DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/18618Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation AirTransportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software,Safety, and Human Factors42 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-29831-5 | DOI 10.17226/18618Committee to Review the Enterprise Architecture, Software Development Approach,and Safety and Human Factor Design of the Next Generation Air TransportationSystem; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineeringand Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilInterim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation 
Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, 
Software, Safety, and Human Factors
Committee to Review the Enterprise Architecture, Software Development Approach, and 
 Safety and Human Factor Design of the Next Generation Air Transportation System
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical SciencesInterim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National Research 
Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy 
of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen 

for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
This project was supported by the Federal Aviation Administration under award number DTFAWA-12-A-80013. 
Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) 

and do not necessarily reflect the view of the organizations or agencies that provided support for this project.
Additional copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360

Washington, DC 20001
(800) 624-6242
(202) 334-3313 

http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2014 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars 
engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their 
use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy 
has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. 
Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of 
Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the 
selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal 

government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national 

needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. C. D. Mote, 

Jr., is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the services of 
eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the 
public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional 
charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, 
research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad 
community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the 
federal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has 
become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of 

Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. 

The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and 
 Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iv
OTHER RECENT REPORTS
 OF THE COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
 BOARDGeotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps, 
2013. 
Professionalizing the Nation™s Cybersecurity Workforce? Criteria for Future Decision-Making, 
2013.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Summary of a Workshop on Current 
Knowledge and Research Gaps
, 2013. 
Continuing Innovation in Information Technology
, 2012. 
Computing Research for Sustainability
, 2012. 
The Safety Challenge and Promise of Automotive Electronics: Insights from Unintended Acceleration
, 2012 (with the Board on Energy and Environmental Systems and the Transportation Research 
Board). 
Strategies and Priorities for Information Technology at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
, 2011. 
The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or Next Level?
, 2011. 
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options
, 2011. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowl
-edge and Research Gaps
, 2011. 
Critical Code: Software Producibility for Defense
, 2010. 
Proceedings of a Workshop on Deterring Cyberattacks: Informing Strategies and Developing Options for 
U.S. Policy
, 2010.
Achieving Effective Acquisition of Information Technology in the Department of Defense
, 2010. 
Improving State Voter Registration Databases
, 2010. 
Toward Better Usability, Security, and Privacy of Information Technology: Report of a Workshop
, 2010. 
Limited copies of CSTB reports are available free of charge from:
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
National Research Council
The Keck Center of the National Academies
500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001
(202) 334-2605/cstb@nas.edu
www.cstb.org
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE TO REVIEW THE ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE, SOFTWARE
 DEVELOPMENT APPROACH, AND SAFETY AND HUMAN FACTOR DESIGN OF THE NEXT GENERATION
 AIR TRANSPORTATION
 SYSTEMDAVID E. LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners, 
Chair
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University
JOHN-PAUL B. CLARKE, Georgia Institute of Technology
GEORGE L. DONOHUE, George Mason University
R. JOHN HANSMAN, JR., Massachusetts Institute of Technology
MATS P.E. HEIMDAHL, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
JOHN C. KNIGHT, University of Virginia
LEON J. OSTERWEIL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
WALKER E. ROYCE, International Business Machines Corporation
GAVRIEL SALVENDY, Purdue University
THOMAS B. SHERIDAN, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ROBERT F. SPROULL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
JAMES W. STURGES, Independent Consultant, Greer, South Carolina 
ELAINE WEYUKER, Independent Consultant, Metuchen, New Jersey 
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 

LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
DWAYNE A. DAY, Senior Program Officer, Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Officer, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Chair
 LUIZ ANDRE BARROSO, Google, Inc. 
ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC
EDWARD FRANK, Apple, Inc.
JACK L. GOLDSMITH III, Harvard Law School
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 
LAURA HAAS, IBM Corporation
MARK HOROWITZ, Stanford University
MICHAEL KEARNS, University of Pennsylvania
ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University 
SUSAN LANDAU, Google, Inc.
PETER LEE, Microsoft Corporation 
DAVID E. LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners 
BARBARA LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia
JOHN A. SWAINSON, Dell, Inc.
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California
KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Officer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director 
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
For more information on CSTB, see its website at http://www.cstb.org, write to CSTB, National 
Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or e
-mail the 
CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
The Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) is an effort begun in 2003 whose 
goals include improving the capacity, efficiency, and safety of the U.S. air transportation system 
and also enabling reduction in noise, pollution, and energy use. The Federal Aviation Administra
-tion (FAA), and various stakeholders, including equipment providers, airlines, and contractors, are 

currently implementing both near-term and midterm capabilities of this effort.
Section 212 of the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012, Public Law 112-95 (Box P-1) 
called for an examination of NextGen™s enterprise architecture and related issues by the National 
Research Council (NRC). The project that was a result of this call was funded by the FAA. The 
Committee to Review the Enterprise Architecture, Software Development Approach, and Safety and 
BOX P-1 FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012, Public Law 112-95
SEC. 212. EXPERT REVIEW OF ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE FOR NEXTGEN. 
(a) REVIEW.ŠThe Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall enter into an arrangement with 
the National Research Council to review the enterprise architecture for the NextGen. 
(b) CONTENTS.ŠAt a minimum, the review to be conducted under subsection (a) shallŠ (1)  
highlight the technical activities, including human- system design, organizational design, and other 
safety and human factor aspects of the system, that will be necessary to successfully transition cur
-rent and planned modernization programs to the future system envisioned by the Joint Planning and 
Development Office of the Administration; 
(2)  
assess technical, cost, and schedule risk for the software development that will be necessary to 
achieve the expected benefits from a highly automated air traffic management system and the impli
-
cations for ongoing modernization projects; and (3)  
determine how risks with automation efforts for the NextGen can be mitigated based on the experi
-ences of other public or private entities in developing complex, software-inten-sive systems. 
(c) REPORT.ŠNot later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit to 
the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on 
Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report containing the results of the review conducted 
pursuant to subsection (a).Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
Human Factor Design of the Next Generation Air Traffic System was formed under the auspices 
of the NRC™s Computer Science and Telecommunications Board in 2012 to conduct the study. The 
statement of task for the study committee can be found in Box P-2.
The study committee has received a number of briefings on NextGen efforts, particularly as 
related to the study™s focus on enterprise architecture, software development approach, safety, and 

human factors. For the purposes of this interim report, the committee offers a brief encapsulation of 
some of the areas of focus and concern it has been discussing up to this point in the study process. 
The original focus of this interim report was expected to be on software development challenges, 
per the statement of task (see Box P-2). Based on what it has learned so far, coupled with the fact 
that software development is affected by every stage (from conception to deployment and mainte
-nance) of system development and integration, the committee has reframed that discussion around 

the challenges of system architecture for software-intensive systems. Chapter 1 offers context and 
background information, Chapter 2 briefly discusses numerous and complex constraints to which 
the FAA and NextGen are subject, and Chapter 3 describes the committee™s emerging areas of focus 
and concern, along with some of the questions that have been under discussion thus far in the study 
process. Committee biographies can be found in Appendix A. A list of briefers from meetings prior 
to the release of this interim report can be found in Appendix B. 
The committee thanks the FAA staff and the other experts who took the time to brief the com
-mittee. The committee also thanks the reviewers who made many thoughtful comments and also 
had several suggestions regarding additional topics to explore. The committee expects to receive 
additional briefings and inputs and explore those and other topics further and is reliant on timely 
availability of FAA staff and information to do so. The committee expects to issue its final report 
with findings and recommendations in 2014. 
David E. Liddle, 
Chair
 Committee to Review the Enterprise Architecture, Software Development 
Approach, and Safety and Human Factor Design of the Next Generation 
Air Transportation System 
BOX P-2 Statement of Task
As stipulated in Sec. 212 of the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012, PL 112-95, a National 
Research Council study would review the enterprise architecture, software development approach, and safety 
and human factor design aspects of the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen). An ad hoc 
committee will conduct a study and prepare a report that will (1) highlight the technical activities, including 
human-system design and testing, organizational design, and other safety and human factor aspects of the 
system, that will be necessary to successfully transition current and planned modernization programs to the 

future system envisioned by the Joint Planning and Development Office of the Administration and obtain 
necessary certifications and operational approval; (2) assess technical, cost, and schedule risk for the soft
-ware development that will be necessary to achieve the expected benefits from a highly automated air traffic 

management system and the implications for ongoing modernization projects; and (3) determine how risks 

with automation efforts for the NextGen can be mitigated based on the experiences of other public or private 

entities in developing complex, software-intensive systems, particularly for life-critical, real-time operational 
systems, and including past aviation system development programs. The committee will issue a brief interim 
report within 12 months providing an initial assessment focusing on software development challenges and a 

final report within 18 months providing a full assessment of the issues listed above. 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspec
-tives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the National Research 
Council™s Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as 
possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and 
responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential 
to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals for 
their review of this report:
Laura Haas, IBM Corporation,
Norman Fujisaki, Independent Contractor, Broadlands, Virginia,

Barbara Liskov, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Amadeo Odoni, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

Amy Pritchett, Georgia Institute of Technology,
William Scherlis, Carnegie Mellon University,
Edmond Soliday, United Airlines (ret.),
John Swainson, Dell, Inc., and
John Tracy, The Boeing Company.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and sugges
-tions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the 
final draft of the report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Peter M. Banks, 

Red Planet Capital Partners. Appointed by the National Research Council, he was responsible for 
making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with 
institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility 
for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
Contents
SUMMARY
 11 INTRODUCTION
 42 CONSTRAINTS
 6 Operational and Capacity Constraints, 6 
 Political, Economic, and Cultural Constraints, 7
 Technical Constraints, 7
 3 EMERGING TOPICS OF FOCUS AND CONCERN
 9 Understanding and Managing Benefit and Cost Expectations, 9
 Architecture, 10
 System Integration and Software Development Approaches, 12
 System Safety, 13
 Human Factors, Automation, and Decision Support Tools, 13
 System Security, 15
 Unmanned Aircraft System Integration, 15
 Spectrum Management, 16
 The Importance and Necessity of Modernization, 16
APPENDIXES
A Biographies of Committee Members and Project Staff
 21
B 
 Briefers to the Study Committee
 29
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary
Section 212 of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Modernization and Reform Act of 
2012, Public Law 112-95 (see Box P-1), calls for an examination by the National Research Council 
(NRC) of the Next Generation Air Transportation System™s (NextGen™s) enterprise software devel
-opment approach and safety and human factor design.
 This interim report of the Committee to 
Review the Enterprise Architecture, Software Development Approach, and Safety and Human 
Factor Design of the Next Generation Air Transportation System briefly describes issues that have 
surfaced so far in the study.
NextGen aims to overhaul the nation™s air transportation by introducing technological 
improvementsŠincluding use of the Global Positioning System and digital communicationsŠand 
procedural changes that exploit those technologies. Its goals include improved monitoring and 
management of aircraft, shortened routes, better navigation around weather, time and fuel savings, 
reduced delays, and increased system capacity.
This endeavor is constrained by operational and capacity factors as well as political, economic, 
cultural, and technical factors. These reflect the diverse interests of stakeholders as well as the FAA™s 
own history and organizational culture. The FAA and the United States rightly pride themselves on 
an excellent safety record. But organizational culture can affect how quickly process and techno
-logical change can happen. The technical realities and constraints to which NextGen programs are 

subject include the particular capabilities of legacy hardware, legacy software, costs of certification, 
and the challenges of human-systems integration and aligning operational procedures with revised 
or enhanced technological capabilities.
Several key issues that have emerged from the committee™s work thus far are discussed below. 
Because the committee™s data gathering and analysis is still incomplete, the observations and 

emphases in this report may not be mirrored in the committee™s final report.
˜˚
Understanding and managing benefit and cost expectations. 
The committee is concerned about 
the alignment among (1) the overarching vision for NextGen, (2) the expected benefits and 
the risks to achieving those benefits, and (3) the estimated costs (and who bears those costs). 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
Because all three are subject to change as the context and underlying assumptions change, 
and it is to be expected that all three would have changed since the launch of NextGen. 
But the committee is concerned that these changes were not fully reflected in the briefings 
it has received or the documents it has reviewed and that there are not clear mechanisms 
to track these changes over time or to make them known to stakeholders. Also, risks to 
achieving the anticipated benefits on the expected schedule are not clear to the committee, 
because the sources of uncertainty in the value framework delivered to the users and the 
development risks confronted by the developers are not well prioritized or well quanti
-fied, and the evolutionary commitments for the short, medium, and long term are not well 

articulated. In an effort to understand these and related issues better, the committee will 

explore further the vision for NextGen and how it has changed over time and the risks and 
benefits analysis for NextGen. 
˜˚
Architecture. 
In the federal government, an ﬁenterprise architectureﬂ is a ﬁmanagement best 
practiceﬂ designed to ﬁpromote mission success by serving as an authoritative reference, 
and by promoting functional integration and resource optimization with both internal and 
external service partners.ﬂ
1 (The term is also used sometimes in industry, with a similar 
meaning.) The enterprise architecture defined for NextGen addresses these matters, but 

does not, in the committee™s view, address key technical and performance parameters 
and relationships (including organizational and human factors considerations) that are 
essential for managing system development. Thus, the committee has expanded its focus 
to also explicitly encompass system architecture. A system architecture specifies how all of 
the parts of a large-scale software-intensive system fit together and interact and provides 
a framework in which incremental changes can be made while maintaining overall system 
integrity. The committee intends to examine NextGen system architecture efforts and their 
implications for program success. 
˜˚
System integration and software development approaches. 
The committee is focused on the 

existing and anticipated processes for integrating new capabilities into the U.S. National 
Airspace System (NAS) and NextGen over time. Regarding system integration, the commit
-tee has been seeking information about the incremental build plan for NextGen and how 
new capabilities will be integrated, the existing and anticipated NextGen architecture, and 
the primary desired behaviors and attributes that drove efforts toward this architecture. 
The development of a software-intensive system includes requirements elicitation and 
analysis, specification, architecture definition, design, coding, testing and analysis, and 
evolution. Historically, the trade-offs captured in requirements elicitation, specification, and 
architecture have proven to be strong indicators of success in reducing risks and uncertain
-ties, especially in larger, more complex software systems such as those being developed for 

NextGen. The committee is particularly interested in the quantified measures and expert 

engineering judgments of software change costs that have been encountered so far as well 
as trendsŠhow these change costs are increasing or decreasing over time. 
˜˚
System safety. 
In considering the system safety aspects of NextGen, two factors are key: (1) 
the development of NextGen provides an opportunity to introduce new air traffic control 
(ATC) safety capabilities, and (2) the development of NextGen requires that historic safety 
performance of ATC systems be maintained or improved. The committee is seeking to 
1  Office of Management and Budget, 
The Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture,
 Washington, D.C., available at 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/assets/egov_docs/common_approach_to_federal_ea.pdf, May 2012. 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3understand the FAA™s safety management system process and implications for the develop
-ment and deployment of anticipated NextGen capabilities. 
˜˚
Human factors, automation, and decision support tools. The scale, heterogeneity, and complexity 
of NextGen mean that there will be many upgraded or new systems, all being developed 
under different programs, at different stages of implementation, being tested at different 
airports, and coming online at different times. This is understandable given the complexity 
and scale of the NextGen effort. However, experience has shown that human factors and 
human-system integration challenges arise when different systems and different people 
interact. The committee is interested in current and anticipated automation and decision-
support capabilities, along with plans for managing their integration and the transitions 

from existing tools and processes to NextGen. 
˜˚
System security. 
The designers and developers of any software- and communications-intensive 

system deployed today must grapple with questions of system security.
2 Understanding 
the security risks and threats and developing appropriate threat models and mitigations 
are challenges endemic across government and industry. NextGen is no exceptionŠindeed, 

the safety-of-life implications and the vital economic importance of air travel make security 
of NextGen and the NAS critically important. As various programs and components of the 
national airspace are modernized, upgraded, and transformed, the security implications 
of the changes will need to be taken into account. The committee is concerned about the 
plans, processes, and mechanisms for managing cybersecurity in NextGen and the national 
airspace, including impacts of security on safety.
˜˚
Unmanned aircraft system integration. 
Unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) pose numerous 

procedural and technical challenges and introduce new requirements; they also will involve 
both safety and security challenges. NextGen will need to be designed and operated to 
manage, accommodate, and integrate this new class of aircraft. The committee is concerned 

about current and anticipated plans for safe integration of UAS into the NAS, recognizing 
that planning for UAS implementation has just begun.
˜˚
Spectrum management. 
The committee is interested in current and anticipated plans with 

regard to spectrum management for the NAS and NextGen. 
The long-term vision for NextGen is ambitious. Some aspects of NextGen are anticipated to be 
transformational. Other, no less critical, short- and medium-term initiatives provide a foundation 

for implementing the longer-term vision and enable critically needed modernization of aging ele
-ments of the NAS. In the committee™s view, both of these elements are critically important.
The study committee will receive additional briefings about these and other aspects of NextGen 
in order to fulfill its task. A final report, with the committee™s findings and recommendations, is 

anticipated in 2014. In that report, although it may not address each of the questions raised in this 
interim report, the committee expects to say more about each of the above topics.
2  Here the committee refers to what some call cybersecurityŠsystem, data, and communications securityŠwhich is distinct from 
the physical security required for airport and aircraft operation, provided in part by the Transportation Security Administration.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41Introduction
The U.S. National Airspace System (NAS) is widely acknowledged to be both safe and reliable. 
However, runway capacity (particularly at the busiest U.S. airportsŠreferred to as the ﬁMetro
-plexﬂ airports), the current operational model, and the evolved NAS constrain flight patterns and 
operations in ways that limit the net capacity of the U.S. air space and limit options for improving 
efficiency. Although technological and procedural improvements have been introduced into the 
system over the years to increase capacity, reduce delays, and improve safety, elements of the NAS 
rely on outdated technology, and the system has not been significantly changed to take advantage 
of available information and communications technologies or to enable major improvements in 
how the airspace is organized and managed. Furthermore, the NAS exists in a complex political, 
organizational, and economic milieu that imposes its own constraints and demands as well.
In 2003, an effort to transform the air transportation system was announced, and the Joint Plan
-ning and Development Office was established to develop the Next Generation Air Transportation 
System (NextGen). NextGen refers to a set of programs and initiatives to be coordinated into an 
evolving overall transportation system aimed at a continuing transformation of the NAS. NextGen 
aims to overhaul the U.S. air transportation system through a combination of procedural and tech
-nological improvements. It is intended to make use of extant capabilities along with key enabling 

technologies such as satellite navigation systems and a digital communications infrastructure to 
share real-time information, making it possible to shorten routes, navigate better around weather, 
save time and fuel, reduce delays, increase capacity at airports not already capacity-limited, and 
improve capabilities for monitoring and managing of aircraft. The Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA), working with a wide range of stakeholders, is currently working toward both near-term 
and midterm capabilities.
1 NextGen efforts will almost certainly increase the amount, complexity, and safety-criticality 
of NAS systems and corresponding enterprise and system architectures. The development of 
1  More information about NextGen can be found in the NextGen Implementation Plan 2013 on the FAA™s website at http://
www.faa.gov/nextgen/implementation/.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION 5large-scale, software-intensive systems is widely recognized to be challenging and risky (in terms 
of cost, schedule, and system performance), and there have been both ﬁextraordinary successes 
and colossal failuresﬂ
2 in developing and deploying systems in both the private and public sector. 
Efforts related to the national air transportation system are especially challenging owing to its large 

scope and scale (and difficulty tends to increase nonlinearly as systems scale up in complexity, 
features, and quality goals), the multiple entities that interconnect with it (such as airlines, aircraft 
manufacturers, and airport operators), and the human-systems interactions associated with piloting 
and controlling. Cost and time estimates associated with the acquisition of large, software-intensive 
systems are notoriously overoptimisticŠin part due to the misalignment of near-term goals and 
incentives with long-term goals and incentives. In addition, in any complex environment, new or 

upgraded systems require careful attention to the co-development of appropriate new business pro
-cesses and to human-systems integration considerations and related issues such as organizational 

design, development of new concepts of operation, system usability, and user training.
The committee has received a number of briefings on NextGen efforts, particularly as related 
to the study™s focus on enterprise architecture, software development, safety, and human factors. 
In this interim report, the committee outlines some of the topics it has examined so far in the study 
process. Chapter 2 describes some of the constraints faced by NextGen efforts. Chapter 3 outlines 
major themes and areas of focus and concern that have emerged thus far in the committee™s work. 
The final reportŠanticipated in mid-2014Šwill provide more in-depth analysis, along with find
-ings and recommendations.
2  National Research Council, 
Achieving Effective Acquisition of Information Technology in the Department of Defense
, The National 
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2010, p. ix.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62Constraints
There are numerous complex constraints on the design and operation of the U.S. National 
Airspace System (NAS) to which the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and its stakeholders 
are subject. The FAA is well aware of these constraintsŠsome of which may affect development 
of systems and some of which may bear on ultimate benefits and outcomes. In the committee™s 
view, it is helpful to keep these often challenging constraints, which include legacy commitments 
already made, in mind when planning, assessing, or evaluating Next Generation Air Transporta
-tion System (NextGen) efforts. 
OPERATIONAL
 AND CAPACIT
Y CONSTRAINTSOne of the goals for NextGen is to improve efficiency and reduce congestion in the NAS. FAA™s 
Aerospace forecast projects that the U.S. aviation industry will grow from 731 million passengers 
in 2011 to 1.2 billion in 2032.
1 Congestion in the NAS tends to be localized to certain regions. Using 
2012 FAA Air Traffic Activity Data for 21.7 million commercial air operations, more than 56 percent 

(12 million) of these involved the so-called Metroplex airports.
2 Although there are opportunities 
to increase runway efficiency, such as less separation, parallel approaches, and so on, the realiz
-able benefits of such are not yet clear. For example, wake vortex separation requirements may 
limit separation reduction, and local community resistance to noise and night flights may limit the 
introduction of new approach routes or extended hours that would increase the capacity of exist
-ing runways. In addition to all of this is uncertainty about what the future capacity needs will be 

given uncertainties about travel demand and fuel and other operational costs. 
1  FAA, FAA Aerospace Forecast: Fiscal Years 2012-2032, available at http://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_
offices/apl/aviation_forecasts/aerospace_forecasts/2012-2032/media/2012%20FAA%20Aerospace%20Forecast.pdf.
2  FAA, Air Traffic Activity Systems, Airport Operations, available at http://aspm.faa.gov/opsnet/sys/Airport.asp.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONSTRAINTS 7POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND CULT
URAL CONSTRAINTSThe NAS is a national infrastructure to which significant resources are devoted. As such, it has 
numerous stakeholders, and there are few individuals or businesses in the country that do not have 
an interest in or expectations regarding its performance. Thus, the NAS, the FAA, and NextGen 
efforts are subject to significant scrutinyŠnot only from users (such as trade groups, airlines, air
-ports, and affiliated labor groups), but from Congress, other federal agencies, and the flying public 

as well. And as a federal agency, the FAA must operate within the federal political environment and 
under whatever financial and performance constraints and expectations are produced within it. 
External stakeholders, such as those listed above, have a variety of interests, demands, and 
constraints. Agreement, or at least rough consensus, on requirements will be important (albeit 
challenging to achieve). Some NextGen programs and components will undoubtedly have implica
-tions for the workforceŠcontrollers, safety specialists, and pilots. The capacity, skill sets, size, and 

expectations of the associated workforces will need to be taken into account when developing and 
deploying new or changed capabilities.
3 NextGen™s benefits are expected to accrue to stakeholders; 
however, many of those benefits (such as increased automatic communication between aircraft) 

cannot be fully realized without participation and (sometimes costly) adoption by the relevant 
stakeholders.
4 In addition, although many of the NextGen advances should benefit participants 
in the NAS writ large, the fact that some of the benefits may accrue to competitors could be a 
disincentive to participation by private entities. Thus, for some NextGen goals, the FAA is caught 
in a bind due to the distributed costs of deployment and the uncertainty of those costs if broad 
deployment does not occur. The expectation that economic benefits will sufficiently motivate airline 
equipment purchases may be misplaced, calling into question whether the anticipated voluntary 
uptake will occur. 
In addition to external political considerations, as a large organization, the FAA has its own 
organizational culture that has developed over time. The FAA and the United States rightly pride 
themselves on a devotion to safety and an excellent safety record to match. At the same time, a 
conservative safety culture can affect how quickly process and technological change can happenŠa 
challenge in an arena where technologies change rapidly. An historic culture of safety and responsi
-bilityŠespecially one that has resulted in a strong safety recordŠmay inhibit the adoption of new 
technologies or increased automation that could potentially result in net improvements in both 
safety and efficiency. Recognizing and taking into account the tensions among competing goals in 
an organization is critical to ensure progress. 
TECHNICAL CONSTRAINTSThe technical realities and constraints to which NextGen programs are subject run the gamut 
from the capabilities of legacy hardware to costs of certification to the challenges of large-scale 
system integration. The great majority of the tasks facing NextGen involve software and informa
-tion and communications technologyŠthe systems architecture has implications for how software 
3  The 2007 National Research Council report 
Human-System Integration in the System Development Process: A New Look
 (The 
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.) explores iterative development processes suitable for systems that have intensive 
human interaction and with humans having functional roles within the system (e.g., pilots, controllers, and so on.) 
4  For example, ADS-B must be installed not only in larger commercial aircraft, but also in smaller general aviation aircraft to 
make full use of the system everywhere and there are costs (financial and also process) associated with deploying this technol
-ogy. (Automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B) is an aircraft tracking technology that relies on the global positioning 

system (GPS) and a datalink to broadcast (ADS-B Out) and receive (ADS-B In) data.)
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
components are developed and integrated and for how corresponding operational procedures are 
developed, refined, and deployed. Higher levels of software automation and integrity and fault 
tolerance will likely be needed, along with more reliable integration of aircraft and ground systems 
and processes. Future needs also include more flexibility and agility in systems and processes to 
deal with a dynamic and uncertain environment coupled with, wherever possible, reduction of 
uncertainties in the system (e.g., improved weather forecasting, tracking of wake vortices, wind 
shear, and so on).
Avionics systems and any upgrades or changes to them require time and resources for certi
-fication and, ultimately, integration. In addition, most avionics systems must have international 
backing and agreement in order to achieve substantial deployment, so rapid introduction of new 

technologies that might benefit the national airspace may not be possible. 
For certain capabilities, decisions will need to be made about whether to deploy new software 
or whether software emulators running on new hardware may be sufficient.
5 In addition, as capa
-bilities are developed and deployed, ensuring that potential avenues of future improvementŠsuch 
as in the areas of communications, authentication, and spectrum managementŠare not closed off 

prematurely will be important. 
Aligning operational procedures with revised or enhanced technological capabilities is critical 
to the success of any technology advances. Ensuring clear processes and plans for any changes 
to the operational infrastructure, such as the development of procedures and airspace that take 
full advantage of the new technical capabilities of NextGen, will be important. Given the human-
intensive nature of operating the national airspace, there are also challenges related to design for 
organizations and to human-system integration, including robustness of the combined human-
machine interaction, along with human factors concerns with the implementation of new techni
-cal functions. The anticipated benefits of NextGen will depend on commensurate changes in the 

airspace and how all of these challenges are managed. 
The bulk of NextGen software and system development is done under a variety of contracts, 
thus obliging the FAA (or another contractor) to act as the system integrator. The structure of the 

network of supplier relationships and incentives to create and deploy NextGen will bear on devel
-opment and deployment. A systems architecture serves as an integration blueprint that demands 

careful specification of the behaviors and interfaces of the components, effective tracking of con
-tractor efforts, and continuous integration and testing of in-progress and completed components. 

Moreover, the importance of human-systems interaction and human factors in NextGen has impli
-cations for how the work is contracted. Notably, it is challenging to make measureable, quantifiable 

specifications for human factorsŠsuch as ensuring that the contractor makes a product that is truly 
effective and usable from the point of view of the controller. Thus, delegation of detailed design 
to contractors has implications for these and related aspects of NextGen. More generally, in the 
management of architecture, there is a natural tension between the client (FAA) and the supplier 
(various contractors) with regard to architecture leadership. Architectural leadership also requires 
senior management attention to constraints, incentives, and design participation by suppliers. Inef
-fective leadership can result in a diffusion of responsibility, which can result in perverse incentives 

for suppliers. Diffusion of responsibility might also lead to a vague, ineffective architecture or to 
different interpretations by different actors (client, various vendors). 
 If the architecture leadership is 
weak or dispersed, it could lead to an overall system with no architecture or a flawed architecture. 
 5  Similar efforts were undertaken in the late 1990s for the FAA™s Host Computer System. See FAA, Host and Oceanic Computer 
System Replacement Program, available at http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId=6419, 1999.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.93Emerging Topics of Focus and Concern
In this Chapter, the committee outlines several topics and areas of focus and concern that 
have emerged from its data gathering efforts so far. The committee will provide its findings and 
recommendations in its final report. Some of the questions that have been raised and discussed at 
briefing sessions are noted here, clustered roughly according to topic. Note that these preliminary 
observations, questions, and topics are raised as part of the committee™s information-gathering 
efforts and may not reflect the emphases that will be given to topics in the committee™s final report, 
and the committee does not anticipate addressing every question and issue outlined here in the 
final report. This chapter concludes with a brief comment about the importance of modernization.
 UNDERSTANDIN
G AND MANAGING BENEFIT AND COST EXPECTATIONS
The committee is concerned about the alignment among (1) the overarching vision for the Next 
Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen), (2) the expected benefits and the risks to achiev
-ing those benefits, and (3) the estimated costs (and who bears those costs). Because all three are 

subject to change as the context and underlying assumptions change, it is to be expected that all 
three would have changed since the launch of NextGen. But the committee is concerned that these 
changes were not fully reflected in the briefings it has received or the documents it has reviewed 
and that there are not clear mechanisms to track these changes over time or to make them known 
to stakeholders. The vision, the benefits, and the costs of NextGen are all models (that is, predic
-tions) of a future state with many sources of uncertainty. The risks to achieving the anticipated 

benefits on the expected schedule are not clear to the committee, because of uncertainty in the value 
framework delivered to the users and stakeholders. In addition, the development risks confronted 
by the developers are not well prioritized or well quantified, and the evolutionary commitments 
for the short, medium, and long term are not well articulated. 
In an effort to understand these and related issues better, the committee will explore further 
the vision for NextGen and how it has changed over time and the risks and benefits analysis for 
NextGen and how those analyses have changed over time. Examining the state changes of the vision 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
from its original inception to the current baseline provides a window into how the predictions of 
the benefits have performed since NextGen was first envisioned. 
More generally, the committee is concerned about how uncertainty in this large, complex under
-taking is understood, managed, and synthesized into more predictable plans and expectations. The 
FAA is correctly taking an incremental approach to system development. The committee seeks to 
ascertain how the FAA channels the validated learning in previous increments into better predic
-tions of benefits, costs, and outcomes. Focusing on FAA™s approach to programmatic, engineering, 

and operational risk for NextGen, the committee requested information on the following: the FAA™s 
assessment of each of these types of risk, how risk assessment is done, ongoing or anticipated miti
-gation strategies and how those are built into the development process, and expectations for how 
these risk profiles will change in the medium and long term. The committee has not been able to 
elicit a clear articulation of the significant risks perceived within the NextGen systems and software 
or how the FAA would quantify or monetize these risks to substantiate the priority ordering and 
anticipated schedule. Specific questions the committee will explore further include the following: 
˜˚
What is the largest source of NextGen benefits today? What is the largest source of benefits 
expected to be in the future? 
˜˚
What are the most uncertain benefits planned in the FAA™s NextGen system and software 

capability? 
˜˚
What are the most significant uncertainties in NextGen requirements that drive develop
-ment risk?
˜˚
What are the most significant uncertainties in NextGen design and system architecture?
˜˚
What are the most significant uncertainties in the planned sequence of milestone expectations? 
˜˚
What measures and metrics will be used to quantify and steer risk management priorities? 
The committee wants to better understand the FAA™s perspective on the uncertainty in the 
upsides (benefits) and the downsides (programmatic risks). The FAA could quantify these uncer
-tainties by modeling the benefits and risks as probability distributions of possible outcomes. Even 

if these distributions were represented as simple triangular distributions (best case, worst case, 
expectation), it would provide the committee with a set of critical priorities and a quantified model 
of the perceived uncertainties. 
ARCHITECTUREThe committee™s statement of task (see Box P-2) asks for an examination of the NextGen enter
-prise architecture. The committee interprets this use of the term ﬁenterprise architectureﬂ to mean 
the Office of Management and Budget requirement that every government agency have an enter
-prise architecture designed to ﬁpromote mission success by serving as an authoritative reference, 

and by promoting functional integration and resource optimization with both internal and external 

service partners.ﬂ
1 The enterprise architecture is thus focused on business structures and processes, 
1  See Office of Management and Budget, The Common Approach to Federal Enterprise Architecture, Washington, D.C., May 
2012, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/assets/egov_docs/common_approach_to_federal_
ea.pdf. The term ﬁenterprise architectureﬂ does not have a single definition and is used by others outside the federal context with 

slightly different meaning. Peter Weill at MIT defines an enterprise architecture as ﬁthe organizing logic for key business processes 

and IT capabilities reflecting the integration and standardization requirements of the firm™s operating modelﬂ (Page 2 of P. Weill, 

ﬁInnovating with Information Systems: What Do the Most Agile Firms in the World Do,ﬂ presented at the Sixth e-Business Con
-ference, Barcelona, Spain, March 2007, available at http://www.iese.edu/en/files/6_29338.pdf.)
 Maier and Rechtin observe that 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TOPICS OF FOCUS AND CONCERN 
 11and the NextGen enterprise architecture
2 addresses these matters. However, enterprise architecture 
is only one piece of the architectural definition that is needed
 for NextGen.
Any large-scale, software-intensive systems endeavor requires a technical and systems architec
-ture that specifies how all of its parts fit together and interact, which can be used in a dynamic way 
to help inform and drive decision making.
3 The systems architecture of the NAS would encompass 
the technical and operational aspects of the system and its componentsŠindividual avionics sys
-tems, communications facilities, ground equipment, airport facilities, routes, approach procedures, 
personnel roles and training, and so on. In addition to addressing the technical enablement of the 
full set of functional capabilities, a system architecture also addresses ﬁnonfunctionalﬂ attributes 
such as critical quality attributes, management of variabilities (that is, anticipated changes over a 

system lifetime), roles of services vendors, and alignment with organizational and supply-chain 
structure. 
The committee™s discussions have focused on both the particulars of the enterprise architecture 
as well as the technical and systems architecture. Questions and topics related to these architectures 
that have been discussed thus far include the following: 
˜˚
Who are the specific intended users of the various architectures, and what types of decisions 
are they expected to influence? 
˜˚
What are the processes for managing architecturally significant decision making within 

the NextGen effort? Are these processes explicitly managed, or is architecture more of an 
emergent outcome from a multiplicity of separate processesŠand one that may, or may 
not, have the necessary technical and structural attributes? 
Given the enormous range of activities within NextGen, considerations related to the congru
-ence of system architecture and organizational (and supply-chain) architecture are likely to be 

significant, prompting the following questions:
˜˚
How does the architecture address the goal of risk mitigation, and how is this determined? 
ﬁIf we take an enterprise to be an organization with a defined mission, . . . the practice of enterprise architecture would concern 
itself largely with business strategy and business processesﬂ (M. Maier and E. Rechtin, The Art of Systems Architecting, Third 

Edition, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla., 2009, p. 353).
2  Mike Hritz, Role of Enterprise Architecture NextGen, Briefing to the Committee Review the Enterprise Architecture, Software 
Development Approach, and Safety and Human Factor Design of the Next Generation Air Transportation System, March 2013. 

See also The National Airspace System Enterprise Architecture at https://nasea.faa.gov. 
3  Chapter 3 of National Research Council, 
Critical Code: Software Producibility for Defense
 (The National Academies Press, Wash
-ington, D.C., 2010, pp. 68-69) offers a useful description of architecture and its importance
: Just as in physical systems, architectural commitments comprise more than struc
 tural connections among components of a system. The 
commitments also encompass decisions regarding the principal domain abstractions to be represented in the software and how they 
will be represented and acted upon. The commitments also include expectations regarding performance, security, and other behavioral 
characteristics of the constituent components of a system, such that an overall architectural model can facilitate prediction of significant 
quality-related characteristics of a system that is consistent with the architectural model. Architecture represents the earliest and often 
most important design decisionsŠthose that are the hardest to change and the most critical to get right. Architecture makes it possible to 
structure require
 ments based on an understanding of what is actually possible from an engineering standpointŠand what is infeasible 
in the present state of technology. It provides a mechanism for communications among the stakeholders, including the infrastructure 
providers, and managers of other systems with require
 ments for interoperation. It is also the first design artifact that addresses the so-
called non-functional attributes, such as performance, modifiability, reliability, and security that in turn drive the ultimate quality and 
capability of the system. Architecture is an important enabler of reuse and the key to system evolution, enabling management of future 
uncertainty. In this regard, architecture is the primary determiner of modularity and thus the nature and degree to which multiple 
design decisions can be decoupled from each other. Thus, when there are areas of likely or potential change, whether it be in system 
functionality, performance, infrastructure, or other areas, architecture decisions can be made to encapsulate them and so increase the 
extent to which the overall engineering activity is insulated from the uncertainties associated with these localized changes.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
˜˚
How, for example, is the system architecture designed to accommodate novel uses of the 
airspace such as unmanned aircraft systems? 
˜˚
How are the interplays between security and safety and between efficiency and safety in 

the system architecture being dealt with and assured?
˜˚
To what extent are technological requirements and specifications for near-term systems 

developed to accommodate future needs, and how is this managed in the overall systems 
architecture? 
˜˚
How are changing requirements and changing stakeholder needs expressed, modeled, and 

accommodated over time? 
˜˚
How are process or technology innovations suggested or developed by local area experts 
(e.g., at individual towers), contractors, or other stakeholders within the NAS vetted for 
potential impacts and potential wider adoption/implementation, and can the system archi
-tecture flexibly accommodate such innovations? The committee is particularly interested 
in examples of where these sorts of accommodations have been accomplished.
SYSTEM INTEGRATION
 AND SOFTWARE
 DEVELOPMENT APPROACHESThe committee is focused on the existing and anticipated processes for integrating new capa
-bilities into the system over time. Regarding system integration, the committee has been seeking 

input about the incremental build plan for NextGen and how new capabilities will be integrated, 
including the NextGen target architecture and the primary desired behaviors and attributes that 
drove efforts toward this target architecture. As discussed above, understanding the primary con
-straints (economic, technical, political, physical, human, and so on) that bound decisions will be 

important to aligning the evolving NextGen vision with near- and long-term benefits. 
The development of a large-scale, software-intensive system includes requirements elicitation 
and analysis, specification, architecture definition, design, coding, testing and analysis, and evolu
-tion. Historically, the trade-offs captured in requirements elicitation, specification, and architecture 

have proven to be strong indicators of success in reducing risks and uncertainties, especially in 
larger, more complex software systems such as those being developed for NextGen. 
The committee is particularly interested in quantified measures and expert engineering judg
-ments of software change costs (e.g., requirement change, design change, code change, regression 
test cycle, bug fix, build time, or others) and trends (how are these change costs increasing or 
decreasing over time). More abstractly, the committee will examine further how the FAA character
-izes its software posture. The following considerations have been discussed: How to characterize 

and quantify the ﬁmassﬂ of software to be developed, and how to characterize and quantify the cost 
of the software to be developed. With respect to contractors in particular, the committee has been 
discussing and learning about how technical and system requirements and expectations (as well as 
changes) are communicated to and from the FAA, what the underlying technical and architectural 
assumptions are and how they are made explicit, and how testing and integration is managed. 
A particular program or enabling technology can be used as an exemplar to consider some 
of these issues. With regard to the major NextGen programs, the committee is interested in their 
detailed technical specifications and operational dates. For the Data Communications program, for 
example, these areas would include what modes of digital data will be supported (i.e., protocols, 
bandwidth, security, availability, reliability, and so on) and what the expected aircraft equipage 
rates will be. In general, the requirements for a given programŠwhat the new capability will be 
used for in the medium and long term, and more generally the current status of the program and 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TOPICS OF FOCUS AND CONCERN 
 13projected timeline for its implementation, are of interest. Equipment cost expectationsŠboth for 
commercial carriers and general aviation usersŠwill also play a role in uptake in some situations. 
For a given program, the general questions about uncertainties and risk apply as well: What have 
been the biggest challenges (technical, process, operational, or organizational)? and What are cur
-rent uncertainties and risks and anticipated mitigation plans?
SYSTEM SAFETY In considering the system safety aspects of NextGen, two factors are key: (1) the development 
of NextGen provides an opportunity to introduce new air traffic control (ATC) safety capabilities, 

and (2) the development of NextGen requires that historic safety performance of ATC systems either 
be maintained or improved. The committee is seeking to understand the FAA™s safety management 
system process and implications for the development and deployment of anticipated NextGen 
capabilities so as to understand how these two factors are being addressed.
The committee is focused on the safety objectives that the FAA has for NextGen, the processes 
and techniques by which the FAA expects these objectives to be met, any safety indicators and 

metrics used in an ongoing way in the development process, and any preliminary NextGen safety 
data and associated analyses that are currently available. In order to understand the basis for the 

safety objectives for NextGen, the committee is interested in learning more about the following: the 
safety objective defined for the current ATC system, the current mechanism for safety assessment 
for the NAS, the status of assessed safety metrics in the NAS, and how current safety assessment 
mechanisms and procedures might change as NextGen capabilities continue to be put in place.
Safety is not a system property that can be added after basic functionality has been addressed. 
Safety is an emergent property that derives from careful design at all levels. Thus, the committee 
is interested to learn what techniques are included in the NextGen architecture, design, and imple
-mentation to mitigate residual risk. The committee also notes that comprehensive hazard identifica
-
tion is a critical input to the safety-engineering process. The committee is interested to learn what 
specific techniques are being used to undertake hazard identification and estimate residual risk at 
each phase of deployment. In briefings to the committee, quantification of various safety items has 
been summarized. The committee expects to further explore what quantification approaches are 
being used in NextGen to estimate probabilities of hazardous states and the role of quantification 
in deployment decisions for NextGen features and capabilities.
Other air traffic control systems throughout the world have been upgraded and have added 
novel capabilities over time. The committee also plans to explore the following: to what extent the 
safe-design concepts and safety-assessment techniques planned for NextGen are consistent with 
and compatible with those used by other agencies around the world (such as the United Kingdom™s 
Civil Aviation Authority, Eurocontrol, and the International Civil Aviation Organization) and to 
what extent the safety technology and associated experience elsewhere have been reviewed by and 
considered for adoption by the FAA.
HUMAN FACTORS, AUTOMATION
, AND DECISION SUPPORT
 TOOLSExperience has shown that human factors challenges arise when different systems and differ
-ent people interact. The scale, heterogeneity, and complexity of NextGen mean that there will be 
many upgraded or new systems and operational procedures, all being developed under different 
programs, at different stages of implementation, tested at different airports, and coming online at 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
different times. This is understandable given the complexity and scale of the NextGen effort. The 
committee is interested in understanding the current and anticipated automation and decision-
support capabilities and how users of the airspace will be trained, including plans for managing the 
transitions from existing tools and processes to NextGen, recognizing that it is difficult to specify 
a priori design, and guidelines for human-systems interaction. 
With regard to roles and boundaries in human-systems interactions, there is generally a shift, 
from human to system, taking place in the interpretation of sensor data and, increasingly, deci
-sions and actions based on that data.
4 This has profound significance for the design of the NextGen 
system. It applies both to piloting and to controller responsibilitiesŠraising issues that connect 

policy, user-experience design, and usability evaluation. It also creates challenges for capability 
assurance, because some of rules of engagement previously belonging in the human domain, 

and typically relatively informally modeled, may need to be formalized to the point where there 
can be assurance that system behavior will respect these rules. There are trade-offs to be studied 
between enacting desired mission goals through changing the human (selection, training, staffing) 
and changing the technology. 
Thus far, the committee has been exploring some of the topics and questions in this area, asking, 
At what level of management is the responsibility to ensure that critical human factors consid
-ered? and At what stage in the system development process does the human factors team become 

involved, and what is their method of involvement? The committee will explore examples of past 
human-factors recommendations that have been integrated into the system (or not) and why they 
were (or were not) integrated. The committee will also explore the differences between current 
ATC technologies and processes and anticipated NextGen ATC technologies and processes with 
regard to needed skill sets and knowledge requirements for controllers and pilots. A large cadre of 
controllers will be retiring soon, so the committee is interested in understanding what measures 
are being taken to analyze the job skills required for ensuring that new controllers understand and 
make use of the computer-based systems being introduced in NextGen.
Because human performance capabilities and risks are difficult to quantify in engineering terms 
sufficient to specify requirements, human factor aspects of new system designs must be evaluated 
by means of human-in-the-loop simulations (HITLSs). One issue is how and when to use HITLSs, 
and with what simulator fidelity. Experience has shown that at initial stages of system design, much 
understanding of the issues can be gleaned from relatively simple part-task HITLSs.
New computer-based decision aids are bound to make controllers more dependent on the com
-puter advice given. Questions include, How is that expected to affect policies for assigning authority 
and responsibility of controllers?
 What types of automation of capabilities are anticipated in the 
near and long term, what capabilities exist for human override of automation, and what changes 

are anticipated in the future? NextGen assumes a level of teamwork between sector controllers, 
flow controllers, tower controllers, and pilotsŠmuch greater than in current ATC. The committee 
is interested in what means are being used to ensure that all parties to the cooperation are seeing 

the picture in the same way in an adequate time window.
4  National Research Council, 
Human-System Integration in the System Development Process: A New Look,
 The National Academies 
Press, Washington, D.C., 2007.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TOPICS OF FOCUS AND CONCERN 
 15SYSTEM SECURITY The designers and developers of any software- and communications-intensive system deployed 
today must grapple with questions of system security.
5 Understanding the security risks and threats 
and developing appropriate threat models and mitigations are challenges endemic across govern
-ment and industry. NextGen is no exception; indeed, the safety of life implications and the vital 
economic importance of air travel make the security of NextGen and the NAS critically important. 
As various programs and components of the national airspace are modernized, upgraded, and 
transformed, the security implications of the changes will need to be taken into account. 
The committee is concerned about the plans, processes, and mechanisms for managing system 
security in the national airspace. Some of the topics and questions in this area the committee has 
been exploring thus far include the following: the threat model, how it is being validated, and 
how threats will be monitored over time as context and adversaries change; the scope and focus 
of security concerns for NextGen and how they are accommodated in the system architecture; and 
the FAA™s assessment of its most significant security risks and challenges and what plans are in 
place to address them. For example, is there a well-articulated a process for addressing security 
attributes as early as possible in the process, as opposed to relying on process compliance and 
intensive after-the-fact acceptance evaluation?
6 Programmatically, questions to consider further 
include these: Where does overall responsibility for security reside? and How are cybersecurity 

considerations managed and addressed in the various programs of NextGen (such as ADS-B and 
DataComm)? Finally, the committee believes it will be important to understand how NextGen and 
the NAS cope with the insider threatŠthat is, authorized users of the systems with malicious intent.
UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEM INTEGRATION
Unmanned aircraft systems pose numerous procedural and technical challenges and introduce 
new requirements; they also will involve both safety and security challenges. NextGen architec
-tures will need to be designed to manage, accommodate, and integrate this new class of aircraft. 
Depending on what rules are promulgated with respect to unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) in the 
airspace, integration of UAS will likely require that the NAS accommodate a wider spectrum of air
-craft weights and sizes; aircraft operating over a larger range of flight profiles using non-traditional 

routes; and a larger variety of aircraft with a broader range of capabilities.
7 Additional challenges 
include managing differences between see-and-avoid capability (the capability traditionally pro
-vided by human pilots) and sense-and-avoid operation; autonomous operation of UAS, either as 
part of a mission profile or as a result of the loss of a command link; and ensuring efficient com
-munication with the UAS crew. Operational expectations within the NAS would almost certainly 

have to change. For example, procedures to ensure adequate separation of UAS from other aircraft 
and recovery of safe flight for manned aircraft in the event of a loss of separation will be important. 
Perhaps most critically, failure modes of UAS will differ substantially from the failures modes 
of manned aircraft, affecting safety, reliability, and security analyses. For instance, vulnerabilities 
may exist in the command and control linkŠHow should a UAS behave if it loses communications 
capability along that link or is spoofed or jammed? The committee is concerned about current and 
5  Here the committee refers to what some call cybersecurityŠsystem, data, and communications security, which is distinct from 
the physical security required for airport and aircraft operation, provided in part by the Transportation Security Administration. 
6  See, for example, M. Howard and S. Lipner, The Security Development Lifecycle, 2006. 
7  Unmanned aircraft systems could operate from altitudes of a few hundred feet to perhaps 50,000 feet with dwell times po
-tentially beyond 24 hours. The ability of a typical UAS to maneuver is also severely limited, complicating collision avoidance.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
anticipated plans for safe integration of UAS into the NAS, recognizing that planning for UAS 
implementation has just begun. Questions include: What are the key factors that will guide FAA 
work in this space, and what is the projected time line for policy decisions and any associated 
implementation? What design and architectural decisions (if any) have been or will need to be taken 
in NextGen to accommodate UAS of varying flight profiles, capabilities, and weights and types? 
SPECTRUM MANAGEMENTOne of the FAA™s most valuable capital assets is its allocated spectrum. The management and 
use of this asset in the future will need to be a critical element of the systems architecture. It takes 
significant time and effort to achieve international agreement and standardization before any 
changes can be made to the allocation of the spectrum. Aircraft equipage considerations require 
standardization and implementation to be coordinated worldwide; otherwise, international flights 
would be required to carry multiple sets of equipment for different parts of the world. Spectrum 

efficiency is also important. Like other entities that manage government-held spectrum, the FAA 
is under pressure to share spectrum and to use it more efficiently.
8 The 108-137 MHz very-high- 
frequency (VHF) and 960-1215 MHz ultrahigh-frequency airbands, which are used for navigation 
aids, precision approach systems, and voice communications, are used inefficiently by modern 
standards, having been allocated in a different technology era. Most notable is the continued use of 
amplitude modulation (AM) channels for voice communication. But the transition to efficient digi
-tal voice, low-cost, high-performance data radios and the shutdown of some radars and old VHF 

navigation equipment to free up spectrum will be a challenging process. The committee is focused 
on current and anticipated plans with regard to spectrum management for the NAS and NextGen. 
THE IMPORTANCE
 AND NECESSITY OF MODERNIZATION
FAA™s NextGen efforts are broadly aimed at transforming U.S. airspace, and toward that end, 
there are significant modernization opportunities along the way. Opportunities to replace and 
upgrade aging equipment are certainly within the scope for NextGen and offer the potential to 
reduce the risk of failure, to reduce maintenance costs, and to enhance capabilities. Modernization 
efforts also afford opportunities to increase the flexibility and extensibility of existing software-
intensive systems to allow for incremental advancement over time. The trade-off between the near 
term and long term is, in part, about delivering economic benefits in the near term while taking 
compatible near-term steps that support longer-term transformation of the system. NextGen aims to 
deliver near-term benefits for its user community (which has a near-term planning horizon driven 
by business objectives) while establishing and retaining a focus on longer-term transformative 
changes in the system. The challenge is balancing evolutionary changes with revolutionary changes 
and aligning these changes with the most significant problems that most critically require solutions.
The long-term vision for NextGen is ambitious. Some aspects of NextGen are anticipated to 
be transformational. Others, no less critical, are important and necessary modernization efforts 
and can pave the way for potential eventual transformations. An ambitious long-term vision for 
NextGen includes short- and medium-term initiatives that will (1) provide a foundation for the 
8  Two Presidential Memoranda in recent years have emphasized the importance of wise spectrum management: June 28, 2010, 
ﬁUnleashing the Broadband Revolutionﬂ (http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/presidential-memorandum-unleashing-
wireless-broadband-revolution), and June 14, 2013, ﬁExpanding America™s Leadership in Wireless Innovationﬂ (http://www.

whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/06/14/presidential-memorandum-expanding-americas-leadership-wireless-innovatio). 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TOPICS OF FOCUS AND CONCERN 
 17longer-term vision and (2) enable critically needed modernization of aging elements of the NAS. 
In the committee™s view, both of these elements are critically important.
The study committee will receive additional briefings about these and other aspects of NextGen 
in order to fulfill its charter. A final report, with the committee™s findings and recommendations, 

is anticipated in 2014. In that report, although it will not necessarily address each of the questions 
raised here in this preliminary snapshot, the committee expects to say more about each of the 
above topics.
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21
ABiographies of Committee Members and Staff
David E. Liddle, 
Chair
, has been a partner at U.S. Venture Partners, a Silicon Valley-based venture 
capital firm since 2000. He co-founded Interval Research Corporation, a Silicon Valley-based labo
-ratory and incubator for new businesses focusing on broadband, consumer devices, interaction 
design, and advanced technologies, where he served as president and CEO between 1992 and 1999. 
Previously, Dr. Liddle co-founded Metaphor Computer Systems, Inc., in 1982 and served as its 
president and CEO until 1991. He has also held executive positions at Xerox Corporation and IBM. 
Prior to co-founding Interval with Paul Allen, Dr. Liddle founded Metaphor, which was acquired by 
IBM in 1991, which named him vice president of business development for IBM Personal Systems. 
His extensive experience in research and development has focused largely on human-computer 
interactions and includes 10 years at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), from 1972 to 1982. 
He has been a director of MaxLinear, Sybase, Broderbund Software, Borland International, and 
Ticketmaster and is currently on the board of the New York Times Company and InPhi, Inc. His 
board involvement at U.S. Venture Partners includes AltoBeam, Karmasphere, and LineStream. Dr. 
Liddle served on the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Information Science 
and Technology Committee and as co-chair of the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) Computer 
Science and Telecommunications board. His contributions to human-computer interaction design 
earned him the distinction of senior fellow at the Royal College of Art. He is on the boards of SRI 
International, the College of Engineering at Stanford University and The Public Library of Science. 
Dr, Liddle earned a B.S. in electrical engineering at the University of Michigan and a Ph.D. in EECS 
at the University of Toledo, where his dissertation focused on reconfigurable computing machines 
and theories of encryption, encoding and signal recovery. He recently served as chair of the NRC 
study on wireless technology prospects and policy options, and on the subsequent PCAST study 

on realizing the full potential of government-held spectrum to spur economic growth. He is a type-
rated Citation pilot with more than 2,000 hours in jets. 
Steven M. Bellovin
 (NAE) is a professor of computer science at Columbia University, where he does 
research on networks, security, and especially why the two do not get along. He recently served as 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
the chief technologist for the Federal Trade Commission. He joined the faculty at Columbia in 2005 
after many years at Bell Labs and AT&T Labs Research where he was an AT&T fellow. He received a 
B.A. degree from Columbia University and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. While a graduate student, he helped create Netnews; for 
this, he and the other perpetrators were given the 1995 Usenix Lifetime Achievement Award (The 
Flame). In 2007 he received the National Institute of Standards and Technology/National Security 
Agency National Computer Systems Security Award. He is a member of the National Academy of 
Engineering (NAE) and is serving on the Department of Homeland Security™s Science and Technol
-ogy Advisory Committee and the Technical Guidelines Development Committee of the Election 

Assistance Commission. He was a member of the Internet Architecture Board from 1996-2002 and 

was co-director of the Security Area of the Internet Engineering Task Forcefrom 2002 through 2004. 
Dr. Bellovin is the co-author of 
Firewalls and Internet Security: Repelling the Wily Hacker,
 and holds a 
number patents on cryptographic and network protocols. He has served on many NRC committees, 

including those on information systems trustworthiness, the privacy implications of authentication 
technologies, and cybersecurity research needs. He was also a member of the information technol
-ogy subcommittee of an NRC study group on science versus terrorism. 
John-Paul B. Clarke
 is an associate professor in the Daniel Guggenheim School of Aerospace 
Engineering with a courtesy appointment in the H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Sys
-tems Engineering and director of the Air Transportation Laboratory at the Georgia Institute of 
Technology. He received S.B., S.M. , and Sc.D. degrees in aeronautics and astronautics from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). His research and teaching in the areas of control, 
optimization, and system analysis, architecture, and design are motivated by his desire to simul
-taneously maximize the efficiency and minimize the societal costs (especially on the environment) 
of the global air transportation system. Dr. Clarke has made seminal contributions in the areas of 
air traffic management, aircraft operations, and airline operationsŠthe three key elements of the 
air transportation systemŠand has been recognized globally for developing, among other things, 
key analytical foundations for the Continuous Descent Arrival and novel concepts for robust airline 
scheduling. His research has resulted in significant changes in engineering methods, processes and 
productsŠmost notably the development of new arrival procedures for four major U.S. airports 
and one European airportŠand changes in airline scheduling practices. He is an associate fellow of 
the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) and a member of the Airline Group 
of the International Federation of Operational Research Societies, Institute for Operations Research 
and the Management Sciences, and Sigma Xi. His many honors include the AIAA/AAAE/ACC Jay 
Hollingsworth Speas Airport Award (1999), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Excellence 
in Aviation Award (2003), the NAE Gilbreth Lecturership (2006), and the 37th SAE/AIAA William 
Littlewood Memorial Lecture Award (2012). 
George L. Donohue
 was granted the status of professor emeritus in 2010 and has been a professor 
of systems engineering and operations research at George Mason University since 2000. He has an 
M.S. and a Ph.D. in mechanical and aerospace engineering from Oklahoma State University and 
a BSME from the University of Houston. From 1994 to 1998, he was the associate administrator 
for research and acquisitions at the FAA and is the founding director of the Center for Air Trans
-portation Systems Research in the Volgenau School of Engineering. Dr. Donohue is a former vice 

president of the RAND Corporation and director of PROJECT AIR FORCE (1989-1994). Previously 
he was the director of DARPA™s Aerospace and Strategic Technology Office (1988-1989), a vice 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 23president of Dynamics Technology (1979-1984). He served as head of the Advanced Technology 
Division (1977-1979) and head of the Fluid Mechanics Branch (1973-1976) at the U.S. Naval Ocean 
System Center in San Diego, California. In the interim, he served as a program manger in DARPA™s 
Tactical Technology Office (1976-1977). He has been awarded an NRC post-doctoral fellowship with 
the U.S. Navy (1973-1974), the Secretary of Defense Meritorious Civilian Service Medal (1977), the 
Air Traffic Control Association Clifford Burton Memorial Award (1998), and the Embry Riddle 
Aeronautical University Pinnacle Award for initiating the Alaska Capstone ADS-B Program (2007). 
He was named one of 
Federal Computer Week™s
 top 100 Executives in 1997 and was also named one 
of the top 100 decision makers in Washington, D.C., by the 
National Journal
 in 1997. Dr. Donohue 
was chosen to head the U.S. Delegation to the International Civil Aviation OrganizationConference 

on Air Traffic Management Modernization in 1998. He is a member of Tau Beta Pi, Pi Tau Sigma, 
Omicron Delta Kappa, and Sigma Xi honorary societies. He is a fellow of AIAA and a licensed 
private pilot with a single-engine land rating. In addition to more than 60 published unclassified 
papers, he has been the principle author of two books on air transportation, the most recent is titled 
Terminal Chaos: Why U.S. Air Travel is Broken and How to Fix It
. He has testified before Congress on 
both military and civil aviation issues on numerous occasions. Dr. Donohue is currently acting as 

an academic advisor to undergraduate and doctoral students. He is a member of the NRC™s NASA 
Aeronautics Research and Technology Roundtable, and a member of the Mechanical and Aerospace 
Engineering Advisory Board, Oklahoma State University.
R. John Hansman, Jr.
 (NAE) is the T. Wilson Professor in the Department of Aeronautics and Astro
-nautics at MIT, where he is head of the Humans and Automation Division. He also is director of 
the International Center for Air Transportation. His current research interests focus on advanced 

cockpit information systems, including flight management systems, air-ground datalink, electronic 
charting, advanced alerting systems, and flight crew situational awareness. Dr. Hansman received 
a Ph.D. from MIT. He holds six U.S. Patents and has authored more than 250 technical publica
-tions. He is also an internationally recognized expert in aviation meteorological hazards such as 

icing and windshear. He is a fellow of AIAA. He received the 1998 Bose Award for Excellence in 
Teaching, the 1997 FAA Excellence in Aviation Award, the 1994 AIAA Losey Atmospheric Award, 
the 1990 OSTIV Diploma for Technical Contributions, and the 1986 AIAA Award for Best Paper in 
Thermophysics. He recently served as co-chair of the MIT Presidential Task Force on Student Life 
and Learning. Dr. Hansman consults and serves as a member of numerous advisory and technical 
committees, including the Congressional Aeronautics Advisory Committee, the FAA Research and 
Development Advisory Committee, the FAA WAAS Independent Review Board, and the NASA 
Advanced Air Transportation Technologies Executive Steering Committee. He serves on several 
editorial boards, including 
Air Traffic Control Quarterly
. He has more than 5,650 hours of pilot in-
command time in airplanes, helicopters, and sailplanes, including meteorological, production, and 

engineering flight test experience.
Mats P.E. Heimdahl
 is the director of the University of Minnesota Software Engineering Center 
where he specializes in software engineering and safety critical systems. Dr. Heimdahl is the recipi
-ent of the National Science Foundation™s CAREER award and University of Minnesota™s McKnight 
Land-Grant Professorship, the McKnight Presidential Fellow Award, and the Award for Outstand
-ing Contributions to Post-Baccalaureate, Graduate, and Professional Education. His research group, 

the Critical Systems Research Group, is conducting research in software engineering and is inves
-tigating methods and tools to help develop software with predictable behavior free from defects. 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
Research in this area spans all aspects of system development ranging from concept formation 
and requirements specification through design and implementation to testing and maintenance. 
In particular, he is investigating model-based software development for critical systems, focusing 
on how to use various static verification techniques to assure that software requirements models 
possess desirable properties, how to correctly generate production code from software requirements 
models, how to validate models, and how to effectively use the models in the testing process.
John C. Knight
 is a professor of computer science at the University of Virginia. He holds a B.Sc. 
(Hons) in mathematics from the Imperial College of Science and Technology (London) and a Ph.D. 
in computer science from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. Prior to joining the University 

of Virginia in 1981, he was with NASA™s Langley Research Center. He was the general chair of the 

2000 International Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE), and general chair 
of the 2007 International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). He served as editor in chief 
of 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
 from January 2002 to December 2005. He was honored 
by the IEEE Computer Society as the recipient of the 2006 Harlan D. Mills Award ﬁfor encourag
-ing software researchers to focus on practical results as well as theory, and for critically analyzing 

their assumptions and evaluating their research claims.ﬂ He was honored by the Association for 
Computing Machinery™s (ACM™s) Special Interest Group on Software Engineering (SIGSOFT) as 
the recipient of the 2008 Distinguished Service Award.
Leon J. Osterweil
 is a professor in the Department of Computer Science and co-director of the 
Laboratory for Advanced Software Engineering Research at the University of Massachusetts, 
Amherst. He served as dean of the College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics at the University 
of Massachusetts, as chair of the Information and Computer Science Department of the University 
of California, Irvine, and chair of the Computer Science Department at the University of Colo
-rado, Boulder. Dr. Osterweil received the Outstanding Research Award for lifetime achievement 

in research and the Influential Educator Award, both from ACM SIGSOFT. His paper suggesting 
the idea of process programming was recognized as the Most Influential Paper of the 9th Interna
-tional Conference on Software Engineering, awarded as a 10-year retrospective. Dr. Osterweil has 

served on the editorial boards of several journals, including 
IEEE Software, IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering,
 and 
ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology.
 He has served 
as program chair for many conferences, including the 16th ICSE, and as general chair of the 28th 

ICSE and the 6th FSE. He was a member of the Software Engineering Institute™s Process Program 
Advisory Board for several years following its inception and has been an advisor or consultant 
for such organizations as SAIC, MCC, AT&T, Boeing, KLA-Tencor, TRW, and IBM. He has been a 
keynote speaker at many conferences around the world. Dr. Osterweil is a fellow of the ACM and 

an ACM Lecturer.
Walker E. Royce
 is the chief software economist in IBM Software Group. He is a principal consultant 
and practice leader specializing in measured improvement of systems and software development 
capability. He is the author of three books: 
Eureka! Discover and Enjoy the Hidden Power of the English 
Language
 (2011), 
The Economics of Software Development
 (2009) and 
Software Project Management, A 
Unified Framework
 (1998). From 1994-2009, Mr. Royce was the vice president and general manager 
of IBM™s Rational Services organization and built a worldwide team of 500 technical specialists in 
software delivery best practices and $100 million in consulting services. Before joining Rational/
IBM, he spent 16 years in software project development, software technology development, and 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 25software management roles at TRW Electronics and Defense. Mr. Royce was a recipient of TRW™s 
Chairman™s Award for Innovation for his contributions in distributed architecture middleware and 
iterative software processes (1990) and was a TRW technical fellow. He received his B.A. in phys
-ics from the University of California and his M.S. in computer engineering from the University of 

Michigan. 
Gavriel Salvendy
 (NAE) is professor emeritus of industrial engineering at Purdue University and 
chair professor emeritus and former head (2001-2011) of the Department of Industrial Engineering 
at Tsinghua University, Beijing, and P.R. of China. He is the author or co-author of more than 550 
research publications, including more than 300 journal papers, and he is the author or editor of 42 

books. His publications have appeared in seven languages.
 He is the major professor to 67 former 
and current Ph.D. students. His main research deals with the human aspects of design, operation, 
and management of advanced engineering systems. Dr. Salvendy is the founding editor of 
Interna
-tional Journal on Human-Computer Interaction and Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing and 

Service Industries. He was the founding chair of the International Commission on Human Aspects in 

Computing, Headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. In 1990, he became the first member of either 
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society or the International Ergonomics Association to be 
elected to the NAE. He was elected ﬁfor fundamental contributions to and professional leadership 
in human, physical, and cognitive aspects of engineering systems.ﬂ In 1995, he received an honor
-ary doctorate from the Chinese Academy of Sciences ﬁfor great contributions to the development of 

science and technology and for the great influence upon the development of science and technology 
in Chinaﬂ and is the fourth person in all fields of science and engineering in the 45 years of the 
Academy ever to receive this award. In 2006, he received the Friendship Award presented by the 

People™s Republic of ChinaŠthe highest honor the Chinese government confers on foreign experts. 
In 2007, he received the John Fritz Medal, which is the engineering profession™s highest award, 
for his ﬁfundamental international and seminal leadership and technical contributions to human 
engineering and industrial engineering education, theory, and practice.ﬂ
 The journals 
Ergonomics
 (2003), 
Computers in Industry
 (2010), and 
Intelligent Manufacturing
 (2011) have published special 
issues in his honor. He is an honorary fellow and life member of the Ergonomics Society and a 
fellow of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, the Institute of Industrial Engineers, and the 
American Psychological Association. He has advised organizations in more than 31 countries on 
the human side of effective design, implementation, and management of advanced technologies 
in the workplace. He earned his Ph.D. in engineering production at the University of Birmingham, 
United Kingdom.
 Thomas B. Sheridan (NAE) is the Ford Professor of Engineering and Applied Psychology, Emeritus, 

in the Department of Mechanical Engineering and the Department of Aeronautics and Astronau
-tics at MIT, where he has spent most of his professional career serving as director of the Human-

Machine Systems Laboratory. Dr. Sheridan™s research interests are in experimentation, mathematical 
modeling, and design of human-machine systems in air, highway, and rail transportation, space and 

undersea robotics, process control, arms control, telemedicine, and virtual reality. He has authored 
and edited numerous books, co-founded the MIT Press journal 
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual 
Environments
 and served on several editorial boards. Dr. Sheridan chaired and continues to serve 
on the NRC™s Committee on Human Systems Integration and has served on numerous government 

and industrial advisory committees. Since retiring from MIT, he has served the U.S. government 
as a senior research fellow for the U.S. DOT Volpe Center and as chief system engineer for human 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
factors for the FAA. He is a fellow of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society and a recipient 
of their Paul M. Fitts and Arnold Small Awards and the President™s Outstanding Career Award, as 
well as a former president of the society. He was elected to the NAE in 1995. Dr. Sheridan holds a 
bachelor™s degree from Purdue University, an M.S. degree from the University of California, Los 
Angeles, and a Sc.D. degree from MIT.
Robert F. Sproull 
(NAE)
 recently retired as vice president and director of Oracle Labs, an applied 
research group that originated at Sun Microsystems. Since his undergraduate days, Dr. Sproull has 
been building hardware and software for computer graphics, clipping hardware, an early device-
independent graphics package, page description languages, laser printing software, and window 

systems. He has also been involved in very-large-scale integration design, especially of asynchro
-nous circuits and systems. Before joining Sun Microsystems in 1990 (acquired by Oracle in 2010), he 
was a principal with Sutherland, Sproull and Associates, an associate professor at Carnegie Mellon 
University and a member of Xerox PARC. He is a coauthor with William Newman of the early 
text 
Principles of Interactive Computer Graphics.
 He is also an author of the book 
Logical Effort,
 which 
deals with designing fast complementary metal-oxideŒsemiconductor circuits. He is a member of 
the NAE, a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and has served on the U.S. Air 
Force Scientific Advisory Board and as a technology partner of Advanced Technology Ventures. 
He is currently the chair of the NRC™s Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, a direc
-tor of Applied Micro Circuits, Inc., and an adjunct professor of computer science at University of 

Massachusetts, Amherst. Dr. Sproull received a B.A in physics from Harvard College and an M.S. 
and Ph.D. in computer science from Stanford University.
James W. Sturges
 is an independent consultant specializing in program management and systems 
engineering for very large, complex aerospace and defense systems. He retired in 2009 from Lock
-heed Martin Corporation where he had been director, engineering processes, and director, mission 
assurance. Prior to that he was vice president, engineering and total quality, at Loral Air Traffic 
Control/Lockheed Martin Air Traffic Management, and C3I strategic business area director for 
Loral Tactical Defense Systems, Arizona. He is an associate fellow and past member of the Standards 
Executive Council and chair of the Systems Engineering Technical Committee of AIAA and was 
twice chair of the Corporate Advisory Board for the International Council on Systems Engineering. 
Early in his career, he was a naval aviator, instrument instructor, and check pilot and was an anti-
submarine warfare officer for the U.S. Navy. He has a B.A. from the University of North Carolina 
and an M.S. and aeronautical engineer degree from the Naval Postgraduate School at Monterey.
Elaine Weyuker
 (NAE) is an ACM fellow, an IEEE fellow, an AT&T fellow, and NAE member. Dr. 
Weyuker is currently an independent consultant specializing in software testing, reliability, and 
metrics, and a visiting scholar at the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer 
Science of Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey. She is the author of 170 papers in journals 
and refereed conference proceedings. Prior to moving to the Research Division of AT&T Labs, she 
was a professor of the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences of New York University, was a 
faculty member at the City University of New York, a systems™ engineer at IBM, and a programmer 
at Texaco. She served as chair of the ACM Women™s Council from 2004 to 2012, is a member of the 
steering committee of the Coalition to Diversify Computing, a member of the Rutgers University 
Graduate School Advisory Board, and was a member of the board of directors of the Computing 
Research Association. Dr. Weyuker is or was a member of the editorial boards of 
IEEE Transactions 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 27on Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, IEEE Spectrum, Empiri
-cal Software Engineering,
 and the 
Journal of Systems and Software,
 and she was a founding editor of 
ACM Transactions of Software Engineering and Methodology
. She was the secretary/treasurer of ACM 
SIGSOFT and was an ACM national lecturer. Dr. Weyuker received a Ph.D. in computer science 
from Rutgers University, an M.S.E. from the University of Pennsylvania, and a B.A. in mathematics 
from the State University of New York, Binghamton.
Staff
Virginia Bacon Talati
 is a program officer for the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 
(CSTB) of the NRC of the National Academies. She formerly served as a program associate with the 
Frontiers of Engineering program at the NAE. Prior to her work at the Academies, she served as 
a senior project assistant in Education Technology at the National School Boards Association. Ms. 
Talati has a B.S. in science, technology, and culture from the Georgia Institute of Technology and 
an M.P.P. from George Mason University, with a focus in science and technology policy.
Dwayne A. Day
 is a senior program officer for the NRC™s Aeronautics and Space Engineering 
Board, has a Ph.D. in political science from the George Washington University. Dr. Day joined the 
NRC as a program officer for the Space Studies Board. Before this, he served as an investigator for 
the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, was on the staff of the Congressional Budget Office, 
and also worked for the Space Policy Institute at the George Washington University. He has held 
Guggenheim and Verville fellowships and was an associate editor of the German spaceflight 
magazine 
Raumfahrt Concrete
, in addition to writing for such publications as 
Novosti Kosmonavtiki
 (Russia), 
Spaceflight
, and 
Space Chronicle
 (United Kingdom). He has served as study director for 
several NRC reports, including 
Defending Planet Earth: Near-Earth-Object Surveys and Hazard Miti
-gation Strategies
 (2010), 
Preparing for the High Frontier: The Role and Training of NASA Astronauts in 
the Post-Space Shuttle Era
 (2011), 
Continuing Kepler™s Quest: Assessing Air Force Space Command™s 
Astrodynamics Standards
 (2012), 
Recapturing NASA™s Aeronautics Flight Research Capabilities
 (2012), 
and 
NASA™s Strategic Direction and the Need for a National Consensus
 (2012).
Jon Eisenberg
 is director of CSTB. He has also been study director for a diverse body of work, 
including a series of studies exploring Internet and broadband policy and networking and commu
-nications technologies. In 1995-1997 he was a AAAS Science, Engineering, and Diplomacy Fellow 

at the U.S. Agency for International Development, where he worked on technology transfer and 
information and telecommunications policy issues. Dr. Eisenberg received his Ph.D. in physics 
from the University of Washington and B.S. in physics with honors from the University of Mas
-sachusetts, Amherst.
Lynette I. Millett
 is associate director of CSTB. Ms. Millett has extensive experience as program 
manager, team leader, analyst, researcher, and writer with specific expertise in information technol
-ogy policy. She is skilled in working with diverse and expert work groups and since 2000 has been 
developing, directing, and overseeing NRC studies and teams of national experts examining public 
policy issues related broadly to information technology, computing, software, and communica
-tions. Her portfolio at the NRC includes a suite of studies on computing research, the most recent 

being 2012™s 
Computing Research for Sustainability
; several examinations of government information 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
technology and infrastructure needs, such as 2011™s 
Strategies and Priorities for Information Technol
-ogy at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
; and in-depth examinations of privacy, identity 
and
 cybersecurity, including 2010™s 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and Opportunities
.  She has an 
M.Sc. in computer science from Cornell University, where her work was supported by graduate 
fellowships from the National Science Foundation and the Intel Corporation; and a B.A. in math
-ematics and computer science with honors from Colby College.
Eric Whitaker
 is a senior program assistant at CSTB. Prior to joining CSTB, he was a realtor with 
Long and Foster Real Estate, Inc., in the Washington D.C. metropolitan area. Before that, he spent 
several years with the Public Broadcasting Service in Alexandria, Virginia, as an associate in the 

Corporate Support Department. He has a B.A. in communication and theater arts from Hampton 
University
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29
B Briefers to the Study Committee
MARCH 19, 2013Steven Bradford, Federal Aviation Administration
Gerald Dillingham, Government Accountability Office
Michael Hritz, Federal Aviation Administration
Margaret Jenny, RTCA
Heather Krause, Government Accountability Office
Molly Laster, Government Accountability Office
Natesh Menikoth, Federal Aviation Administration
Michele Merkle, Federal Aviation Administration
Madhav Panwar, Government Accountability Office
Pamela Whitley, Federal Aviation Administration
MAY 8-9, 2013Sherry Borener, Federal Aviation Administration

Edgar Calderon, Federal Aviation Administration
Vincent Capezzuto, Federal Aviation Administration 
Rachel Carr, House Aviation Subcommittee, Minority Staff
Sean Cassidy, Air Line Pilot Association 
Paul Fountain, Federal Aviation Administration
Giles Giovinazzi, House Aviation Subcommittee, Minority Staff
Tom Kramer, Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association 
Paul Krois, Federal Aviation Administration
Andrew Lacher, MITRE 
Natesh Manikoth, Federal Aviation Administration 
Mike Matousek, House Aviation Subcommittee, Majority Staff
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human FactorsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 INTERIM REPORT OF A REVIEW OF NEXTGEN
Jay Merkle, Federal Aviation Administration
Robert Nichols, Federal Aviation Administration
Simone Perez, House Aviation Subcommittee, Majority Staff
Andrew Rademaker, House Aviation Subcommittee, Majority Staff
Mike Riso, Professional Aviation Safety Specialists
Rich Swayze, Senate Commerce Committee, Majority Staff
Joseph Teixeira, Federal Aviation Administration
Dan Watts, Federal Aviation Administration 
Holly Woodruff Lyons, House Aviation Subcommittee, Majority Staff
Dale Wright, National Air Traffic Controllers Association
AUGUST 6-7, 2013Sherry Borener, Federal Aviation Administration
Steve Bradford, Federal Aviation Administration
Glen Dyer, Excelis
Fran Hill, Lockheed Martin
Mike Hritz, Federal Aviation Administration
Charles Keegan, Raytheon 
Paul Krois, Federal Aviation Administration
Natesh Manikoth, Federal Aviation Administration
Roberto Ortiz, Federal Aviation Administration
Ron Stroup, Federal Aviation Administration
Jesse Wijntjes, Federal Aviation Administration
