DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/18749At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some BasicConcepts and Issues150 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-30318-7 | DOI 10.17226/18749David Clark, Thomas Berson, and Herbert S. Lin, Editors; Committee on Developinga Cybersecurity Primer: Leveraging Two Decades of National Academies Work;Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineering andPhysical Sciences; National Research CouncilAt the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.David Clark, Thomas Berson, and Herbert S. Lin, 
EditorsCommittee on Developing a Cybersecurity Primer: 
 Leveraging Two Decades of National Academies Work
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICYSome Basic Concepts and IssuesAt the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation under 
Award Number CNS-0940372. Additional support was provided by Microsoft Cor
-poration, Google, Inc., and the President™s Committee of the National Academies.


-cies that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number 13:
 978-0-309-30318-7
International Standard Book Number 10:
 0-309-30318-4
Library of Congress Control Number:
 2014940211
This report is available from
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
National Research Council
500 Fifth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 
334-3313; http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2014 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences

dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-
National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the char
-
-ing engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its 
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for 
advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages 


The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 

Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council

Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 

vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iv
COMMITTEE ON DEVELOPING A CYBERSECURITY PRIMER: 
 LEVERAGING TWO DECADES OF 
NATIONAL ACADEMIES WORK
DAVID CLARK, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Chair
THOMAS BERSON, Anagram Laboratories

1 Georgetown University
Staff
HERBERT S. LIN, Study Director and Chief Scientist, Computer Science 
and Telecommunications Board 
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant, Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board 
1 Ms. Blumenthal resigned from the committee on May 1, 2013, and accepted a position 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Chair
LUIZ ANDRÉ BARROSO, Google, Inc.
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University
ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC
EDWARD FRANK, Apple, Inc.

LAURA M. HAAS, IBM Alamaden Research Laboratory
MARK A. HOROWITZ, Stanford University
MICHAEL KEARNS, University of Pennsylvania
ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University
SUSAN LANDAU, Google, Inc.
PETER LEE, Microsoft Corporation
DAVID E. LIDDLE, US Venture Partners
BARBARA LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology


PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology






RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
For more information on CSTB, see its Web site at http://www.cstb.org, 
write to CSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washing
-ton, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
Today, cybersecurity is widely viewed as a matter of pressing national 
importance. Many elements of cyberspace are notoriously vulnerable to 

-
sector companies both large and small suffer from cyber thefts of sensitive 
information, cyber vandalism (e.g., defacing of Web sites), and denial-of-
service attacks. The nation™s critical infrastructure, including the electric 

-
operation.
Concerns about the vulnerability of the information technology on 
which the nation relies have deepened in the security-conscious envi
-ronment after the September 11, 2001, attacks and in light of increased 
cyber espionage directed at private companies and government agencies 
in the United States. National policy makers have become increasingly 
concerned that adversaries backed by considerable resources will attempt 


have been advanced, and a number of bills have been introduced in Con
-gress to tackle parts of the cybersecurity challenge.
Although the larger public discourse sometimes treats the topic of 
cybersecurity as a new one, the Computer Science and Telecommunica
-
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii PREFACE
cybersecurity as a major challenge for public policy.
1 CSTB work in cyber
-
-tion on practical measures, technical and nontechnical challenges, and 
potential policy responses. Produced by the Committee on Developing a 
Cybersecurity Primer: Leveraging Two Decades of National Academies 

-oped in this body of work to provide a concise primer on the fundamen
-




the report also addresses issues not covered in earlier CSTB work, and 
the committee acknowledges with gratitude input from William Press 

Savage (University of California, San Diego), and William Sanders (Uni
-versity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) on a variety of cybersecurity-
related topics in the course of its work.
As a primer, this report presents fundamental concepts and principles 


change rapidly, but the fundamental concepts and principles endure, or 
at least they change much more slowly. These concepts and principles are 

incidents, although they manifest themselves in a wide variety of different 
technologies and incidents.
The report™s emphasis on fundamental concepts and principles also 
means that in the interest of brevity, coverage in this primer cannot be 


-tial resource.
1 
The Web page at http://sites.nationalacademies.org/CSTB/CSTB_059144 lists all CSTB 
reports related to cybersecurity.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 ixBOX P.1
 Selected Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board Work on CybersecurityŠA Brief Summary of Highlights
The 1991 CSTB report 
Computers at Risk warned that ﬁas computer systems 
become more prevalent, sophisticated, embedded in physical processes, and 
interconnected, society becomes more vulnerable to poor system design . . . and 
attacks on computer systemsﬂ and that ﬁthe nature and magnitude of computer 
system problems are changing dramaticallyﬂ (p. 1). It also lamented that ﬁknown 
techniques are not being usedﬂ to increase security. 
In 1999, CSTB released 
Trust in Cyberspace
, which proposed a research 
agenda to increase the trustworthiness of information technology (IT), with a spe
-cial focus on networked information systems. This report went beyond security 
matters alone, addressing as well other dimensions of trustworthiness such as 
correctness, reliability, safety, and survivability. Importantly, it also noted that ﬁeco
-nomic and political context is critical to the successful development and deploy
-ment of new technologiesﬂ (p. viii).
In 2002, CSTB issued Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay 
Later, which reprised recommendations from a decade of CSTB cybersecurity 
studies. Its preface noted that ﬁit is a sad commentary on the state of the world 
that what CSTB wrote more than 10 years ago is still timely and relevant. For those 
who work in computer security, there is a deep frustration that research and recom
-mendations do not seem to translate easily into deployment and utilizationﬂ (p. v).
CSTB™s 2007 report 
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace
 observed 
that ﬁthere is an inadequate understanding of what makes IT systems vulnerable 
to attack, how best to reduce these vulnerabilities, and how to transfer cybersecu
-rity knowledge to actual practiceﬂ (p. vii). It set forth an updated research agenda, 
sought to inspire the nation to strive for a safer and more secure cyberspace, and 
focused ﬁsubstantial attention on the very real challenges of incentives, usability, 
and embedding advances in cybersecurity into real-world products, practices, and 
servicesﬂ (p. xii).
In 2009, CSTB turned its attention to the technical and policy dimensions 
of cyberattackŠthe offensive side of cybersecurity. 
Technology, Policy, Law, and 
Ethics Regarding U.S. Acquisition and Use of Cyberattack Capabilities
 concluded that although cyberattack capabilities are an important asset for the United States, 
the current policy and legal framework for their use is ill-formed, undeveloped, 
and highly uncertain and that U.S. policy should be informed by an open and 
public national debate on technological, policy, legal, and ethical issues posed by 
cyberattack capabilities.
In 2010, the CSTB report 
Toward Better Usability, Security, and Privacy of 
Information Technology: Report of a Workshop
 identi˜ed research opportunities 
and ways to embed usability considerations in design and development related to 
security and privacy. In that year, CSTB also produced a second workshop report, 
Proceedings of a Workshop on Deterring Cyberattacks: Informing Strategies and 
Developing Options
, a collection of papers that examined governmental, economic, 
technical, legal, and psychological challenges involved in deterring cyberattacks. 
NOTE: All of these reports were published by the National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE
BOX P.2
 The Project Statement of Task
A primer on the technical and policy issues of cybersecurity, building on more 
than two decades of prior Academies work, will be developed under the auspices 
of a small study committee. The report will examine what is known about effective 
technical and nontechnical approaches, the state of the art and open challenges, 
why relatively little progress has been made in cybersecurity despite the recom
-mendations of many reports from the Academies and elsewhere, and potential 
policy responses. Much of the material will be drawn directly from previous reports. 
The committee will also review emerging issues and new technical and nontechni
-cal approaches that may not have been covered in previous National Research 
Council reports. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 

procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution
 in making its
 pub
-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 

to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Steven Bellovin, Columbia University,
RuthAnne Bevier, California Institute of Technology,



Butler Lampson, Microsoft Corporation, and
Steven Wallach, Convey Computer Corporation.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-
The review of this report was overseen by Sam Fuller (Analog Devices). 
Appointed by the National Research Council, he was responsible for mak
-At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERS
out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review com
-
this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Contents

   
1
 1.1
  
On the Meaning and Importance of Cyberspace and 
Cybersecurity, 7
 1.2
 Cybersecurity and Public Policy Concerns, 10


2  
SOME BASICS OF COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONS 
 18
 

 2.1
 Computing Technology, 18
 2.2
 Communications Technology and the Internet, 21
  2.3
 Information Technology Systems, 27


 3.1
  
On the Terminology for Discussions of Cybersecurity and 
Public Policy, 29
 3.2
 What It Means to Be an Adversary in Cyberspace, 31



  3.2.2
 Cyberattack, 32




 Attack, 35
  3.3
 Inherent Vulnerabilities of Information Technology, 35
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv CONTENTS 3.4
 The Anatomy of Adversarial Activities in Cyberspace, 40
   
3.4.1
 Cyber Penetration, 41
  
3.4.2
 Cyber Payloads (Malware), 46
  
3.4.3
 Operational Considerations, 48


 3.6
 Threat Assessment, 52


 4.1
 Approaches to Improving Security, 53
  
4.1.1
 Reducing Reliance on Information Technology, 53
  
4.1.2
 Knowing That Security Has Been Penetrated, 54
  
4.1.3
 Defending a System or Network, 57
  
4.1.4
 Ensuring Accountability, 62
  
4.1.5
  
Building a Capacity for Containment, Recovery, and 
Resilience, 69
  
4.1.6
 Employing Active Defense, 71
 4.2
 Nontechnological Dimensions of Cybersecurity, 75
  
4.2.1
 Economics, 76
  
4.2.2
 Psychology, 77
  
4.2.3
 Law, 81



  
4.2.5
 Deterrence, 86
 4.3
 Assessing Cybersecurity, 88
 4.4
 On the Need for Research, 90



 
 5.1
 Economics, 93
  
5.1.1
  
Economic Approaches to Enhancing 
 Cybersecurity, 93
  
5.1.2
  
Economic Impact of Compromises in 
 Cybersecurity, 96
 5.2
 Innovation, 98
 5.3
 Civil Liberties, 100
  
5.3.1
 Privacy, 100



  
5.3.3
 Due Process, 102
 5.4
 International Relations and National Security, 103
  
5.4.1
 Internet Governance, 103
  
5.4.2
  
Reconciling Tensions Between Cybersecurity and 
Surveillance, 104
  
5.4.3
 Norms of Behavior in Cyberspace, 106
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS xv  
5.4.4
  
Managing the Global Supply Chain for Information 
Technology, 111
  
5.4.5
 Role of Offensive Operations in Cyberspace, 113
6 FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION
 116
 6.1
 Findings, 116
 6.2
 Conclusion, 124
APPENDIXES
A Committee Members and Staff
 129
B Bibliography
 132
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary
Nations are increasingly dependent on information and information 
technology. Companies rely on computers for diverse business processes 
ranging from payroll and accounting to the tracking of inventory and 
sales, to support for research and development. Distribution of food, 
water, and energy is dependent on computers and networks at every 

Modern military forces use weapons that are computer controlled. Even 
more important, the movements and actions of military forces are increas
-ingly coordinated through computer-based networks that allow informa
-

In light of this dependence on information technology, cybersecurity 
is increasingly important to the nation, and cyberspace is vulnerable 
to a broad spectrum of hackers, criminals, terrorists, and state actors. 
Working in cyberspace, these malevolent actors can steal money, intellec
-
impersonate law-abiding parties for their own purposes; harass or bully 
innocent people anonymously; damage important data; destroy or disrupt 
the operation of physical machinery controlled by computers; or deny the 
availability of normally accessible services.
A number of factors, such as the September 11, 2001, attacks and 
higher levels of cyber espionage directed at private companies and gov
-ernment agencies in the United States, have deepened concerns about 
the vulnerability of the information technology (IT) on which the nation 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY



substantial harm on the nation. Numerous policy proposals have been 
advanced, and a number of bills have been introduced in Congress to 
tackle parts of the cybersecurity challenge.
It is to help decision makers and the interested public make informed 
choices that this report was assembled. The report is fundamentally a 

leverages insights developed in work by the National Research Council™s 
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board over more than two 
decades on practical measures for cybersecurity, technical and nontechni
-cal challenges, and potential policy responses.

dependent on computing and communications technology; the informa
-tion that these artifacts use, store, handle, or process; and how these vari
-ous elements are connected. Security in cyberspace (i.e., cybersecurity) is 
about technologies, processes, and policies that help to prevent and/or 
reduce the negative impact of events in cyberspace that can happen as the 
result of deliberate actions against information technology by a hostile or 
malevolent actor.
Cybersecurity issues arise because of three factors taken togetherŠ
the presence of malevolent actors in cyberspace, societal reliance on IT for 
many important functions, and the inevitable presence of vulnerabilities 
in IT systems that malevolent actors can take advantage of. Despite these 

they are supposed to do and only when they are supposed to do it, and 

is the purpose of cybersecurity.
Against this backdrop, it appears that 
cybersecurity is a never-end
-ing battle, and a permanently decisive solution to the problem will 
not be found in the foreseeable future
.1 Cybersecurity problems result 

-ing judgments about what actions and information are safe or unsafe 
from a cybersecurity perspective. Furthermore, threats to cybersecurity 
evolve, and adversariesŠespecially at the high-end part of the threat 
spectrumŠconstantly adopt new tools and techniques to compromise 
security when defenses are erected to frustrate them. As information tech
-nology becomes more ubiquitously integrated into society, the incentives 
to compromise the security of deployed IT systems grow. Thus, enhancing 

1 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3in which it is embeddedŠmust be understood as an ongoing process 
rather than something that can be done once and then forgotten.
Ultimately, the relevant policy question is not how the cybersecurity 
problem can be solved, but rather how it can be made manageable. Soci
-
drug abuse, and so on are rarely ﬁsolvedﬂ or taken off the policy agenda 

-
so decisively that they will never reappearŠand the same is true for 
cybersecurity.
At the same time, 
improvements to the cybersecurity posture of 

-able value in reducing the loss and damage that may be associated with 
cybersecurity breaches.
 A well-defended target is less attractive to many 
malevolent actors than are poorly defended targets. In addition, defensive 

thus making intrusion attempts slower and more costly and possibly 
helping to deter future intrusions.
Improvements to cybersecurity call for two distinct kinds of activ
-ity: efforts to more effectively and more widely use what is known 
about improving cybersecurity, and efforts to develop new knowledge 
about cybersecurity.
 The gap in security between the U.S. national cyber
-
gap is the difference between what our cybersecurity posture is and what 
it could be if known best cybersecurity practices and technologies were 
widely deployed and used. The second part (Part 2) is the gap between 
the strongest posture possible with known practices and technologies 

-technical in nature (requiring, e.g., research relating to economic or psy
-chological factors regarding the use of known practices and techniques, 
enhanced educational efforts to promote security-responsible user behav
-
security awareness). Closing the Part 1 gap does not require new technical 

technical knowledge. Research will be needed to understand how better 
to promote deployment and use of such knowledge. Closing the Part 2 
gap is where new technologies and approaches are needed, and is the 
fundamental rationale for technical research in cybersecurity.
Publicly available information and policy actions to date have been 


For 
a number of years, the cybersecurity issue has received increasing public 
attention, and a greater amount of authoritative information regarding 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
cybersecurity threats is available publicly. But all too many decision mak
-
-tional cybersecurity postures, and little has been done to harness market 
forces to address matters related to the cybersecurity posture of the nation 
as a whole. If the nation™s cybersecurity posture is to be improved to a 
level that is higher than the level to which today™s market will drive it, the 

-curity must be altered in some fashion.
Cybersecurity is important to the nation, but the United States 

-tives of cybersecurity. Tradeoffs are inevitable and will have to be 
accepted through the nation™s political and policy-making processes. 
Senior policy makers have many issues on their agenda, and they must set 
priorities for the issues that warrant their attention. In an environment of 
many competing priorities, reactive policy making is often the outcome. 
Support for efforts to prevent a disaster that has not yet occurred is typi
-cally less than support for efforts to respond to a disaster that has already 

or few attempts have yet been made to compromise the cybersecurity of 
application 
X
-tifying why immediate attention and action to improve the cybersecurity 
posture of application 
X can be deferred or studied further.
Progress in cybersecurity policy has also stalled at least in part 

yes, but we also want a private sector that innovates rapidly, and the con
-venience of not having to worry about cybersecurity, and the ability for 
applications to interoperate easily and quickly with one another, and the 
right to no diminution in our civil liberties, and so on. Although research 
and deeper thought may reveal that, in some cases, tradeoffs between 
security and these other equities are not as stark as they might appear at 

when they are irreconcilable, and honest acknowledgment and discus
-sion of the tradeoffs (e.g., a better cybersecurity posture may reduce the 
nation™s innovative capability, may increase the inconvenience of using 
information technology, may reduce the ability to collect intelligence) will 
go a long way toward building public support for a given policy position.
The use of offensive operations in cyberspace as an instrument 
to advance U.S. interests raises many important technical, legal, and 

-ernment. 
Some of these questions involve topics such as U.S. offensive 
capabilities in cyberspace, rules of engagement, doctrine for the use of 

-ment of Defense and the intelligence community, and a host of other 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5topics related to offensive operations. It is likely that behind the veil of 

opacity has many undesirable consequences, but one of the most impor
-tant consequences is that the role offensive capabilities could play in 
defending important information technology assets of the United States 
cannot be discussed fully.
What is sensitive about offensive U.S. capabilities in cyberspace is 

(rather than the nature of that technology itself); fragile and sensitive 


-ticular vulnerability, a particular operational program); or U.S. knowledge 



-vides a generally reasonable basis for understanding what can be done 
and for policy discussions that focus primarily on what should be done.


but not limited to computer science and information technology, psychol
-
sociology, decision sciences, international relations, and law. Although 
technical measures are an important element, cybersecurity is not primar
-ily a technical matter, although it is easy for policy analysts and others 
to get lost in the technical details. Furthermore, what is known about 
cybersecurity is often compartmented along disciplinary lines, reducing 


will never be solved once and for all. Solutions to the problem, limited in 
scope and longevity though they may be, are at least as much nontechni
-cal as technical in nature. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71
1.1
 ON THE MEANING AND IMPORTANCE OF 
CYBERSPACE AND CYBERSECURITY
Most people in modern society encounter computing and communi
-

-puters are not openly visible. People type at the keyboard of computers or 
tablets and use their smart phones daily. People™s personal lives involve 
computing through social networking, home management, communica
-tion with family and friends, and management of personal affairs. The 
operation of medical devices implanted in human bodies is controlled by 
embedded (built-in) microprocessors. 
A much larger collection of information technology (IT) is instru
-
government. Companies large and small rely on computers for diverse 
business processes ranging from payroll and accounting to the tracking 
of inventory and sales, to support for research and development (R&D). 
The distribution of food and energy from producer to retail consumer 
depends on computers and networks at every stage. Nearly everyone 
(in everyday society, business, government, and the military services) 
relies on wireless and wired digital communications systems. IT is used 


care, utilities, transportation, and retail and management services. Indeed, 
the architecture of today™s enterprise IT systems is the very embodiment 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY

-
ﬁtraditionalﬂ industries such as manufacturing without IT.
Today and increasingly in the future, computing and communications 
technologies (collectively, information technologies) are found and will 
be more likely to be found in places where they are essentially invisible 
to everyday view: in cars, wallets, clothing, refrigerators, keys, cabinets, 
watches, doorbells, medicine bottles, walls, paint, structural beams, roads, 

-ing some embedded in human beings). These devices will be connectedŠ
the so-called Internet of Things. Computing will be embedded in myriad 
places and objects; even today, computing devices are easily transported 
in pockets or on wrists. Computing devices will be coupled to multiple 
sensors and actuators. Computing and communications will be seamless, 
enabling the tight integration of personal, family, and business systems. 
Sensors, effectors, and computing will be networked together so that they 
pass relevant information to one another automatically.
In this emerging era of truly pervasive computing, the ubiquitous 
integration of computing and communications technologies into com
-mon everyday objects enhances their usefulness and makes life easier 

-ances will make appropriate information available on demand, enabling 
users to be more productive in both their personal and their professional 
lives. And, as has been true with previous generations of IT, interconnec
-tions among all of these now-smart objects and appliances will multiply 
their usefulness many times over.

ﬁcyberspaceﬂ often arises. Although ﬁcyberspaceﬂ does not have a single 

1 some things can be said about how the term 
is used in this report. First, cyberspace is not a physical place, although 
many elements of cyberspace are indeed physical, do have volume and 

three spatial dimensions. Second, cyberspace includes but is not limited 
to the InternetŠcyberspace also includes computers (some of which are 
attached to the Internet and some not) and networks (some of which may 
be part of the Internet and some not). Third, cyberspace includes many 
intangibles, such as information and software and how different elements 
of cyberspace are connected to each other.

1 

https://blogs.cisco.com/security/cyberspace-what-is-it/.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHY CARE ABOUT CYBERSECURITY? 9based on or dependent on computing and communications technology; 
the information that these artifacts use, store, handle, or process; and the 
interconnections among these various elements. But the reader should 

precise one.
Given our dependence on cyberspace, we want and need our infor
-mation technologies to do what they are supposed to do and only when 
they are supposed to do it. We also want these technologies to not do 
things they are not supposed to do. And we want these things to be true 
in the face of deliberately hostile or antisocial actions.
Cybersecurity issues arise because of three factors taken together. 
First, we live in a world in which there are parties that will act in deliber
-ately hostile or antisocial waysŠparties that would do us harm or sepa
-rate us from our money or violate our privacy or steal our ideas. Second, 
we rely on IT for a large and growing number of societal functions. Third, 
IT systems, no matter how well constructed (and many are not as well 
constructed as the state of the art would allow), inevitably have vulner
-abilities that the bad guys can take advantage of.

Security in cyberspace (i.e., cybersecurity) is about technologies, processes, and 
policies that help to prevent and/or reduce the negative impact of events in 
cyberspace that can happen as the result of deliberate actions against information 
technology by a hostile or malevolent actor. 

-essary to elaborate on the meaning of ﬁimpact,ﬂ on what makes impact 
ﬁnegative,ﬂ and on what makes an actor ﬁhostileﬂ or ﬁmalevolent.ﬂ

information artifact (software or hardware) has impactŠChapter 3 dis
-cusses different kinds of impact that are related to cybersecurity. But any 
given impact can be positive or negative and any actor can be virtuous or 
malevolent, depending on the perspective of the parties involvedŠthat 
is, who is a perpetrator and who is a target.
In many cases with which readers of this report are likely to be 
concerned, the meanings of these terms are both reasonably clear and 


an impact negative is that their information technology no longer works 

are relying on such technologies and it is the U.S. government that takes 
actions to render their technologies inoperative, the impact would usually 
be seen as positive.
Similarly, many repressive regimes put into place various mecha
-nisms in cyberspace to monitor communications of dissidents. These 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
regimes may regard as ﬁmalevolent actorsﬂ those who help dissidents 
breach the security of these mechanisms and circumvent government 
monitoring, but others may well regard such parties as virtuous rather 
than malevolent actors. Compromising the cybersecurity of an Internet-
based mechanism for conducting surveillance against such parties has 
a negative impact from the standpoint of these regimes, but a positive 
impact for those seeking to open up these regimes.
There are also cases of concern to readers of this report in which the 
meanings of ﬁnegativeﬂ and ﬁmalevolentﬂ may not be shared. Consider 
the debate over Internet surveillance by the National Security Agency 

2013. According to news stories on these documents in the 
Washington 
Post
 and the 
Guardian
, the NSA has engaged in a broad program of elec
-tronic surveillance for counterterrorism purposes.
2 Some of the reactions 


defended the actions of the NSA as a vital element in U.S. counterterror
-ism efforts.

Indeed, one of the most important lessons to emerge from cybersecurity 

factors can have an impact on cybersecurity that is at least as great as 
technology™s impact. A full consideration of cybersecurity necessarily 

-

1.2
 CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY CONCERNS


wrote in 
Computers at Risk:
 We are at risk. Increasingly, America depends on computers. They control 

are used to store vital information, from medical records to business 
plans to criminal records. Although we trust them, they are vulnerableŠ

and perhaps most alarmingly, to deliberate attack. The modern thief can 
2 
Learned from Edward Snowden in 2013,ﬂ 
National Journal, 
December 31, 2013, available at 
http://www.nationaljournal.com/defense/everything-we-learned-from-edward-snowden-
in-2013-20131231.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHY CARE ABOUT CYBERSECURITY? 11steal more with a computer than with a gun. Tomorrow™s terrorist may 
be able to do more damage with a keyboard than with a bomb. (p. 7)
What is worrisome from a public policy perspective is that the words 

-
-cance has grown as our reliance on IT has increased. Table 1.1 illustrates 
some of the security consequences of the changes in the information 
technology environment in the past 20 years.
The IT on which we rely is for the most part created, owned, and 
operated by the private sector, which means that improving the cyberse
-curity posture of the nation will require action by relevant elements of the 
private sector. Nonetheless, many parties believe that the government has 
an important role in helping to address cybersecurity problems, in much 
the same way that the government has many responsibilities for national 
security, law enforcement, and other problems of societal scale.
TABLE 1.1
 Potential Security Consequences of More Than Two 
Decades™ Worth of Change in Information Technology (IT)
Change Since 1990Potential Security Consequence 
 (illustrative, not comprehensive)
Microprocessors, storage devices, 
communications links, and so onŠthe raw 
hardware underlying ITŠdemonstrate 
performance that is several orders of 
magnitude more capable than their 
counterparts of 20 years ago.More integration of IT into the 
functions of daily life means more 
opportunities for malevolent actors to 
compromise those functions.
 Devices for computing have shifted 

mobile computing: tablets, pads, smart 
phones, smart watches, and so on. Desktop 
and laptop computers are still important 
to many end users, especially in business 
environments, but mobile devices are 
ubiquitous today. Accompanying this 
change are new business models for 
providing software to end usersŠvendor-
controlled or vendor-operated app 
stores are now common. Many corporate 
employees use their personally owned 
computing devices for business purposes. 
New security approaches are needed 
to secure battery-operated devices 
with relatively little computational 
power.
  App stores can provide greater 
assurance about the security of 
installed software.
  
control over computing resources 
used on their behalf. continuedAt the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
Change Since 1990Potential Security Consequence 
 (illustrative, not comprehensive)
Cyberphysical systems are physical 
systems that are controlled at least in part 
by IT. Physical devices with embedded 
computing accept data from the physical 
world (through sensors such as cameras 
or thermometers) and/or cause changes 
in the physical world (through actuators 
such as a motor that causes something to 
move or a heater that heats a fluid). Such 
systems are everywhereŠin manufacturing 
assembly lines, chemical production 
plants, power generation and transmission 
facilities, automobiles, airplanes, buildings, 
heating and cooling facilities, and so onŠ
operation of these systems. 
IT-based control of cyberphysical 
systems means that cybersecurity 
compromises can affect physical 
systems and may cause death, 
destruction, or physical damage.
 Cloud computing has become increasingly 
popular as a way for businesses (and 
individuals) to increase the efficiency 

management and IT infrastructure, cloud 
computing promises to reduce the cost of 
computing and increase its accessibility to 
a geographically dispersed user base. 
Concentration of computing resourc
-es for many parties potentially offers 
a ﬁbig fat targetﬂ for malevolent ac
-tors. Cloud computing infrastructure 
may also provide malevolent actors a 
platform from which to launch their 

-ever, enables providers of computing 



-able administrators.The number of Internet users has grown 
by at least two orders of magnitude in the 
past two decades, and hundreds of millions 
of new users (perhaps as many as a billion) 
will begin to use the Internet as large parts 
of Africa, South America, and Asia come 

devices will become increasingly connected 
to the Internet of Things, on the theory that 
network connections between these devices 
will enable them to operate more efficiently 
and effectively.

untutored in the need for security 
and are thus more vulnerable.
  A larger user base means a larger 
number of potentially malevolent 
actors. The rise of social networking and 

such as Facebook and Twitter, is based on 
the ability of IT to bring large numbers of 
people into contact with one another. 
Connectivity among friends and 
contacts offers opportunities for 
malevolent actors to improperly 
take advantage of trust 
relationships.
TABLE 1.1 Continued
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHY CARE ABOUT CYBERSECURITY? 13Public policy concerns about the effects of inadequate cybersecurity 
are often lumped into a number of categories:
Cybercrime

the Internet and IT to steal valuable assets (e.g., money) from their rightful 
owners or otherwise to take actions that would be regarded as criminal 
if these actions were taken in person, and a breach of security is usually 
an important element of the crime. Criminal activity using cyber means 
includes cyber fraud and theft of services (e.g., stealing credit card num
-bers); cyber harassment and bullying (e.g., taking advantage of online 
anonymity to threaten a victim); cyber vandalism (e.g., defacing a Web 
site); penetration or circumvention of cybersecurity mechanisms intended 
to protect the privacy of communications or stored information (e.g., 

identity theft (e.g., stealing login names and passwords to forge e-mail 
or to improperly manipulate bank accounts). Loss of privacy and theft 
of intellectual property are also crimes (at least sometimes) but generally 
occupy their own categories of concern. Note also that in addition to the 

-curity consume resources (e.g., money, talent) that could be better used to 
build improved products or services or to create new knowledge. And, in 
some cases, concerns about cybersecurity have been known to inhibit the 
use of IT for some particular application, thus leading to self-denial of the 

Loss of privacy
. Losses of privacy can result from the actions of oth
-ers or of the individual concerned. Large-scale data breaches occur from 
time to time, for reasons including loss of laptops containing sensitive 
data and system penetrations by sophisticated intruders. Intruders have 
used the sound and video capabilities of home computers for blackmail 

based social networks without understanding the privacy implications of 
doing so, and are later surprised when such information is accessible to 

-als are concerned about the privacy of their data and communications, 
and a variety of U.S. laws guard against improper disclosure of such 
information.
Activism
to promote, block, or protest social or political change. Compromises 
in cybersecurity have been used in some activist efforts in cyberspace, 
wherein activists may compromise the cybersecurity of an installation in 
an effort to make a political statement or to call attention to a cause, for 

release or by defacing a public-facing Web site. Activism may also be an 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY

sites belonging to adversaries of Nation A.
Misappropriation of intellectual property
 such as proprietary software, 
R&D work, blueprints, trade secrets, and other product information. Con
-cern over theft of intellectual property is especially pronounced when 

goods and services vital to national security. Although misappropriation 
of trade secrets is prohibited under international trade law, many coun
-tries in the world conduct activities aimed at collecting information that 
might be economically useful to their domestic companies.
3 Private com
-panies also have incentives to undertake these latter activities, although 
in many cases some of such activity is forbidden by domestic laws.
Espionage. Espionage refers to one nation™s attempts to gather intel
-ligence on other nations, where intelligence information includes informa
-tion related to national security and foreign affairs. Cyber espionage refers 
to national-level entities conducting espionage activities using cyber 
means to obtain important intelligence information relevant to national 

-lection of intelligence information about another nation is not prohibited 
under international law.
Denials (or disruption) of service
. When services are not available 
when needed, the elements of society that rely on those services are 
inconvenienced and may be harmed. Denials of service per se do not 
necessarily entail actual damage to the facilities providing service. For 

-ing it impossible to place one, but as soon as the attacker stops, it again 
becomes possible to make a call. Denial of services is described further in 
Chapter 3.
Destruction of or damage to physical property
. Such concerns fall into 
three general categories:
  
Š Individual cyberphysical systems
, such as automobiles, airliners, 
and medical devices. Increasingly, computers control the opera
-tion of such systems, and communications links, either wired or 
wireless, connect them to other computational devices. Thus, a 
malevolent actor might be able to improperly assume control of 
individual cyberphysical systems or to obtain information (e.g., 
medical information) that should be private.
  
Š Critical infrastructure
, which includes multiple facilities for 
electric power generation and transmission, telecommunications, 

storage, and water supply. Although failures in individual facilities 
3 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHY CARE ABOUT CYBERSECURITY? 15

-sive loss of life, long-lasting disruption of the services that these 

loss. Policy makers have become increasingly concerned about 
cyber threats to critical infrastructure emanating from both nations 
and terrorist groups. 
  
Š 
. Modern economies depend in large measure 

everyday activities. Under some circumstances, it is possible that 

even symbols of the nation, such as important monuments) could 


considered to have some catastrophic potential as well.
As far as is known publicly, actual destruction of or damage to physi
-cal property to date has been a relatively rare occurrence, although there 
have been many incidents in the other categories outlined above. 
Threats to national security and cyber war
. U.S. armed forces depend 
heavily on IT for virtually every aspect of their capabilitiesŠweapons sys
-tems; systems for command, control, communications, and intelligence; 
systems for managing logistics; and systems for administration. Given 
that dependence, potential adversaries are developing ways to threaten 
the IT underlying U.S. military power.
4 In addition, other nations are 
also using IT in the same ways that the United States is using it, for both 
military and civilian purposes, suggesting that the United States could 
itself seek opportunities to advance its national interests by going on the 
offensive in cyberspace.
Concerns about the areas described above have made cybersecurity a 
hot topic that has garnered substantial public and government attention. 
In international circles too, such as the United Nations and NATO, as well 
as in bilateral relationships with parties such as China and the European 
Union, cybersecurity is moving higher on the agenda.
But as important as cybersecurity is to the nation, progress in public 
policy to improve the nation™s cybersecurity posture has not been as rapid 


policy issuesŠand measures taken to improve cybersecurity potentially 
4 
Department of Defense Strategy for Operating 
in Cyberspace

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
have negative effects in these other areas. Some of the most important 

Economics
. The costs of action to improve cybersecurity beyond an 

necessary, and the costs of inaction are not borne by the relevant decision 
makers. Decision makers discount future possibilities so much that they 
do not see the need for present-day action. Also, cybersecurity is increas
-ingly regarded as a part of risk managementŠan important part in many 

debates as wellŠwith all of the competing demands for a share of govern
-ment budgets and attention from senior policy makers, policy progress in 
cybersecurity has been slower than many have desired.
Innovation
. The private sector is constantly trying to bring forward 
new applications and technologies that improve on old ways of perform
-ing certain functions and offer useful new functions. But attention to 
security can slow bringing new products and services to market, with the 
result that new technologies and applications are often offered for general 

question is how to manage the tradeoff between the pace of innovation 
and a more robust security posture.
Civil liberties
. Some measures proposed to improve cybersecurity 
for the nation potentially infringe on civil liberties, such as privacy, ano
-nymity, due process, freedom of association, free speech, and due process. 
Advocates of such measures either argue that their favored measures do 
not infringe on civil liberties, or assert that the infringements are small 

because changes in information technology have gone beyond the tech
-

Smith 
vs.
 Maryland
) held that 
metadata on phone calls (i.e., the phone numbers involved and the dura
-tion and time of the call) was less worthy of privacy protection than was 
ﬁcontentﬂ information, that is, what the parties to a phone call actually say 
to each other. But the concept of metadata has come to mean ﬁdata asso
-ciated with a communication that is not communications content,ﬂ and 
given the way modern electronic communications operate, the relevance 
of the 1979 precedent has been challenged as many analysts assert that 
metadata is 
more
 revealing than content information.
55 

IEEE Security and Privacy

February):62-64, 2014, available at http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHY CARE ABOUT CYBERSECURITY? 17International relations and national security
. Because of the world
-wide Internet and a global supply chain in which important elements of 
information technology are created, manufactured, and sold around the 
world, cyberspace does not have physical national borders. But the world 

physical artifact of information technology is located 
somewhere
. Conse
-

with other nationsŠthat is, in their international relations.
1.3
 ORGANIZATION OF THIS REPORT
Chapter 2 presents some fundamental concepts in information tech
-nology that are necessary for understanding cybersecurity. Chapter 3 

what it means to compromise cybersecurity. Chapter 4 describes a variety 
of methods for strengthening and enhancing cybersecurity. Chapter 5 is 
devoted to a further discussion of key public policy issues relating to 

of course. Large-scale analysis of phone metadata reveals patterns of communicationŠ
the identities of communicating parties, and when and with what frequency such 
communications occur. For some people in some situations, a map of their communications 
patterns is more privacy-sensitive than what they are saying in their conversations or even in 
any one conversation; in other situations for other people, their patterns of communication 
are less sensitive.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
2Some Basics of Computing and 
Communications Technology and 

2.1
 COMPUTING TECHNOLOGY
The computers at the heart of information technology are gener
-ally stored-program computers. A program is the way an algorithm is 
represented in a form understandable by a computer. An algorithm is a 
particular method devised to solve a particular problem (or class of prob
-lems). Computers do what the program tells them to do given particular 


that is, how to program it.
A program is implemented as a sequence of instructions to the com
-puter; each instruction directs the computer to take some action, such as 
adding two numbers or activating a device connected to it. Instructions 
are stored in the memory of the computer, as are the data on which these 
instructions operate.
A particularly important instruction is conditional. Let™s call 
X a state
-ment about some particular data that is either true or false. Then if 
X is 
true, the computer does something (call it 
A); if 
X is not true, the computer 
does something else (call it 
B). In this way, the sequence of instructions 

the data provided to the computer. Furthermore, the number of possible 

of decisions: a program with only 10 ﬁyesﬂ or ﬁnoﬂ decisions can have 
more than 1000 possible paths, and one with 20 such decisions can have 
more than 1 million.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOME BASICS OF COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY
 19A second key point about computing is that information processed 
by computers and communication systems is represented as sequences 
of bits (i.e., binary digits). Such a representation is a uniform way for 
computers and communication systems to store and transmit all infor
-
source per se simply by creating the bits and then can be used to produce 
everything from photo-realistic images to an animation to forged e-mail. 
Digital encoding can represent many kinds of information with which 

As bit sequences, information can be found in two formsŠinformation 

card; and information in transit through a cable or over a wireless link 
from one location to another. 
Why do these aspects of computing technology matter for security

depending on the data means that the programmer must anticipate what 
the program should do for all possible data inputs. This mental task is of 


to properly anticipate some particular set of data (e.g., the program pro
-cesses only numeric input, and fails to account for the possibility that a 
user might input a letter).
A further consequence is that for programs of any meaningful utility, 
testing for all possible outcomes is essentially impossible when treating 

inputs. This means that although it may be possible to show that the pro
-gram does what it is supposed to do when presented with certain inputs, 
it is impossible to show that it will never do what it is not supposed to do 


upon receiving that particular sequence, the program can (deliberately) 

The digital representation of information has a number of important 

as sequences of bits means that there is no inherent association between 

originatorŠthat is, information is inherently anonymous. A programmer 

additional data can, in principle, be separated from the information of 
interest. This point matters in situations in which knowing the association 
between information and its originator is relevant to security, as might be 
the case if a law enforcement agency were trying to track down a cyber 
criminal. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
The fact that a given sequence of bits could just as easily be a program 
as data means that a computer that receives information assuming it to be 
data could in fact be receiving a program, and that program could be hos
-tile. Mechanisms in a computer are supposed to keep data and program 
separate, but these mechanisms are not foolproof and can sometimes be 
tricked into allowing the computer to interpret data as instructions. It is 


can be programs that can penetrate the computer™s security, and opening 

Last, the representation of information as sequences of bits has 
facilitated the use of various mathematical techniquesŠcryptographic 
techniquesŠto protect such information. Cryptography has many pur
-poses: to ensure the integrity of data (i.e., to ensure that data retrieved 
or received are identical to data originally stored or sent), to authenticate 


-tiality of information that may have come improperly into the possession 

To understand how cryptographic methods span a range of com
-munication and storage needs, consider the general problem of securing 

accomplished by Alice writing a letter containing her signature (authen
-tication). The letter was sealed inside a container to prevent accidental 

an unbroken seal, it meant that the letter had not been disclosed or altered 
(data integrity), and Bob would verify Alice™s signature and read the mes
-sage. If he received the container with a broken seal, Bob would then take 
appropriate actions.
With modern cryptographic techniques, each of the steps remains 

work. Mathematical operations can scramble (encrypt) the bit sequences 

of them cannot interpret their meaning. Other mathematical operations 
descramble (decrypt) the scrambled bits so that they can be interpreted 
properly and the information they represent can be recovered. Still 
other operations can be used to ﬁsignﬂ a piece of information in a way 
that associates a particular party with that information. (Note, however, 
that signed information can always be separated from its signature, 
and a different signature (and party) can then be associated with that 
information.)
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOME BASICS OF COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY
 212.2
 COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND THE INTERNET
Computers are frequently connected through networks to communi
-cate with each other, thus magnifying their usefulness. Furthermore, since 
computers can be embedded in almost any device, arrays of devices can 
be created that work together for coherent and common purposes.

which is a diverse set of independent networks, interlinked to provide 
its users with the appearance of a single, uniform network. That is, the 
Internet is a network of networks. The networks that compose the Internet 
share a common architecture (how the components of the networks inter
-relate) and protocols (standards governing the interchange of data) that 
enable communication within and among the constituent networks. These 
networks themselves range in scale from point-to-point links between 
individual devices (such as Bluetooth) to the relatively small networks 

-

-
Internally, the Internet has two types of elements: communication 
links, channels over which data travel from point to point; and routers, 
computers at the network™s nodes that direct data arriving along incoming 
links to outgoing links that will take the data toward their destinations. 
Data travel along the Internet™s communication links in packets 

format and header information. Header information includes informa
-tion such as the origin and destination IP addresses of a packet, which 
routers use to determine which link to direct the packet along. A message 
from a sender to a receiver might be broken into multiple packets, each 
of which might follow a different path through the Internet. Information 
in the packets™ headers enables the message to be restored to its proper 
order at its destination. However, as a general rule, it is not possible to 
specify in advance the particular sequence of routers that will handle 
a given packetŠthe routers themselves make decisions about where to 
send a packet in real time, based on a variety of information available to 
those routers about the cost of transmission to different routers, outages 
in adjacent routers, and so on.
The origins and destinations of data transiting the Internet are com
-puters (or other digital devices), which are typically connected to the 
Internet through an Internet service provider (ISP) that handles the nec
-essary technical and administrative arrangements. The links and routers 
of the Internet provide the critical connectivity among source and des
-tination computers, but nothing else. (Distinguishing between source/
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
destination computers transmitting and receiving data and links and 
routers moving data through the Internet captures the essence of its origi
-nal architectural design, but in truth it presents a somewhat oversimpli
-

Figure 2.1 provides a schematic that illustrates the architecture of 
the Internet. Applications that are directly useful to users are provided 
by the source and destination computers. Applications are connected to 
each other using packet-switching technology, which runs on the physi
-
BOX 2.1
 A More Refined View of Internet Architecture
The separation of the Internet into nodes for transmitting and receiving data 
and links and routers for moving data through the Internet captures the essence 
of its original architectural design, but in truth it presents a somewhat oversimpli
-˜ed picture. Some of the more important adjustments to this picture include the 
following:
˜ Content delivery networks
. Certain popular sites on the Web serve a 
large number of end users. To increase the speed of delivering content from these 
sites to end users, these Web sites replicate the most popular content on content 
delivery networks located across the Internet. When a user requests content from 
these popular sites, the content is in fact delivered to the user by one of these 
content delivery networks.
˜ Other networks
. As noted in the main text, the Internet is a network of 
networks. Each network within the Internet is controlled by some entity, such as 
an Internet service provider, a business enterprise, a government agency, and 
so on. The controlling entity has relationships with the users to whom it provides 
service and with the entity controlling the larger network within which this network 
is embedded. Each relationship is governed by negotiated terms of service. These 
entities do have capabilities for monitoring traf˜c and modulating connectivity on 
their networks, so that, for example, they can cut off certain nodes that are pumping 
hostile or adverse traf˜c onto the larger Internet. 
˜ Cloud computing and storage
. Cloud computing and storage, as well as 
services such as Internet search, are Internet applications. Various vendors also 
sell to end users cloud-based services that provide software and even infrastruc
-ture on demand. However, from the standpoint of individual users, cloud computing 
may appear to be located among the links and routers, because the information 
technology on which such applications run is not co-located with end users.
Misbehavior in any of these components reroutes, delays, or drops traf˜c 
inappropriately, or otherwise provides unreliable information, thus posing security 
risks.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOME BASICS OF COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY
 23FIGURE 2.1
 A schematic of the Internet. Three ﬁlayersﬂ of the Internet are de
-picted. The top and bottom layers (the applications layer and the physical in
-frastructure layer) are shown as much wider than the middle layer (the packet-
switching layer), because within each of the wide layers is found a large number 
of largely independent actors. But within the packet-switching layer, the number 
of relevant actors is much smaller, and those that do have some control over the 
packet-switching layer act in tight coordination.
networks, local area networks). Users navigate the Internet using the 

The various applications, the packet-switching technology, and the 
physical infrastructure are often called layers of the Internet™s architec
-
different parties control different layers. Applications (and the infrastruc
-ture on which they run) are developed, deployed, and controlled by mil
-lions of different entitiesŠcompanies, individuals, government agencies, 
and so on. Each of these entities decides what it wants to do, and ﬁputs 
it on the Internet.ﬂ The physical infrastructure responsible for carrying 
packets is also controlled by a diverse group of telecommunications and 

interestsŠmonetary or otherwiseŠin being able to carry data packets. 
(In the United States, these service providers are mostly entities in the 
private sector.)

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
a set of standards for the Internet Protocol discussed above)Šis managed 


not under the control of any government, although governments (and 
many others as well) have input into the processes that evolve the Internet 
Protocol.
It is the separation of the Internet into different layers that are man
-aged separately that is responsible more than any other factor for the 

BOX 2.2
 Internet Navigation
How can a user navigate from one computer to another on the Internet? To 
navigateŠto follow a course to a goalŠacross any space requires a method for 
designating locations in that space. On a topographic map, each location is des
-ignated by a combination of a latitude and a longitude. In the telephone system, 
a telephone number corresponding to a landline designates each location. On 
a street map, locations are designated by street addresses. Just like a physical 
neighborhood, the Internet has addressesŠ32- or 128-bit numbers, called IP ad
-dresses (IP for Internet Protocol)Šthat de˜ne the speci˜c location of every device 
on the Internet.
Also like the physical world, the Internet has namesŠcalled domain names, 
which are generally more easily remembered and informative than the addresses 
that are attached to most devicesŠthat serve as unchanging identi˜ers of those 
devices even when their speci˜c addresses are changed. The use of domain 
names on the Internet relies on a system of serversŠcalled name serversŠthat 
translate the user-friendly domain names into the corresponding IP addresses. 
This system of addresses and names linked by name servers is called the Domain 
Name System (DNS) and is the basic infrastructure supporting navigation across 
the Internet.
Conceptually, the DNS is in essence a directory assistance service. George 
uses directory assistance to look up Sam™s number, so that George can call Sam. 
Similarly, a user who wants to visit the home page of the National Academy of 
Sciences must either know that the IP address for this page is 144.171.1.30, or use 
the DNS to perform the lookup for www.nas.edu. The user gives the name www.
nas.edu to a DNS name server and receives in return the IP address 144.171.1.30. 
However, in practice, the user almost never calls on the DNS explicitlyŠrather, the 
entire process of DNS lookup is hidden from the user in the process of viewing a 
Web page, sending e-mail, and so on.
Disruptions to the DNS affect the user experience. Disruptions may prevent 
users from accessing the Web sites of their choosing. A disruption can lead a user 
to a ﬁlook-alikeﬂ Web site pretending to be its legitimate counterpart. If the look-alike 
site is operated by a malevolent actors, the tricked user may lose control of vital 
information (such as login credentials). 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOME BASICS OF COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY
 25
data from A to B without regard for the content of that data), any given 
applications provider can architect a service without having to obtain 
agreement from any other party. As long as the data packets are properly 
formed and adhere to the standard Internet Protocol, the application pro
-vider can be assured that the transport mechanisms will accept the data 
for forwarding to users of the application. Interpretation of those packets 
is the responsibility of programs on the receiver™s end.
BOX 2.3
 The Internet Engineering Task Force
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
 is a large, open international 
community of network designers, operators, vendors, and researchers concerned 
with the evolution of the Internet architecture and the smooth operation of the In
-ternet. It is open to any interested individual. The actual technical work of the IETF 
is done in its working groups, which are organized by topic into several areas (e.g., 
routing, transport, security, and so on). Much of the work is handled via
 mailing lists. The IETF holds meetings three times per year.
The IETF describes its mission as ﬁmak[ing] the Internet work better by pro
-ducing high quality, relevant technical documents that in˚uence the way people 
design, use, and manage the Internet.ﬂ The IETF adheres to a number of principles:
˜ Open process. Any interested person can participate in the work, know 
what is being decided, and make his or her voice heard on an issue. All IETF docu
-ments, mailing lists, attendance lists, and meeting minutes are publicly available 
on the Internet.
˜ Technical competence
. The issues addressed in IETF-produced docu
-ments are issues that the IETF has the competence to speak to, and the IETF 
is willing to listen to technically competent input from any source. The IETF™s 
technical competence also means that IETF output is designed to sound network 
engineering principles, an element often referred to as ﬁengineering quality.ﬂ
˜ Volunteer core
. IETF participants and leaders are people who come to the 
IETF because they want to do work that furthers IETF™s mission of ﬁmaking the 
Internet work better.ﬂ
˜ Rough consensus and running code
. The IETF makes standards based on 
the combined engineering judgment of its participants and their real-world experi
-ence in implementing and deploying its speci˜cations.
˜ Protocol ownership
. When the IETF takes ownership of a protocol or func
-tion, it accepts the responsibility for all aspects of the protocol, even though some 
aspects may rarely or never be seen on the Internet. Conversely, when the IETF 
is not responsible for a protocol or function, it does not attempt to exert control 
over it, even though such a protocol or function may at times touch or affect the 
Internet.
SOURCE: Adapted from material found at the IETF Web site at http://www.ietf.org.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
Put differently, most of the service innovationŠthat is, the applica
-tions directly useful to usersŠtakes place at the source and destination 
computers, independently of the network itself, apart from the techni
-cal need for sending and receiving packets that conform to the Internet 
Protocol. The Internet™s architecture is an embodiment of the end-to-end 
argument in systems design that says that ﬁthe network should provide 
a very basic level of serviceŠdata transportŠand that the intelligenceŠ
the information processing needed to provide applicationsŠshould be 
located in or close to the devices attached to . . . the network.ﬂ
1 As a result, 
innovation requires no coordination with network architects or operators, 
as long as the basic protocols are adhered to. All of the services commonly 
available on the Internet todayŠe-mail, the World Wide Web, Facebook, 
Google search services, voice-over-IP communications services, and so 

Why do these aspects of communications technology and the Internet matter 
for security?
The fundamental architecture of the Internet also has many implica
-tions for security. In particular, the end-to-end design philosophy of the 
Internet is that the Internet should only provide capability for transport
-ing information from one point to another. As such, the Internet™s design 
philosophy makes no special provision for security services. Instead, the 
Internet operates under the assumption that any properly formed packet 
found on the network is legitimate; routers forward such packets to the 
appropriate addressŠand don™t do anything else.
Discussions of cybersecurity for ﬁthe Internetﬂ often carry a built-in 
ambiguity. From the standpoint of most users, ﬁthe Internetﬂ refers to all 
of the layers depicted in Figure 2.1Šthat is, users™ conception of ﬁInternet 
securityﬂ includes the security of the source and destination computers 
connected to the Internet. From the standpoint of most technologists, 
however, ﬁthe Internetﬂ refers only to the packet-switching technology. 
This distinction is important because the locus of many cybersecurity 
problems is found in the applications that use the Internet.
In principle, security mechanisms can be situated at every layer. 
Depending on the layer, these mechanisms will have different properties 
and capabilities, and will be implemented by different parties.
Contrary to the Internet™s end-to-end design philosophy, some parties 
argue that the Internet needs security services that are more embedded 
into the Internet™s architecture and protocols and active in the packet-

for a wide range of security threats, and perhaps take action to curb or 
1 

System Design,ﬂ 
ACM Transactions on Computer Systems
 2(4):277-288, 1984.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOME BASICS OF COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY
 27
-cation users. Further, this argument implies that the end-to-end design 
philosophy has impeded or even prevented the growth of such security 
services.
Those favoring the preservation of the end-to-end design philosophy 
argue that because of the higher potential for inadvertent disruption 
as a side effect of a change in architecture or protocols, every proposed 
change must be tested and validated. Because such changes potentially 

and time-consumingŠand thus raise concerns about negative impacts 
on the pace of innovation in new Internet-based products and services. 
Moreover, actions driven by the requirements of protocols necessarily 
slow down the speed at which packets can be forwarded to their destina
-tions. And any mechanisms to enforce security mechanisms embedded in 
Internet protocols may themselves be vulnerable to compromise that may 
have wide-ranging effects.
Others argue that security services should be the responsibility of the 
developers of individual applications. In this view, the security function
-ality provided can be tailored to the needs of the application, and provid
-
the performance of the Internet as a whole. In addition, the scope and 
nature of security services provided need not be negotiated with stake
-holders responsible for other applications. Countering this viewpoint is 
the perspective that applications-based security is a burden on end users.
Some security services can be provided at a distance from the applica
-

them when they detect that a user™s security has been compromised. Such 
offerings are not uncommon, and they have a modest impact on users™ 


-


Whether and how to violate the end-to-end principle in the name of 
security is an important policy issue today. How this issue is resolved will 
have profound implications for security. 
2.3
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS
Information technology (IT) systems integrate computing technol-ogy, communication technology, people (such as developers, operators, 
and users), procedures, and more. Interfaces to other systems and control 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY









-










-





-
Why do these properties of IT systems matter for security?







-




-










At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29
3On the Nature of Cybersecurity
Chapter 1 points out that bad things that can happen in cyberspace 
fall into a number of different categories: cybercrime; losses of privacy; 
misappropriation of intellectual property such as proprietary software, 
R&D work, blueprints, trade secrets, and other product information; espi
-onage; disruption of services; destruction of or damage to physical prop
-erty; and threats to national security. After a brief note about terminology, 
this chapter addresses how adversarial cyber operations can result in any 
or all of these outcomes.
3.1
 ON THE TERMINOLOGY FOR DISCUSSIONS 
OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
In developing this report, the committee was faced with an unfortu
-
mind the conceptual basis) for discussions about cybersecurity and pub
-
where it is well known that translations among English, Chinese, German, 
Russian, Arabic, French, and Hebrew can be problematic. But it is also the 
case that even within the United States, different communitiesŠand even 
different individuals within those communitiesŠuse terminology whose 


-cerns about cybersecurity have spread rapidly in the past 10 years to many 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
be established under such circumstances. Further, different vocabularies 

and orientation that might differentiate various communities.
As an illustration, consider the term ﬁcyberattack.ﬂ The term has been 
used variously to include: 
˜˚
Any hostile or unfriendly action taken against a computer system 
or network regardless of purpose or outcome.
˜˚
Any hostile or unfriendly action taken against a computer system 
or network if (and only if) that action is intended to cause a denial of ser
-vice (discussed below) or damage to or destruction of information stored 


-tration (the essential characteristic of cyber espionage) and other kinds of 

law and domestic legal authorities for conducting such actions; these 
points are discussed further in Section 4.2.3 on domestic and international 
law.)
˜˚
Any hostile or unfriendly action taken against a computer system 
or network if (and only if) that action is intended to cause damage to or 
destruction of information stored in or transiting through that system or 
network 
and
 is effected primarily through the direct use of information 


actions can seriously disrupt services provided by the attacked computer 
or cables.)
Another frequent confusion in the literature or in discussions involves 

-
making a copy of it and conveying that copy into an adversary™s hands. 

 
 is a mechanism used 


X) means ﬁto take advan
-tage ofﬂ (as in ﬁan adversary can take advantage of vulnerability 
Xﬂ). 
The reader is cautioned that there are many terms in cybersecurity 



on some particular vocabulary, but until that day comes, participants in 

special care to ensure that they understand a speaker™s or writer™s intent 
when certain terms are used.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ON THE NATURE OF CYBERSECURITY
 313.2
 WHAT IT MEANS TO BE AN ADVERSARY IN CYBERSPACE
In this report, an adversarial (or hostile) cyber operation is one or 
more unfriendly actions that are taken by an adversary (or equivalently, 
an intruder) against a computer system or network for the ultimate pur
-
operationsﬂ or ﬁoffensive operations in cyberspaceﬂ are roughly equiva
-lent from an action standpoint but are terms for operations conducted by 

can be used more or less interchangeably with ﬁhostile cyber operation,ﬂ 
but in this report will usually refer to an adversarial cyber operation con
-ducted sometime in the past.

attack.
3.2.1
 Cyber Exploitation


should not have access to it. To date, the vast majorityŠnearly allŠof 

stored information such as Social Security numbers, medical records, 

and bid information, and software source code have all been obtained by 


-

-
-ered, the credit card owner can notify the bank and prevent the card™s 
further use.

the winter holiday season of 2013, when the Target retail store chain 
suffered a data breach in which personal information belonging to 70 
million to 110 million people was stolen.
1 Such information included 
names, mailing and e-mail addresses, phone numbers, and credit card 
numbers. Shortly after the breach occurred, observers noted an order-
of-magnitude increase in the number of high-value stolen cards on black 
market Web sites, from nearly every bank and credit union. The Target 
1 
New 
York Times

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/11/business/
target-breach-affected-70-million-customers.html
.At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY

ending February 1, 2014, relative to the comparable period a year earlier, 

covered 72 percent).
2 Financial institutions spent $200 million to replace 
credit cards after the breach.
3
stored on a computer or network, they can also seek information in the 
physical vicinity of a computer when the computer has audio and/or 
video capabilities. In such cases, an intruder can penetrate the computer 
and activate the on-board camera or microphone without the knowledge 
of the user, and thus surreptitiously see what is in front of the camera and 


of the new Miss Teen USA and took pictures that he subsequently used to 
blackmail the victim.
4
the warning light on the camera from turning on.
3.2.2
 Cyberattack
A cyberattack is an action intended to cause a denial of service or 
damage to or destruction of information stored in or transiting through 
an information technology system or network.
A denial-of-service (DOS) attack is intended to render a properly 
functioning system or network unavailable for normal use. A DOS attack 
may mean that the e-mail does not go through, or the computer simply 


-trolled by the system). As a rule, the effects of a DOS attack vanish when 
the attack ceases. DOS attacks are not uncommon, and have occurred 
against individual corporations, government agencies (both civilian and 
military), and nations.

requests for service (e.g., requests to display a Web page, to receive and 

2 Paul Ziobro, ﬁTarget Earnings Suffer After Breach,ﬂ 
Wall Street Journal
, February 27, 
2014, available at http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB2000142405270230425560457940
6694182132568.
3 Saabira Chaudhuri, ﬁCost of Replacing Credit Cards After Target Breach Estimated 
at $200 Million,ﬂ 
Wall Street Journal
, February 19, 2014, available at http://online.wsj.com/
news/articles/SB10001424052702304675504579391080333769014.
4 Nate Anderson, ﬁWebcam Spying Goes Mainstream as Miss Teen USA Describes Hack,ﬂ 
Ars Technica
, April 16, 2013, available at http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/08/
webcam-spying-goes-mainstream-as-miss-teen-usa-describes-hack/.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ON THE NATURE OF CYBERSECURITY
 33to handle legitimate requests for service and thus blocking others from 
using those resources. Such an attack is relatively easy to block if these 
bogus requests for service come from a single source, because the tar
-get can simply drop all service requests from that source. A 
distributed
 
many different machines. Since each of these different machines might, in 
principle, be a legitimate requester of service, dropping all of them runs a 
higher risk of denying service to legitimate parties. BotnetsŠa collection 



when a series of distributed denial-of-service (DDOS) attacks began on a 
range of Estonian government Web sites, media sites, and online banking 
services.
5 Attacks were largely conducted using botnets to create network 


around the world. The duration and intensity of attacks varied across 
the Web sites attacked; most attacks lasted 1 minute to 1 hour, and a few 
lasted up to 10 hours.
6 Attacks were stopped when the attackers ceased 
their efforts rather than being stopped by Estonian defensive measures.
7 The Estonian government was quick to claim links between those con
-ducting the attacks and the Russian government,
8
-cials denied any involvement.
9A damaging or destructive attack can alter a computer™s program
-ming in such a way that the computer does not later behave as it should. 
If a physical device (such as a generator) is controlled by the computer, 
the operation of that device may be compromised. The attack may also 

being sent from one point to another). Such an attack may delete data 

Although the preparation for an attack may be surreptitious (so that 
5 Economist
Estonia, presentation to Centre for Strategic and International Studies, November 28, 2007.
6 


asert.arbornetworks.com/2007/05/estonian-ddos-attacks-a-summary-to-date/. 
7 
McAfee Corporation, 
Cybercrime: The Next Wave, 
McAfee Virtual Criminology Report, 

8 
Maria Danilova, ﬁAnti-Estonia Protests Escalate in Moscow,ﬂ 
Washington Post
, May 2, 
2007, available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/05/02/
AR2007050200671_2.html. The article quotes both the Estonian president and the Estonian 
ambassador to Russia as claiming Kremlin involvement. 
9 
McAfee Corporation, 
Cybercrime: The Next Wave, 
2007, p. 7.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
BOX 3.1
 BotnetsAn attack technology of particular power and signi˜cance is the botnet. Bot
-nets are collections of victimized computers that are remotely controlled by the 
attacker. A victimized computerŠan individual botŠis connected to the Internet, 
usually with an ﬁalways-onﬂ broadband connection, and is running software clan
-destinely introduced by the attacker. The attack value of a botnet arises from the 
sheer number of computers that an attacker can controlŠoften tens or hundreds of 
thousands and perhaps as many as a million. (An individual unprotected computer 
may be part of multiple botnets.)
Since all of these computers are under one party™s control, the botnet can act 
as a powerful ampli˜er of an adversary™s actions. In addition, by acting through a 
botnet, a malevolent actor can be more anonymous (because his actions can be 
routed through many computers belonging to third parties). The use of botnets can 
also help to defeat defensive techniques that identify certain computers as sources 
of hostile traf˜cŠas one bot in the net is identi˜ed as a source of hostile traf˜c, the 
adversary simply shifts to a second, and a third, and a fourth bot.
An attacker usually builds a botnet by ˜nding a few individual computers to 
compromise, perhaps using one of the tools described above. The ˜rst hostile 
action that these initial zombies take is to ˜nd other machines to compromiseŠa 
task that can be undertaken in an automatic manner, and so the size of the botnet 
can grow quite rapidly.
A botnet controller can communicate with its botnet and still stay in the back
-ground, unidenti˜ed and far away from any action, while the individual botsŠwhich 
may belong mostly to innocent parties that may be located anywhere in the worldŠ
are the ones that are visible to the party under attack. The botnet controller has 
great ˚exibility in the actions it may takeŠit may direct all of the bots to take the 
same action, or each of them to take different actions.
Individual bots can probe their immediate environment and take action based 
on the results of that probe. A bot can pass information it ˜nds back to its control
-ler, or it can take destructive action, which may be triggered at a certain time, or 
perhaps when the resident bot receives a subsequent communication from the 
controller. Bots can also obtain new programming from their controllers, giving 
them great ˚exibility with respect to the range of harmful tasks they can conduct 
at any time.
Perhaps the most important point about botnets is the great ˚exibility they 
offer to a malevolent actor. Adversaries can obtain botnet services on the open 
(black) market for hacking services (e.g., the botnets used to attack Estonia in 
2007 were apparently rented).
1 Although botnets are known to be well suited to 
distributed denial-of-service attacks, it is safe to say that their full range of utility 
for adversarial operations in cyberspace has not yet been examined.
1 Mark Landler and John Markoff, ﬁDigital Fears Emerge After Data Siege in Estonia,ﬂ 
New York 
Times, May 29, 2007, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/29/technology/29estonia.
html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ON THE NATURE OF CYBERSECURITY
 35the victim does not have a chance to prepare for it), the effects of an attack 
may or may not be concealed. If the intent of an attack is to destroy a 

be traceable to a cyberattack on the controlling computer). But if the intent 
of an attack is to corrupt vital data, small amounts of corruption may not 
be visible (and small amounts of corruption continued over time could 
result in undetectable large-scale corruption).

hostile cyber operation that targeted the computer-controlled centrifuges 

10
 After taking control 

ways that would cause them to self-destruct, unbeknownst to the Iranian 
centrifuge operators. 
3.2.3
 An Important Commonality for Exploitation and Attack

they generally use the same basic technical approaches to penetrate the 
security of a system or network, even though they have different out
-
the latter results in damage to information or information technologyŠ
and whatever else that technology controls.) The reason for this similarity 
is addressed below in Section 3.4. Also, a single offensive operation can, in 

3.3
  INHERENT VULNERABILITIES OF 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Designing a completely secure, totally unhackable computer is easyŠ


-
system is entirely secure (see the left side of Figure 3.1). Of course, this 


useful (right side of Figure 3.1).
A computer can produce useful results only when it is provided with 
ﬁcorrectﬂ or ﬁgoodﬂ information. But what counts as ﬁgoodﬂ and ﬁbadﬂ 
information depends on decisions made by fallible human beingsŠand 
in particular humans who may be tricked into believing that certain 
10 

IEEE Spectrum
, February 26, 2013, 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
information or programs are good when they are in fact bad. This fact 
underscores a basic point about most adversarial cyber operationsŠthe 

Two other factors compound the inherent vulnerabilities of infor
-mation technology. First, the costs of an adversarial cyber operation are 
usually small compared with the costs of defending against it. This asym
-metry arises because the victim (the defender) must succeed every time 
the intruder acts (and may even have to take defensive action long after 
the intruder™s initial penetration if the intruder has left behind an implant 
for a future attack). By contrast, the intruder needs to succeed in his efforts 
only once, and if he pays no penalty for a failed operation, he can continue 
his efforts until he succeeds or chooses to stop.
11
whose proper (secure) operation requires many actors to have behaved 
correctly and appropriately and to continue to do so in the future. Each 

-


11 
This asymmetry applies primarily when the intruder can choose when to act, that 
is, when the precise timing of the intrusion™s success does not matter. If the intruder must 

of tries to succeed, and the asymmetry between intruder and defender may be reduced 

FIGURE 3.1
 A secure but useless computer (
left
), and an insecure but useful 
computer (
right
).
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ON THE NATURE OF CYBERSECURITY
 37something that many people do every day with ease. The user can type 
the name of a Web page (called a URL, uniform resource locator) as 
depicted in the top of Figure 3.2, and the proper Web page appears in a 
second or two as depicted at the bottom of Figure 3.2. In addition, the user 
also wants the display of the Web page to be the 
only
 thing that happens 


things that the user does not want to happen.
Behind this apparent simplicity is a multitude of steps, as depicted 

-
by any of these actors may mean that the requested page does not appear 
as required.
Inspection of Figure 3.3 with a powerful magnifying lens (not sup
-

preparation of the computer used to display the page, preparation of 
the Web page that is to be displayed, and the actual retrieval of the Web 
page from where it is hosted to where it is displayed. Each of these parts 
is itself composed of actions involving a number of actors. Some of the 
actors shown in Figure 3.3 include:
˜˚
The provider of the hardware and the operating system;
˜˚
The delivery service that handles the computer in transit (e.g., 

BOX 3.2
 A Simple Example of DeceptionHTML (an acronym for Hypertext Markup Language) is a computer language 
that is used to display Web pages. One feature of this language is that it enables 
the conversion of text into links to other Web pages. The user sees on the page a 
certain text string, but the text string conceals a linkŠclicking on the ﬁclick hereﬂ 
text brings the user to the Web site corresponding to the link. (Although the link 
can be revealed if the user™s pointing device hovers over the text string, many users 
do not perform such a check.)
But there are no limits on the text string to be displayed to the user, and so it 
is possible for the user to see on the screen ﬁwww.example.com,ﬂ but underneath 
the text is really the link for another Web page, such as www.hackyourcomputer.
com. Clicking on the text displayed on the screen takes the user to the bad site 
rather than the intended site. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
Figure  3.2a and bFIGURE 3.2
 Viewing a Web page, from the user™s perspective. When a user types 
a Web page™s name (
top), the corresponding page appears and can be read (
bottom). 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 39User
startProvider
ofO/SSelect
ISPDesignWeb
Sl/h
BootcomputerRunDHCPSpecif
yDNS
O/SProvider
ofHardwareAccess
ISPVPNproviderCreateweb
pageDevelopmentDevelopmenttoolsDNS
registrar;DNS
providerActivateDNS
nameSelect
/purchasecomputerProvider
startDesignAppUseVPNObtainmerchant
certificate
Runningsystemavailable
Select
browserInstallbrowserpy
Provider
ofbrowserDownloadmechanism
DNS
providerInstallonserver
Electtouse
CDNServer
software;systemoperatorCDNproviderElecttouse
SSLSetupsecurepageCertificate
authorityConfigured
systemavailable
mechanism
Server
software;systemoperatorObtainURLBrowser
Web
pageavailable
ExtractDNS
nameRetrieve
certificate
ConvertDNS
toIP
Retrieve
pageRenderpageDNS
server/systemAllISPsalong
pathBrowser
AllISPsalong
pathVerifycertificate
Browser
certificate
Browser
certificate
authorityRenderpageViewretrieved
pageRetrieve
embeddedelements
Browser
AllofthesestepsAcceptverificationUser
cognition/perception
FIGURE 3.3
 Viewing a Web page, behind the scenes. SOURCE: David Clark, ﬁControl Point Analysis,ﬂ ECIR Working Paper, 2012, 

control-point-analysis. Reprinted by permission.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
the factory to the proper destination without allowing an adversary to 
tamper with it;
˜˚
The Internet service provider that provides Internet service to the 
location where the user accesses the Web page;
˜˚
The party responsible for the Internet browser that the user runs to 
access the Web page;
˜˚
The party or parties responsible for various add-ons that the 

˜˚
The developer of the tools for creating Web pages; 
˜˚
The operator of the server that hosts the Web page to be accessed;
˜˚
The provider of software for the host server;
˜˚
Providers of the advertisement(s) that might be served up along 
with the Web page;
˜˚
The Domain Name System registrar that registers the name of the 
Web site where the Web page can be found;
˜˚
The DNS provider that translates the name of the Web site to a 
numerical Internet Protocol address such as 144.171.1.4;
˜˚

the Web site is in fact the properly registered operator; and
˜˚
All of the Internet service providers along the connection path 
between the host and the user.
Each of these actors must carry out correctly the role it plays in 

-ing protocols if packets are to reach their destination. Moreover, each of 
these actors could take (or be tricked into taking) one or more actions 
that thwart the user™s intent in retrieving a given Web page, which is to 
receive the requested Web page promptly and to have only that task be 
accomplished, and not have any other unrequested task be accomplished.
3.4
 THE ANATOMY OF ADVERSARIAL 
ACTIVITIES IN CYBERSPACE
Adversarial operations in cyberspace against a system or network 
usually require penetration of the system or network™s security to deliver 
a payload that takes action in accordance with the intruder™s wishes 
against the target of interest (e.g., against any of the entities shown in 
ovals in Figure 3.3). The payload is usually computer code, and is also 
known as malware. (In some cases, the payload could be instructions or 
commands issued to the computer by a malevolent actor.)



At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ON THE NATURE OF CYBERSECURITY
 41a problem very different from that posed by the same cabinet located 

-net, the intruder might take advantage of an easily pickable lock on the 
cabinetŠthat is, an easily pickable lock is a vulnerability. The payload in 


-tion on those papers, perhaps by replacing certain pages with pages of 
the intruder™s creation (i.e., he alters the data recorded on the pages), 
he can pour ink over the papers (i.e., he renders the data unavailable to 
any legitimate user), or he can copy the papers and take the copies away, 

3.4.1
 Cyber Penetration 
Access


one that the intruder need spend only a little effort preparing and the 

target that is known to be connected to the Internet. Public Web sites are 

the Internet to be useful.
Hard targets are those that require a great deal of preparation on the 
part of the intruder and where access to the target can be gained only 
at great effort or may even be impossible for all practical purposes. For 

-nected to the Internet for the foreseeable future, which means that launch
-ing a cyberattack against such a plane will require some kind of harder-
to-achieve access to introduce a vulnerability that can be used later. As a 
general rule, sensitive and important computer systems or networks are 
likely to fall into the category of hard targets.
Access paths to a target include those in the following categories:
˜˚
Remote access
, in which the intruder is at some distance from the 

remote access is that of an adversary computer attacked through the 

accessing an adversary computer through a dial-up modem attached 
to it or through penetration of the wireless network to which it is con
-nected. Malevolent actors are constantly searching for new computers 

computer, and in some cases, such penetration takes only a matter of 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
minutes or hours from the moment of initial connection to the Internet, 
even without its owner taking any other action at all.
12
 


computer language used for managing data input and data manipulation 


to insert (ﬁinjectﬂ) database commands of his own into the input. In a 


making 32 million user names and passwords available to intruders.
13
 In 

Federal Trade Commission.
14
˜˚
Close access
, in which the penetration of a system or network takes 
place through the local installation of hardware or software functionality 

-imity to the computer or network of interest. Close access is a possibility 


conduct than remote access.

to 
The Telegraph
, criminal gangs in China gained access to the supply 
chain for a certain line of chip-and-pin credit card readers.
15
 The gangs 

-
-nal enterprises. The readers were repackaged with virtually no physical 
traces of tampering and shipped directly to several European countries. 
Details collected from the cards were used to make duplicate credit cards, 
12 

Survival Time
, available at http://isc.sans.org/survivaltime.html. 

was rendered unusable through online attacks. The computer was probed within 30 seconds 



13
SC 
Magazine, 
compromises-32-million-passwords/article/159676/.
14 
SC Magazine, 
rockyou-to-pay-ftc-250k-after-breach-of-32m-passwords/article/233992/.
15 
Henry Samuel, ﬁChip and Pin Scam ‚Has Netted Millions from British Shoppers,™ﬂ 
The Telegraph
, October 10, 2008, available at http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/
law-and-order/3173346/Chip-and-pin-scam-has-netted-millions-from-British-shoppers.
html.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ON THE NATURE OF CYBERSECURITY
 43
International estimated that thousands of customer accounts were com
-promised, netting millions of dollars in ill-gotten gains before the breach 
was discovered.
˜˚
Social access
. An intruder can gain access by taking advantage of 

trust the intentions of a known and/or friendly party than an unknown 

BOX 3.3
 Close Access Through the 
Information Technology Supply Chain
Systems (and their components) can be penetrated in design, development, 
testing, production, distribution, installation, con˜guration, maintenance, and op
-eration. In most cases, the supply chain is only loosely managed, which means 
that the party supplying the system to the end user may well not have full control 
over the entire chain. Examples of possible supply-chain penetrations include the 
following: 
˜˚A vendor with an employee loyal to an adversary introduces malicious 
hardware or code at the factory as part of a system component for which the 
vendor is a subcontractor in a critical system.
˜˚An adversary intercepts a set of USB ˚ash drives ordered by the victim 
for distribution at a conference and substitutes a different doctored set for actual 
delivery to the victims. In addition to the conference proceedings, the adversary 
places hostile software on the ˚ash drives that the victims install when they plug 
in the drives.
˜˚An adversary writes an application for a smart device that performs some 
useful function (e.g., an app that displays a clock on the device™s face) but also 
includes malware that sends the contact list on the device to the adversary.
˜˚An adversary bribes a shipping clerk to look the other way when the com
-puter is on the loading dock for transport to the victim, opens the box, replaces the 
video card installed by the vendor with one modi˜ed by the intruder, and reseals 
the box.
A supply chain penetration may be effected late in the chain, for example, 
against a deployed computer in operation or one that is awaiting delivery on a 
loading dock. In these cases, such a penetration is by its nature narrowly and 
speci˜cally targeted, and it is also not scalable, because the number of computers 
that can be penetrated is proportional to the number of human assets available. In 
other cases, a supply chain penetration may be effected early in the supply chain 
(e.g., introducing a vulnerability during development), and high leverage against 
many different targets might result from such an attack. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY

IT systems of interest can often be compromised through recruitment, 

can be of enormous value to the intruder. In some cases, a trusted insider 
ﬁgoes badﬂ for his or her own reasons and by virtue of the trust placed 
in him is able to take advantage of his own credentials for improper 
purposesŠthis is the classical ﬁinsider threat.ﬂ Social engineering is the 
use of deception and trickery for gaining access. Social engineering results 
in the intruder gaining access to the credentials and therefore the access 
privileges of those the intruder has tricked.

penetrate the security of computer systems, consider the case of Edward 

-ments from the National Security Agency and other government agencies 
in the United States and abroad that described electronic surveillance 

nature of these documents, many have asked how their security could 
have been compromised. According to a Reuters news report,
16
 Snowden 

him with their credentials, telling them that he needed that information 
in his role as systems administrator.
Sometimes, social engineering is combined with either remote access 
or close access methods. An intruder may make contact through the Inter
-net with someone likely to have privileges on the system or network of 
interest. Through that contact, the intruder can trick the person into taking 

intruder sends the victim an e-mail with a link to a Web page and when 
the victim clicks on that link, the Web page may take advantage of a 
technical vulnerability in the browser to run a hostile program of its own 
choosing on the user™s computer, often or usually without the permission 
or even the knowledge of the user.
Social engineering can be combined with close access techniques in 

-
computer. Because some systems support an ﬁauto-runﬂ feature for insert
-able media (i.e., when the medium is inserted, the system automatically 


ports can be glued shut, but such a countermeasure also makes it impos
-16
 Mark Hosenball and Warren Strobel, ﬁSnowden Persuaded Other NSA Workers to 
Give Up PasswordsŒSources,ﬂ 
Reuters
, November 7, 2013, available at http://www.reuters.
com/article/2013/11/08/net-us-usa-security-snowden-idUSBRE9A703020131108.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ON THE NATURE OF CYBERSECURITY
 45sible to use the USB ports for 
any


The red team scattered USB drives in parking lots, smoking areas, and 

drive was inserted, and the result was that 75 percent of the USB drives 
distributed were inserted into a computer.
17
 Vulnerability
Access is only one aspect of a penetration, which also requires the 
intruder to take advantage of a vulnerability in the target system or 



the target such as a default setting that leaves system protections turned 
off. Vulnerabilities arise from the characteristics of information technol
-ogy and information technology systems described above.

door for opportunistic use of the vulnerability by an adversary who learns 

discovered and can then be used by anyone with moderate technical skills 
until a patch can be developed, disseminated, and installed. Intruders 
with the time and resources may also discover unintentional defects that 
they protect as valuable secrets that can be used when necessary. As long 
as those defects go unaddressed, the vulnerabilities they create can be 
used by the intruder.

-


built into programs by their creators; the purpose of a ﬁback doorﬂ is to 
enable another party to bypass security features that would otherwise 
keep that other party out of the system or network. An illustration would 

would have an assigned login name and password that would enable 
them to do certain things (and only those things) on the Web site. But if 
the program™s creator had installed a back door, a knowledgeable intruder 
(perhaps in cahoots with the program™s creator) could enter a special 
17 
See Steve Stasiukonis, ﬁSocial Engineering, the USB Way,ﬂ 
Dark Reading



At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
40-character password and use any login name and then be able to do 
anything he wanted on the system.

vulnerability.ﬂ The term refers to a vulnerability for which the responsible 
party (e.g., the vendor that provides the software) has not provided a 



impact are those in a remotely accessible service that runs by default on all 
versions of a widely used piece of softwareŠunder such circumstances, 
an intruder could take advantage of the vulnerability in many places 
nearly simultaneously, with all of the consequences that penetrations of 
such scale might imply.
Those who discover such vulnerabilities in systems face the question 
of what to do with them. A private party may choose to report a vulner
-ability privately to those responsible for maintaining the system so that 

actions can be taken; keep a discovered/known vulnerability for its own 
purposes; or sell it to the highest bidder. National governments face a 
similar choiceŠkeep it for future use in some adversarial or offensive 

the susceptibility to penetration of the systems in which that vulnerability 
is found. National governments as well as nongovernment entities such as 

for future use.

penetration approaches and techniques, and thus may look quite simi
-lar to the victim, at least until the nature of the malware involved is 
ascertained.
3.4.2
 Cyber Payloads (Malware)
If an intruder is successful at penetrating a system or network, the 

A payload is most often a ﬁmalwareﬂ program that is designed to 
take hostile action against the system to which it has been delivered. In 
general, these hostile actions can be anything that could be done by an 

has entered a system, it can be programmed to reproduce and retransmit 



-At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ON THE NATURE OF CYBERSECURITY
 47ability for future use, and so on. The payload is what determines if an 

Malware can have multiple capabilities when inserted into an adver
-sary system or networkŠthat is, malware can be programmed to do 
more than one thing. The timing of these actions can also be varied. And 
if a communications channel to the intruder is available, malware can be 
remotely updated. Indeed, in some cases, the initially delivered malware 
consists of nothing more than a mechanism for scanning the penetrated 
system to determine its technical characteristics and an update mecha
-nism to retrieve the best packages to further the malware™s operation.
Malware may be programmed to activate either immediately or when 
some condition is met. In the second case, the malware sits quietly and 
does nothing harmful most of the time. However, at the right moment, 

-
ﬁright momentﬂ can be triggered because:
˜˚
A certain date and time are reached;
˜˚

˜˚

˜˚

Malware may also install itself in ways that keep it from being 
detected. It may delete itself, leaving behind little or no trace that it was 
ever present. In some cases, malware can remain even after a computer is 
scanned with anti-malware software or even when the operating system 
is reinstalled from scratch.

-puters in everyday useŠrun through a particular power-on sequence 
when their power is turned on. The computer™s power-on sequence loads 
a small program from a chip inside the computer known as the BIOS 
(Basic Input-Output System), and then runs the BIOS program. The BIOS 
program then loads the operating system from another part of the com
-puter, usually its hard drive. Most anti-malware software scans only the 
operating system on the hard drive, assuming the BIOS chip to be intact. 
But some malware is designed to modify the program on the BIOS chip, 
and reinstalling the operating system simply does not touch the (modi
-
targets the BIOS,
18
 and in 1998 it rendered several hundred thousand 
18
 The Chernobyl virus is further documented in CERT Coordination Center, ﬁCIH/
Chernobyl Virus,ﬂ CERT
® Incident Note IN-99-03, updated April 26, 1999, available at 

 IN-99-03.html.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
computers entirely inoperative without physical replacement of the BIOS 
chip. 
Last, the payload might not take the form of hostile software at all. 

advantage of a certain vulnerability to give himself remote access to 
the target computer such that the intruder has all of the privileges and 
capabilities that he might have if he were sitting at the keyboard of that 
computer. He is then in a position to issue to the computer commands of 
his own choosing, and such commands may well have a harmful effect 
on the target computer.
3.4.3
 Operational Considerations
Sections 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 describe the basic structure of hostile activi
-ties in cyberspace. But an intruder must take into account a number of 
operational considerations if such activities are to be successful:
˜˚
Effects prediction and assessment
. When planning a hostile operation, 

operation has concluded, the responsible party wants to know if it was 
successful. But accurate predictions about the outcome of hostile opera
-

eye.
˜˚
Target selection



of sources, including open source collection, automated target selection, 

in targeting may require large amounts of intelligence information.
˜˚
Fragility

the vulnerability that was taken advantage of by an intruder. Thus, an 
intruder must consider the possibility that a particular penetration tool 
will be usable only once or a few times.
˜˚
Rules of engagement
. These rules specify what tools may be used 
to conduct a hostile cyber operation, what their targets may be, what 
effects may be sought, and who may conduct such operations under what 

specifying these rules for a variety of different purposes (e.g., military 
purposes, intelligence purposes, law enforcement purposes).
˜˚
The availability of intelligence
. As a general rule, a scarcity of intelli
-gence information regarding possible targets means that any cyber opera
-tion launched against them can only be ﬁbroad-spectrumﬂ and relatively 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ON THE NATURE OF CYBERSECURITY
 49indiscriminate or blunt. Substantial amounts of intelligence information 
about targets (and paths to those targets) are required if an operation 
is intended as a very precise one directed at a particular system. Often, 


3.5
 CHARACTERIZING THREATS TO CYBERSECURITY
Malevolent actors in cyberspace span a very broad spectrum, rang
-




to the lone intruder.
In addition to those who are motivated by pure curiosity, malevolent 
actors have a range of motivations. Some are motivated by the desire to 


nationalistic considerations.
The skills of malevolent actors also span a very broad range. Some 
have only a rudimentary understanding of the underlying technology and 
are capable only of using tools that others develop to conduct their own 
operations but in general are not capable of developing new tools. Those 
with an intermediate level of skill are capable of developing hacking tools 
on their own.
Those with the most advanced levels of skillsŠthat is, the high-end threatŠcan identify weaknesses in target systems and networks and 
develop tools to take advantage of such knowledge. Moreover, they are 




support. When governments are involved, the resources of national intel
-ligence, military, and law enforcement services can be brought to bear. Of 

end intruder, efforts oriented toward countering the casual adversary or 
even the common cyber criminal amount to little more than speed bumps.
The availability of such resources widens the possible target set of 



seeks the credit card numbers of a group of individuals. The operation 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
may not be entirely successful because some of these individuals have 
defenses in place that thwart the operation on their individual machines. 
But the operation taken as a whole will obtain some credit card numbers, 
and an adversary that simply wants credit card numbers without regard 
for who actually owns those numbers will regard this operation as a 
success.
However, because of the resources available to them, high-end adver
-
enormous value (ﬁthe crown jewelsﬂ). In the former case, an adversary 
confronted with an adequately defended system simply moves on to 
another system that is not so well defended. In the latter case, the adver
-

has become known as the advanced persistent threat.
High-end adversariesŠand especially major nation-state 
adversariesŠare also likely to have the resources that allow them to 
obtain detailed information about the target system, such as knowledge 
gained by having access to the source code of the software running on 
the target or the schematics of the target device, or through reverse-
engineering. Success in obtaining such information is not guaranteed, of 
BOX 3.4
 The Advanced Persistent Threat
Discussions of high-end cybersecurity threats often make reference to the 
ﬁadvanced persistent threat (APT).ﬂ One document suggests that the term was 
originally coined by the U.S. Air Force in 2006 to refer to ﬁa sophisticated adversary 
engaged in [cyber] warfare in support of long-term strategic goals.ﬂ
1 That is, the 
APT is a party (an actor) that is technologically advanced and persistent (i.e., able 
and willing to persist in its efforts).
A second usage of the term refers to the character of a cyber intrusionŠone 
that is technologically sophisticated (i.e., advanced) and hard to ˜nd and eliminate 
(i.e., persistent). In this usage, the APT is highly focused on a particularly valu
-able target. This tight and narrow focus stands in contrast to other cyber threats 
(e.g., spamming for credit card numbers) that seek targets of opportunity. An APT 
typically makes use of tools and techniques that are customized to the speci˜c 
security con˜guration and posture of its target. Furthermore, it operates in ways 
that its perpetrators hope minimize the likelihood of detection.
1 See Fortinet, Inc., ﬁThreats on the Horizon: The Rise of the Advanced Persistent Threat,ﬂ 
Solution Brief, 2013, http://www.fortinet.com/sites/default/˜les/solutionbrief/threats-on-the-
horizon-rise-of-advanced-persistent-threats.pdf.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ON THE NATURE OF CYBERSECURITY
 51course, but the likelihood of success is clearly an increasing function of the 
availability of resources. For instance, a country may obtain source code 
and schematics of a certain vendor™s product because it can require that 
the vendor make those available to its intelligence agencies as a condition 
of permitting the vendor to sell products within its borders.
The high-end adversary is generally indifferent to the form that its 
path to success takes, as long as that path meets various constraints such 
as affordability and secrecy. In particular, the high-end adversary will 


the former is easier to do than the latter.
To support this broad range of malevolent actors, there is a thriving 
and robust underground marketplace for hacking tools and services. 
Those wishing to conduct an adversarial operation in cyberspace can 
often purchase the service with nothing more than a credit card (probably 
a stolen one) or an alternative and untraceable currency such as Bitcoin.
19
 
out of which a malevolent actor can assemble his own adversarial cyber 
operation. In an environment in which such services can be bought and 

A number of general observations can be made about the various 
malevolent actors: 
˜˚
Bad guys who want to have an effect on their targets have some 
motivation to keep trying, even if their initial efforts are not successful in 
intruding on a victim™s computer systems or networks. 
˜˚
Bad guys nearly always make use of deception in some formŠ
they trick the victim into doing something that is contrary to the victim™s 
interests. 
˜˚
A would-be bad guy who is induced or persuaded in some way to 
refrain from intruding on a victim™s computer systems or networks results 
in no harm to those systems or networks, and such an outcome is just as 
good as thwarting his hostile operation (and may be better if the user is 
persuaded to avoid conducting such operations in the future). 
˜˚
Cyber bad guys will be with us forever for the same reason that 
crime will be with us foreverŠas long as the information stored in, pro
-cessed by, or carried through a computer system or network has value to 
19 

R. Velde, ﬁBitcoin: A Primer,ﬂ 
Chicago Fed Letter
, Number 517, December 2013, available 
at http://www.chicagofed.org/digital_assets/publications/chicago_fed_letter/2013/

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
third parties, cyber bad guys will have some reason to conduct adversarial 
operations against a potential victim™s computer systems and networks.
3.6
 THREAT ASSESSMENT
The process through which information is assembled and interpreted 
to assess the threats faced by a potential target is known as threat assess
-ment. Threat assessments help those who are defending systems and 
networks to allocate resources (money, time, effort, personnel) 
prior
 to 
hostile action and to plan what they should do when they are the target 

resources should be deployed to combat one particular threat over all 
others or that a particular strategy would be more effective than others in 
responding to a given threat.
In general, threat assessments are based on information from multiple 
sources. As is discussed in Section 4.1.4, successful forensics of actual 
cyber incidents provide one kind of information, yielding details about 
the methodology and identity of the intruders, the damage that resulted, 
and so on. Other sources of useful information may include intercepts of 
communications and other signals, interviews with those knowledgeable 
about intruder doctrine or operations, analysis of intruders™ documents, 
photo reconnaissance, reports from intelligence agents, public writing and 
speeches by relevant parties, and so on.
A threat assessment sheds light on adversary capabilities and inten
-
hostile party.) What an adversary is capable of doing depends on the 
tools available, the skill with which the adversary can use those tools, 
and the numbers of skilled personnel available to the adversary. What 
an adversary intends to do depends on the adversary™s motivation, as 

target set (i.e., what targets the adversary seeks to penetrate) and in what 
the adversary wishes to do or be able to do once penetration is achieved 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53
4Enhancing Cybersecurity
4.1
 APPROACHES TO IMPROVING SECURITY

-cance of adversarial cyber operations. The approaches described below 

that some combination of them be used. 
4.1.1
 Reducing Reliance on Information Technology
The most basic way to improve cybersecurity is to reduce the use 

of using IT must be weighed against the security risks that the use of IT 

-cient degree, and the use of IT should be rejected. In other cases, security 

costs should be factored into the decision. But what should 
not
 happen 
is that security risks be ignored entirelyŠas may sometimes be the case.

connecting a computer system to the Internet, even if not connecting 
might increase costs or decrease the system™s utility. The theory underly
-ing such a decision is that the absence of an Internet connection to such 
a computer will prevent intruders from gaining access to it and thus that 
the computer system will be safe. In fact, this theory is not rightŠthe lack 
of such a connection reduces but does not prevent access, and thus the 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
safety of the computer system cannot be taken for granted forever after. 
But disconnection does help under many circumstances.
The broader point can be illustrated by supervisory control and data 
acquisition (SCADA) systems, some of which are connected to the Inter
-net.1 SCADA systems are used to control many elements of physical 
infrastructure: electric power, gas and oil pipelines, chemical plants, fac
-tories, water and sewage, and so on. Infrastructure operators connect their 
SCADA systems to the Internet to facilitate communications with them, at 
least in part because connections and communications hardware that are 

provide such communications. But Internet connections also potentially 
provide access paths to these SCADA systems that intruders can use.
Note that disconnection from the Internet may not be easy to accom
-plish. Although SCADA systems may be taken off the Internet, connecting 
these systems to administrative computers that are themselves connected 

means that these SCADA systems are in fact connectedŠindirectlyŠto 
the Internet. 
4.1.2
 Knowing That Security Has Been Penetrated
Detection
From the standpoint of an individual system or network operator, 
the only thing worse than being penetrated is being penetrated and not 
knowing about it. Detecting that one has been the target of a hostile cyber 

action.

action) is harmful (or potentially harmful) or not harmful. Making such 
decisions is problematic because what counts as harmful or not harmful 
is for the most part a human decisionŠand such judgments may not be 
made correctly. In addition, the number of nonharmful things happening 
inside a computer or a network is generally quite large compared with 
the number of harmful things going on. So the detection problem is nearly 

One often-used technique for detecting malware is to check to see 

Such checks depend on ﬁsignaturesﬂ that might be associated with the 

1 See http://cyberarms.wordpress.com/2013/03/19/worldwide-map-of-internet-connected- 
scada-systems/.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 55when it was created, a hash of the program,
2 and so on. Signatures might 
also be associated with the path through which a program has arrived at 

The Einstein program of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 

3 By law and policy, DHS is the primary agency responsible for protecting 
U.S. government agencies other than the Department of Defense and the 


header information in each packet but not the content of a packet itself) 
and compares that data to known patterns of such data that have previ
-

dropped).
This signature-based technique for detection has two primary weak
-nesses. First, it is easy to morph the code without affecting what the 
program can do so that there are an unlimited number of functionally 
equivalent versions with different signatures. Second, the technique can
-not identify a program as malware if the program has never been seen 
before.
Another technique for detection monitors the behavior of a program; 

are behavioral signatures that help with anomaly detection, this tech
-


But it is not a general solution because there is usually no reliable way to 

a legitimate and benign purpose and an intruder who wishes to do that 
very same thing for some nefarious purpose. In practice, this technique 

something nefarious is going on when in fact it is not. A high level of false 
positives annoys legitimate users, and often results in these users being 
unable to get their work done.
2

constructed algorithm, hashes of two different bit sequences are very unlikely to have the 
same hash value.
3 Department of Homeland Security, National Cyber Security Division, Computer 
Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT), 
Privacy Impact Assessment [of the] Einstein Program: 
Collecting, Analyzing, and Sharing Computer Security Information Across the Federal Civilian 
Government

privacy_pia_eisntein.pdf.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
Assessment
A hostile action taken against an individual system or network may or 
may not be part of a larger adversary operation that affects many systems 
simultaneously, and the scale and the nature of the systems and networks 
affected in an operation are critical information for decision makers.
Detecting a 
coordinated
 adversary effort against the background noise 
of ongoing hostile operations also remains an enormous challenge, given 
that useful information from multiple sites must be made available on a 
timely basis. (And as detection capabilities improve, adversaries will take 
steps to mask such signs of coordinated efforts.)
An assessment addresses many factors, including the scale of the hos
-tile cyber operation (how many entities are being targeted), the nature of 
the targets (which entities are being targeted), the success of the operation 

and nature of any foreign involvement derived from technical analysis of 

-cally derived from the operation itself, and attribution of the operation 


of ﬁsomething bad going on in cyberspace.ﬂ Assessments are further com
-plicated by the possibility that an initial penetration is simply paving the 
way for hostile payloads that will be delivered later, or by the possibility 
that the damage done by an adversarial operation will not be visible for 
a long time after it has taken place.
The government agencies responsible for threat assessment and warn
-ing can, in principle, draw on a wide range of information sources, both 
inside and outside the government. In addition to hearing from private-

communicate with security IT vendors, such as Symantec and McAfee, 
that monitor the Internet for signs of hostile activity. Other public inter
-est groups, such as the OpenNet Initiative and the Information Warfare 
Monitor, seek to monitor hostile operations launched on the Internet.
44 
See the OpenNet Initiative (http://opennet.net/) and the Information Warfare Moni
-tor (http://www.infowar-monitor.net/) Web sites for more information on these groups. 
A useful press report on the activities of these groups can be found at Kim Hart, ﬁA 
New Breed of Hackers Tracks Online Acts of War,ﬂ 
Washington Post
, August 27, 2008, 
available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/08/26/
AR2008082603128_pf.html.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 574.1.3
 Defending a System or Network
Defending a system or network means taking actions so that a hostile 
actor is less successful than he or she would otherwise be in the absence 
of defensive actions. A desirable side effect of taking such measures is that 
by reducing the likelihood that a hostile actor will succeed, that actor may 
also be deterred from taking hostile action because of its possible futility.
Some of the most important approaches to defense include:
˜˚
Reducing the number of vulnerabilities contained in any deployed IT 
system or network
. There are two methods for doing so.


known as ﬁpatchingﬂ). Much software has the capability to update 
itself, and many updates received automatically by a system con
-tain patches that repair vulnerabilities that have become known 
since the software was released for general use.
  
Š Design and implement software so that it has fewer vulnerabili
-ties from the start. Software designers know many principles about 
how to design and build IT systems and networks more securely 

-

security features are feasibleŠimplementing such features in hard
-ware is often more secure than implementing them in software, 

-parable software implementations.
˜˚
Eliminating or blocking known but unnecessary access paths
. Many IT 
systems or networks have a variety of ways to access them that are unnec
-essary for their effective use. Security-conscious system administrators 
often disconnect unneeded wireless connections and wired jacks; disable 
USB ports; change system access controls to quickly remove departing 
employees or to restrict the access privileges available to individual users 

-
the Internet is a particular instance of eliminating an access path.
˜˚
ﬁWhitelistingﬂ software
. Vendors of major operating systems provide 
the option of (and sometimes require) restricting the programs that can be 

approach is the ﬁapp storeﬂ approach to software development by third 
parties for mobile devices. In principle, whitelisting requires that the code 
of an application be cryptographically signed by its author using a public 

-At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
BOX 4.1
 On Attribution
Attribution is the process through which an adversarial cyber operation is 
associated with its perpetrator. In this context, the de˜nition of ﬁperpetratorﬂ can 
have many meanings: 
˜˚The computer from which the adversarial cyber operation reached the 
target. Note that this computerŠthe one most proximate to the targetŠmay well 
belong to an innocent third party that has no knowledge of the operation being 
conducted. 
˜˚The computer that launched or initiated the operation.
˜˚The geographic location of the machine that launched or initiated the 
operation.
˜˚The individual sitting at the keyboard of the initiating machine. 
˜˚The nation under whose jurisdiction the named individual falls (e.g., by 
virtue of his physical location when he typed the initiating commands).
˜˚The entity under whose auspices the individual acted, if any.
One can thus imagine a hostile operation that is launched under the auspices 
of Elbonia, by a Ruritanian citizen sitting in a Darkistanian computer laboratory, 
that penetrates computers in Agraria as intermediate nodes in an attack on com
-puters in Latkovia.
In general, ﬁattributionﬂ of a hostile cyber operation could refer to an identi˜ca
-tion of any of three entities:
˜˚A computer or computers (called C) that may be involved in the operation. 
The identity of C may be speci˜ed as a machine serial number, a MAC address, 
or an Internet Protocol (IP) address.
1 ˜˚The human being(s) (H) involved in the operation, especially the human 
being who initiates the hostile operation (e.g., at the keyboard). The identity of H 
may be speci˜ed as his or her name, pseudonym, or identi˜cation card number, 
for example.
˜˚The party (P) ultimately responsible for the actions of the involved hu
-mans. The identity of P may be the name of another individual, the name of an 
organization, or the name of a country, for example. If H is a ﬁlone wolf,ﬂ P and H 
are probably the same.
Note that knowing the identity of C does not necessarily identify H, and know
-ing the identity of H does not necessarily identify P. 
The distinctions between C, H, and P are important because the appropriate 
meaning of attribution depends on the reason that attribution is necessary.
˜˚If the goal is to mitigate the negative effects of a hostile cyber operation 
as soon as possible, it is necessary to shut down the computers involved in the 
operation, a task that depends on affecting the computers more than on affecting 
their operators or their masters. The identity of C is important.
˜˚If the goal is to prosecute or take the responsible humans into custody, 
the names of these human beings are important. The identity of H is important.
˜˚If the goal is to deter future hostile acts, and recognizing that deterrence 
involves imposing a cost on the party that would otherwise choose to launch a 
future hostile act, the identity of P is important.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 59When the identities of H or P are desired, judgments of attribution are based 
on all available sources of information, which could include technical signatures 
and forensics collected regarding the act in question, communications information 
(e.g., intercepted phone calls monitoring conversations of individuals or their lead
-ers), prior history (e.g., similarity to previous hostile operations), and knowledge of 
those with incentives to conduct such operations.
The fact that such a diversity of sources is necessary for identifying humans 
underscores a fundamental pointŠassignment of responsibility for an adversarial 
cyber operation is an act that is in˚uenced although not uniquely determined by the 
technical information associated with the operation itself. Nontechnical evidence 
can often play an important role in determining responsibility, and ultimately, human 
judgment is an essential element of any attempt at attribution.
It is commonly said that attribution of an adversarial cyber operation is im
-possible. The statement does have an essential kernel of truth: if the perpetrator 
makes no mistakes, uses techniques that have never been seen before, leaves 
behind no clues that point to himself, does not discuss the operation in any public 
or monitored forum, and does not conduct his actions during a period in which his 
incentives to conduct such operations are known publicly, then identi˜cation of the 
perpetrator may well be impossible.
Indeed, sometimes all of these conditions are met, and policy makers rightly 
despair of their ability to act appropriately under such circumstances. But in other 
cases, the problem of attribution is not so dire, because one or more of these 
conditions are not met, and it may be possible to make some useful (if incomplete) 
judgments about attribution. For example, a cyber intruder may leave his IP ad
-dress exposed (perhaps because he forgot to use an anonymizing service to hide 
it). That IP address may be the key piece of information that is necessary to track 
the intruder™s location and eventually to arrest the individual involved.
2Perhaps the more important point is that 
prompt attribution of any given 
adversarial cyber operation is much more dif˜cult than 
eventual
 or delayed
 attribu
-tion. It takes timeŠdays, weeks, perhaps monthsŠto assemble forensic evidence 
and to compare it to evidence of previous operations, to query nontechnical intel
-ligence sources, and so on. In a national security context, policy makers faced with 
responding to a hostile cyber operation naturally feel pressure to respond quickly, 
but sometimes such pressures have more political than operational signi˜cance.
Last, because attribution to any actor beyond a machine involves human 
judgments, actors that are accused of being responsible for bad actions in cyber
-space can always assert their innocence and point to the sinister motives of the 
parties making human judgments, regardless of whether those judgments are 
well founded. Such denials have some plausibility, especially in an environment in 
which there are no accepted standards for making judgments related to attribution.
1 A MAC address (MAC is an acronym for media access control) is a unique number as
-sociated with a physical network adapter, speci˜ed by the manufacturer and hard-coded into 
the adapter hardware. An IP address (Internet Protocol address) is a number assigned by the 
operator of a network using the Internet Protocol to a device (e.g., a computer) attached to 
that network; the operator may, or may not, use a con˜guration protocol that assigns a new 
number every time the device appears on the network.
2 See Gerry Smith, ﬁFBI Agent: We™ve Dismantled the Leaders of Anonymous,ﬂ 
The 
Huf˜ngton Post
, August 21, 2013, available at http://www.huf˜ngtonpost.com/2013/08/21/
anonymous-arrests-fbi_n_3780980.html.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY

5 If the app store 
does whitelisting consistently and rigorously (and app stores do vary sig
-
cannot run programs that have not been properly signed. Another issue 
for whitelisting is who establishes any given whitelistŠthe user (who 
5



BOX 4.2
 The Saltzer-Schroeder Principles of 
Secure System Design and Development
Saltzer and Schroeder articulate eight design principles that can guide sys
-tem design and contribute to an implementation without security ˚aws:
˜˚Economy of mechanism: The design should be kept as simple and small 
as possible
. Design and implementation errors that result in unwanted access 
paths will not be noticed during normal use (since normal use usually does not 
include attempts to exercise improper access paths). As a result, techniques such 
as line-by-line inspection of software and physical examination of hardware that 
implements protection mechanisms are necessary. For such techniques to be suc
-cessful, a small and simple design is essential. 
˜˚Fail-safe defaults: Access decisions should be based on permission rather 
than exclusion
. The default situation is lack of access, and the protection scheme 
identi˜es conditions under which access is permitted. The alternative, in which 
mechanisms attempt to identify conditions under which access should be refused, 
presents the wrong psychological base for secure system design. This principle 
applies both to the outward appearance of the protection mechanism and to its 
underlying implementation. 
˜˚Complete mediation: Every access to every object must be checked for 
authority
. This principle, when systematically applied, is the primary underpinning 
of the protection system. It forces a system-wide view of access control, which, 
in addition to normal operation, includes initialization, recovery, shutdown, and 
maintenance. It implies that a foolproof method of identifying the source of every 
request must be devised. It also requires that proposals to gain performance by 
remembering the result of an authority check be examined skeptically. If a change 
in authority occurs, such remembered results must be systematically updated. 
˜˚Open design: The design should not be secret
. The protection mecha
-nisms should not depend on the ignorance of potential attackers, but rather on the 
possession of speci˜c, more easily protected keys or passwords. This decoupling 
of protection mechanisms from protection keys permits the mechanisms to be 
examined by many reviewers without concern that the review may itself compro
-mise the safeguards. In addition, any skeptical users may be allowed to convince 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 61themselves that the system they are about to use is adequate for their individual 
purposes. Finally, it is simply not realistic to attempt to maintain secrecy for any 
system that receives wide distribution. 
˜˚Separation of privilege: Where feasible, a protection mechanism that re
-quires two keys to unlock it is more robust and ˚exible than one that allows access 
to the presenter of only a single key
. The reason for this greater robustness and 
˚exibility is that, once the mechanism is locked, the two keys can be physically 
separated, and distinct programs, organizations, or individuals can be made re
-sponsible for them. From then on, no single accident, deception, or breach of trust 
is suf˜cient to compromise the protected information. 
˜˚Least privilege: Every program and every user of the system should oper
-ate using the least set of privileges necessary to complete the job
. This principle 
reduces the number of potential interactions among privileged programs to the 
minimum for correct operation, so that unintentional, unwanted, or improper uses 
of privilege are less likely to occur. Thus, if a question arises related to the possible 
misuse of a privilege, the number of programs that must be audited is minimized. 
˜˚Least common mechanism: The amount of mechanism common to more 
than one user and depended on by all users should be minimized
. Every shared 
mechanism (especially one involving shared variables) represents a potential infor
-mation path between users and must be designed with great care to ensure that it 
does not unintentionally compromise security. Further, any mechanism serving all 
users must be certi˜ed to the satisfaction of every user, a job presumably harder 
than satisfying only one or a few users. 
˜˚Psychological acceptability: It is essential that the human interface be 
designed for ease of use, so that users routinely and automatically apply the pro
-tection mechanisms correctly. More generally, the use of protection mechanisms 
should not impose burdens on users that might lead users to avoid or circumvent 
themŠwhen possible, the use of such mechanisms should confer a bene˜t that 
makes users want to use them. Thus, if the protection mechanisms make the 
system slower or cause the user to do more workŠeven if that extra work is 
ﬁeasyﬂŠthey are arguably ˚awed
.SOURCE: Adapted from J.H. Saltzer and M.D. Schroeder, ﬁThe Protection of Information in 
Computer Systems,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the IEEE 63(9):1278-1308, September 1975.
(who may not be willing or able to provide the full range of applications 
desired by the user or may accept software too uncritically for inclusion 
on the whitelist). 
These approaches to defense are well known, and are often imple
-mented to a certain degree in many situations. But in general, these 
approaches have not been adopted as fully as they could be, leaving sys
-tems more vulnerable than they would otherwise be. If the approaches 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY

Several factors account for this phenomenon:
˜˚

. In many cases, 
closing down access paths and introducing cybersecurity to a system™s 
design slows it down or makes it harder to use. Restricting access privi
-leges to users often has serious usability implications and makes it harder 

needs higher access privileges temporarily but on a time-urgent basis. 
Implementing the checking, monitoring, and recovery needed for secure 
operation requires a lot of computation and does not come for free. User 
demands for backward compatibility at the applications level often call 
for building into new systems some of the same security vulnerabilities 
present in the old systems. Program features that enable adversary access 
can be turned off, but doing so may disable functionality needed or 
desired by users.
˜˚
The mismatch between these approaches to defense and real-world soft
-ware development environments


such an environment, it makes very little sense to invest up front in the 
approaches to defense outlined above unless such adherence is relatively 

˜˚

. With large systems in place, 

upgrade all parts of the system at once. This means that for practical 

technology environment in which the parts that have not been replaced 
are likely still vulnerable, and their interconnection to the parts that have 
been replaced may make even the new components vulnerable. 
4.1.4
 Ensuring Accountability 
Accountability is the ability to unambiguously associate a conse-
-cation refers to a process that ensures that an asserted identity is indeed 
properly associated with the asserting party. Access control is the tech
-nical mechanism by which certain system privileges but not others are 

-nical means by which the activity of an intruder can be reconstructed; in 
many cases, the intruder leaves behind evidence that provides clues to 
his or her identity. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 63Individual Authentication and Access Control
For purposes of this report, authentication usually refers to the pro
-

-ment agency. 
As applied to individuals, authentication serves two purposes:
˜˚
Ensuring that only authorized parties can perform certain actions
. In 


privileges and no others. Because certain users have privileges that others 







˜˚
Facilitating accountability
, which is the ability to associate a conse
-quence with a past improper action of an individual. Thus, the authentica
-tion process must unambiguously identify one and only one individual 
who will be held accountable for improper actions. (This is the reason that 
credentials should not be shared among individuals.) To avoid account
-ability, an individual may seek to defeat an authentication process.
In general, the authentication process depends on one or more of 
three factors: something you know, something you have, or something 
you are. 
˜˚
Something you know
, such as a password. Passwords have many 

hardware or training. Passwords can be distributed, maintained, and 

guessing and to theft.
6 Passwords are easily shared, either intentionally 


lost (forgotten) passwords. Because people often reuse the same name 
and password combinations across different systems to ease the burden 
6
(in order of frequency) ﬁ123456,ﬂ ﬁpassword,ﬂ and ﬁ12345678.ﬂ See Impact Lab, ﬁThe Top 
50 Gawker Media Passwords,ﬂ December 14, 2010, available at http://www.impactlab.
net/2010/12/14/the-top-50-gawker-media-passwords/.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
on their memories, a successful password attack on a user on one site 
increases the likelihood that accounts of the same user on other sites can 
be hacked.
˜˚
Something you have
, such as a cell phone. If a user is locked out of 
his account because of a forgotten password, a password recovery system 

code that can be used to reset the password. Although anyone can request 

on which the activation code is received. Of course, this approach pre
-sumes that I haveŠin advanceŠtold the system my cell phone number 
at the time of account setup; that is the primary way that the system can 

˜˚
Something you are

(often called biometrics) is the automatic recognition of human individu
-als on the basis of behavioral and physiological characteristics. Biometrics 
have the obvious advantage of authenticating the human, not just the 
presented token or password. Common biometrics in use today verify 

-ous disadvantage of biometric credentials is that they can be forged or 
stolen,
7
credential cannot be changed). Other downsides to biometrics include the 
fact that not all people can use all systems, making a backup authentica
-tion method necessary (and consequently increasing vulnerability), and 
the fact that remote enrollment of a biometric measure (sending one™s 

purpose and is easily compromised. 
These factors can be combined to provide greater authentication secu
-
-
read by a computer. This approach would provide two-factor authentica
-
one to enable access.
All authentication mechanisms are susceptible to compromise to 
varying degrees in two ways. One is technicalŠuse of a gummy bear to 


7


-metrics Firms,ﬂ 
The Register, 
May 16, 2002, http://www.theregister.co.uk/ 2002/05/16/

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 65
-ing action on behalf of someone without those privileges. 
Organizational Authentication





On the Internet today, I would likely rely on the assurances of a trusted 


BOX 4.3
 Certificate Authorities
Cryptography refers to a set of techniques that can be used to scramble 
information so that only certain partiesŠparties with the decryption keyŠcan 
recover the original information. To scramble the original information, the sender 
of the information uses an encryption key.
In symmetric cryptography (or equivalently, secret-key cryptography), the en
-cryption key is the same as the decryption key; thus, message privacy depends on 
the key being kept secret. In asymmetric (or, equivalently, public-key) cryptographic 
systems, the encryption key is different from the decryption key. Message privacy 
depends only on the decryption key being kept secret. The encryption key can 
even be published and disseminated widely, so that anyone can encrypt messages.
Certi˜cate authorities are used to facilitate public-key cryptography systems 
that enable secure communications among a large number of parties who do not 
know each other and who have not made prior arrangements for communicating. 
For Alice to send a secure message to Bob, Alice needs to know Bob™s encryption 
key. Alice looks up in a published directory Bob™s encryption key (which happens to 
be 2375959), and then sends an encrypted message to Bob. Only Bob can decrypt 
it, because only Bob knows the correct decryption key. But how is Alice to know 
that the number 2375959 does in fact belong to BobŠin other words, how does 
Alice know that the published directory is trustworthy?
The answer is that a trusted certi˜cate authority stands behind the association 
between a given encryption key and the party to which it belongs. Certi˜cate au
-thorities play the role of trusted third partiesŠtrusted by both sender and receiver 
to associate and publish public keys and names of potential message recipients.
Certi˜cate authorities can exist within a single organization, across multiple 
related organizations, or across society in general. Any number of certi˜cate au
-thorities can coexist, and they may or may not have agreements for cross-certi
-˜cation, whereby if one authority certi˜es a given person, then another authority 
will accept that certi˜cation within its own structure. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY

-


Given the role of the CA, its compromise is a dangerous event that can 

-
and some have even gone rogue on their own. The security of the Inter
-net is under stress today in part because the number of trusted but not 
trustworthy CAs is growing. Thus, CAs must do what they can to ensure 


is compromised.

-
check its status to see if it 
has
 been revoked. Few users are so diligentŠ
they rely on software to perform such checks. Sometimes the software 
fails to perform a check, leaving the user with a false sense of security. 

revoked and asks the user if he or she wants to proceed. Faced with this 
question, the user often proceeds.
Furthermore, there is an inherent tension between authentication 
and privacy, because the act of authentication involves some disclosure 

attribute for use within an authentication system, creating transactional 
records, and revealing information used in authentication to others 
with unrelated interests all have implications for privacy and other civil 
liberties. 
Stronger Authentication for the Internet
As discussed in Chapter 2, digital information is inherently anony
-
a given party with any given piece of information. The Internet is a means for transporting information from one computer to another, but today™s 
Internet protocols do not require a validated identity to be associated with 
the packets that are sent.
Nevertheless, nearly all users of the Internet obtain service through 
an Internet service provider, and the ISP usually does haveŠfor billing 
purposesŠinformation about the party sending or receiving any given 
packet. In other words, access to the Internet usually requires some kind 
of authentication of identity, but the architecture of the Internet does not 
require that identity to be carried with sent packets all the way to the 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 67intended recipient. (As an important aside, an ISP knows only who pays 
a bill for Internet service, and one bill may well cover Internet access for 
multiple users. However, the paying entity may itself have accounting 
systems in place to differentiate among these multiple users.)
In the name of greater security, proposals have been made for a 
ﬁstrongly authenticatedﬂ Internet as a solution to the problem of attri
-
responsible for a cyber incident. If cyber incidents effectuated through 

could be established and penalties meted out for illegal, improper, or 

to improve attribution capabilities.

services provided at the packet level of the Internet, as described in 
Chapter 2. Alternatively, strong authentication could be a service imple
-mented at the applications level, in which case authentication would be 
the responsibility of individual applications developers that would then 
design such services as needed for the particular application in question.
Although the availability of a strongly authenticated Internet would 
certainly improve the security environment over that of today, it is not 
a panacea. Perhaps most important, users of a strongly authenticated 
Internet would be high-priority targets themselves. Once they were com
-promised (likely through social engineering), their credentials could then 
be used to gain access to the resources on the strongly authenticated Inter
-net. The intruder could then use these resources to launch further hostile 
operations against the true target, masking his true identity.
In addition, strong authentication, especially if implemented at the 
packet level, raises a number of civil liberties concerns, as described in 
Chapter 5. 
Forensics

and science of obtaining useful evidence from an ostensibly hostile cyber 
event. Cyber forensics are intended to provide information about what an 

-
forensics are necessary because, among other things, intruders often seek 
to cover their tracks.

-tal information carries with it no physical signature that can be associated 

-nature on a document says something about the computer that signed the 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
document using a private and secret cryptographic key, it does not neces
-sarily follow that the individual associated with that key signed the docu
-ment. Because the key is a long string of digits, it is almost certainly stored 
in machine-readable form, and the association of the individual with the 
signed document requires a demonstration that no one else could have 

true in practiceŠthat the owner of a Wi-Fi router has willfully allowed 


for information that the perpetrator of a hostile action may have tried to 
delete or did not know was recorded, audits of system logs for reconstruc
-tions of a perpetrator™s system accesses and activities, statistical and his
-



further review and investigation. Conducted in real time, an audit could 
send a warning to system administrators of wrongdoing in progress.
Precisely what must be done in any cyber forensic investigation 
depends on its purpose. One purpose, of course, is to obtain evidence 
that may be usable in court for a criminal prosecution of the perpetrator. 
In this event, forensic investigation also involves maintaining a chain of 
custody over the evidence at every step, an aspect of the investigation 
that is likely to slow down the investigation. But businesses may need 
to conduct a forensic investigation to detect employee wrongdoing or to 
protect intellectual property. For this purpose, the evidentiary require
-ments of forensic investigation may be less stringent and the investigation 
shorter, a fact that might allow statistical likelihood, indirect evidence, 
and hearsay to fall within the scope of non-evidentiary forensics; the 


instrumentation of embedded systems to handling massive data volume 
and network monitoring, and they require a similar foundation to deal 

relevant to civil proceedings, both because the standards of proof there are 
lower and because the use of digital forensics in business activities may 
also be the subject of litigation.
Also, the forensic investigator must proceed differently in an after-
the-fact investigation than in a real-time investigation. Law enforcement 
authorities are often oriented toward after-the-fact forensics, which help 

-vention or mitigation of damage is the goal of law enforcement authorities 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 69or business operators, real-time or near-real-time forensics may be more 
valuable.
When cyber forensics are performed on IT systems and networks 
within the victim™s legitimate span of control, the legal and policy issues 
are few. Such issues become much more complicated if it is necessary to 
perform cyber forensics on IT systems and networks outside the victim™s 

hostile operation from the computer belonging to an innocent third party 
that has no relationship to either adversary or victim, conducting foren
-sics on that computer without the third party™s knowledge or permission 
raises a number of legal and policy problems.
4.1.5
 Building a Capacity for Containment, Recovery, and Resilience
Acknowledging that defenses are likely to be breached, one can also 
seek to contain the damage that a breach might cause and/or to recover 
from the damage that was caused.
Containment 
Containment refers to the process of limiting the effects of a hostile 

-ing environment designed to be disposableŠcorruption or compromise 
in this environment does not matter much to the user, and the intruder 
is unlikely to gain much in the way of additional resources or privileges. 

and the ﬁrealﬂ computing environment in which serious business can be 

for safe interaction between the buffer and the ﬁrealﬂ environment, and 
in an imperfectly designed disposable environment, unsafe actions can 


provide some level of protection against the dangers of running untrusted 
programs.

-puting environments. In agriculture, monocultures are known to be 

of millions of identically programmed computers is systematically vulner
-
those computers are attached to the InternetŠa hostile operation that is 
successful against one of these computers will be successful against all 
of them, and malware can propagate rapidly in such an environment. If 
these computers are programmed differently (while still providing the 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
same functionality to the user), the techniques used in a hostile operation 
against a particular programming base may well be unsuccessful against 
a different code base, and thus not all of the computers in the population 
will be vulnerable to those techniques. However, it is generally more 

environment, and interoperability among the systems in the population 

Recovery 
In general, recovery-oriented approaches accomplish repair by restor
-ing a system to its state at an earlier point in time. If that point in time 
is too recent, then the restoration will include the damage to the system 
caused by the attack. If that point in time is too far back, an unacceptable 



A recovery-oriented approach is not particularly useful in any envi
-ronment in which the attack causes effects on physical systemsŠif an 

-puter systems attacked will restore that generator to working order. (But 
the operator still needs to restore the computer so that the replacement 
generator won™t be similarly damaged.)
In large systems or services, reverting to a known system state before 
the security breach may well be infeasible. Under such circumstances, a 
more practical goal is to restore normal system capacity/functionality 
with as little loss of operating data as possible.
Resilience 
A resilient system is one whose performance degrades gradually 
rather than catastrophically when its other defensive mechanisms are 

-form some of its intended functions, although perhaps more slowly or for 
fewer people or with fewer applications.
Redundancy is one way to provide a measure of resilience. For 

account for the loss of intermediate nodesŠthat is, to provide redundant 

A second approach to achieving resilience is to design a system or 
network without a single point of failureŠthat is, it should be impossible 
to cause the system or network to cease functioning entirely by crippling 
or disabling any one component of the system. Unfortunately, discover
-At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 71

redundancy for certain systems is simply to replicate the system and run 


4.1.6
 Employing Active Defense
The limitations of the measures described above to protect important 
information technology assets and the information they contain are well 
known. Many measures (e.g., repair of system vulnerabilities) can be 

is, systems and networks that it has the legal right to access, monitor, and 
modify. These also may reduce important functionality in the systems 

to use. They are also reactiveŠthey are invoked or become operational 

(or is occurring).

option for responding to the cyber threat, the Department of Defense 
issued in 2011 its 
Department of Defense
 Strategy for Operating in Cyberspace
, which states that the United States will employ ﬁan active cyber defense 

-

8The DOD does not describe active cyber defense in any detail, but 
the formulation above for ﬁactive cyber defenseﬂ could, if read broadly, 

non-cooperative measure affecting or harming an attacker™s IT systems 
and networks, any proactive measure, or any retaliatory measure, as long 
as such action was taken for the purpose of defending DOD systems or 
networks from that attacker.
The sections below describe some of the components that a strategy 
of active cyber defense might logically entail.
Cyber Deception for Defensive Purposes



8 See U.S. Department of Defense, Department of Defense Strategy for Operating in 
Cyberspace

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
looks like the real thing may be misled into taking action harmful to his 
own interests, and at the very least has been forced to waste time, effort, 
and resources in obtaining useless information.
The term ﬁhoneypotﬂ in computer security jargon refers to a machine, 
a virtual machine, or other network resource that is intended to act as a 
decoy or diversion for would-be intruders. Honeypots intentionally con
-
production systems. Indeed, in most cases, systems administrators 
want
 intruders to succeed in compromising or breaching the security of honey
-
the techniques and methods used by the intruder. This process allows 
administrators to be better prepared for hostile operations against their 
real production systems. Honeypots are very useful for gathering infor
-mation about new types of operation, new techniques, and information 
on how things like worms or malicious code propagate through systems, 
and they are used as much by security researchers as by network security 
administrators.
When the effects of a honeypot are limited in scope to the victim™s sys
-tems and networks, the legal and policy issues are relatively limited. But if 
they have effects on the intruder™s systems, both the legal and the policy 




its own offensive operations on B™s systems in certain ways.

-conﬂ that sends an e-mail to A to report on the environment in which it 


B™s systems in the future. All of these actions raise legal and policy issues 
regarding their propriety.
Disruption
Disruption is intended to reduce the damage being caused by an 
adversarial cyber operation in progress, usually by affecting the operation 
of the computer systems being used to conduct the operation.

-abling the computers that control a botnet. Of course, this approach pre
-
is used, such knowledge is unlikely. But over time, patterns of behavior 
might suggest the identity of those computers and an access path to them. Thus, disruption would be easier to accomplish after repeated attacks.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 73Under most circumstances, disabling the computers controlling an 
adversarial operation runs a risk of violating domestic U.S. law such as 
the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. However, armed with court orders, 
information technology vendors and law enforcement authorities have 
worked together in a number of instances to disrupt the operation of 

those botnets.




-

9 In addition, they 
provided information about the botnets to computer emergency response 
teams (CERTs) located abroad, requesting that they target related com
-mand-and-control infrastructure. At the same time, the FBI provided 
related information to its overseas law enforcement counterparts.
Preemption
PreemptionŠsometimes also known as anticipatory self-defenseŠis 

conduct a hostile cyber action against a victim. The idea of preemption 

national security.
10
Preemption as a defensive strategy is a controversial subject, and the 

-tial.
11

preemption. When the number of possible cyber adversaries is almost 
limitless, how would a country know who was about to launch such an 

and other intelligence sources would seem to be a quite daunting task 
9
6, 2013, available at http://www.informationweek.com/attacks/microsoft-fbi-trumpet-

10 Mike McConnell, ﬁHow to Win the Cyber War We™re Losing,ﬂ 
Washington Post
, February 28, 2010, available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/ 
2010/02/25/AR2010022502493.html.
11 Herbert Lin, ﬁA Virtual Necessity: Some Modest Steps Toward Greater Cybersecurity,ﬂ 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 
September 1, 2012, available at http://www.thebulletin.
org/2012/september/virtual-necessity-some-modest-steps-toward-greater-cybersecurity.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
and yet necessary in an environment in which threats can originate from 
nearly anywhere.

the adversary take nearly all of the measures and make all of the prepa
-rations needed to carry out that action. The potential victim considering 
preemption must thus be able to target the adversary™s cyber assets that 
would be used to launch a hostile operation. But the assets needed to 

(or made entirely invisible)Šreducing the likelihood that a serious dam
-age-limiting preemption could be conducted.
BOX 4.4
 A Brief Case StudyŠ
 Securing the Internet Against Routing Attacks
The task of securing the routing protocols of the Internet makes a good case 
study of the nontechnical complexities that can emerge in what might have been 
thought of as a purely technical problem.
As noted in Chapter 2, the Internet is a network of networks. Each network 
acts as an autonomous system under a common administration and with common 
routing policies. BGP is the Internet protocol used to characterize every network 
to each other, and in particular to every network operated by an Internet service 
provider (ISP).
In general, the characterization is provided by the ISP responsible for the 
network, and in part the characterization speci˜es how that ISP would route traf˜c 
to a given destination. A problem arises if and when a malicious ISP in some part 
of the Internet falsely asserts that it is the right path to a given destination (i.e., it 
asserts that it would forward traf˜c to a destination but in fact would not). Traf˜c sent 
to that destination can be discarded, causing that destination to appear to be off 
the net. Further, the malicious ISP might be able to mimic the expected behavior 
of the correct destination, fooling unsuspecting users into thinking that their traf˜c 
has been delivered properly and thus causing further damage.
The technical proposal to mitigate this problem was to have the owner of each 
region of Internet addresses digitally sign an assertion to the effect that it is the 
rightful owner (which would be done using cryptographic mechanisms), and then 
delegate this assertion to the ISP that actually provides access to the addresses, 
which in turn would validate it by a further signature, and so on as the assertion 
crossed the Internet. A suspicious ISP trying to decide if a routing assertion is valid 
could check this series of signed assertions to validate it.
This scheme has a bit of overhead, which is one objection, but it also has an
-other problemŠhow can a suspicious ISP know that the signed assertion is valid? 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 75It has been signed using some cryptographic key, but the suspicious ISP must 
know who owns that key. To this end, it is necessary to have a global key distribu
-tion and validation scheme, which is called a public-key infrastructure, or PKI. The 
original proposal was that there would be a ﬁroot of trust,ﬂ an actor that everyone 
trusted, who would sign a set of assertions about the identities of lower-level enti
-ties, and so on until there was a chain of correctness-con˜rming assertions that 
linked the assertions of each owner of an address block back to this root of trust.
This idea proved unacceptable for the reason, perhaps obvious to nontechni
-cal people, that there is no actor that everyoneŠevery nation, every corporation, 
and so onŠis willing to trust. If there were such an actor, and if it were to suddenly 
refuse to validate the identity of some lower-level actor, that lower-level actor would 
be essentially removed from the Internet. The alternative approach was to have 
many roots of trustŠperhaps each country would be the root of trust for actors 
within its borders. But this approach, too, is hard to make work in practiceŠfor 
example, what if a malicious country signs some assertion that an ISP within its 
border is the best means to reach some range of addresses? How can someone 
know that this particular root of trust did not in fact have the authority to make as
-sertions about this part of the address space? Somehow one must cross-link the 
various roots of trust, and the resulting complexity may be too hard to manage.
Schemes that have been proposed to secure the global routing mechanisms 
of the Internet differ with respect to the overhead, the range of threats to which 
they are resistant, and so on. But the major problem that all these schemes come 
up against is the nontechnical problem of building a scheme that can successfully 
stabilize a global system built out of regions that simply do not trust each other. 
And of course routing is only part of making a secure and resilient Internet. An 
ISP that is malicious can make correct routing assertions and then just drop or 
otherwise disrupt the packets as they are forwarded. The resolution of these sorts 
of dilemmas seems to depend on an understanding of how to manage trust, not 
on technical mechanisms for signing identity assertions. 
4.2
 NONTECHNOLOGICAL DIMENSIONS OF CYBERSECURITY
An important lesson that is often lost amidst discussions of cyber
-security is that cybersecurity is not only about technology to make us 
more secure in cyberspace. Indeed, technology is only one aspect of such 
security, and is arguably not even the most important aspect of security. 

section discusses a number of the most important nontechnological fac
-tors that affect cybersecurity.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
4.2.1
 Economics
12
Many problems of cybersecurity can be understood better from an 


-tory frameworks, and tragedy of the commons. Taken together, economic 

-tions, cybersecurity is and will be a hard problem to address.
Many actors make decisions that affect cybersecurity: technology 

-ment, the intelligence community, and governments (both as technology 
users and as guardians of the larger social good). Each of these actors gets 
plenty of blame for being the ﬁproblemﬂ: if technology vendors would just 
properly engineer their products, if end users would just use the technol
-ogy available to them and learn and practice safe behavior, if companies 
would just invest more in cybersecurity or take it more seriously, if law 
enforcement would just pursue the bad guys more aggressively, if policy 
makers would just do a better job of regulation or legislation, and so on.
There is some truth to such assertions, and yet it is important to 
understand the incentives for these actors to behave as they do. For 



-ity, time, and cost in design and testing while being hard to value or even 
assess by customers.

-als do sometimes (perhaps even often) take cybersecurity into account. 
But these parties have strong incentives to take only those cybersecurity 
measures that are valuable for addressing their own cybersecurity needs, 


much of the payoff from security investments may be captured by society 


-promise intermediary M™s computer facilities in order to attack V. This 
convoluted routing is done so that V will have a harder time tracing the 
12
 For an overview of the economic issues underlying cybersecurity, see Tyler Moore, 
ﬁIntroducing the Economics of Cybersecurity: Principles and Policy Options,ﬂ in National 
Research Council, 
Proceedings of a Workshop on Deterring Cyberattacks: Informing Strategies 
and Developing Options for U.S. Policy
, pp. 3-24, The National Academies Press, Washington 
D.C., 2010. An older but still very useful paper is Ross Anderson, ﬁWhy Information Security 
Is HardŠAn Economic Perspective,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 17th Annual Computer Security 
Applications Conference
, IEEE Computer Society, New Orleans, La., 2001, pp. 358-365.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 77attack back to A. However, the compromise on M™s computers will usu
-ally not damage them very much, and indeed M may not even notice 
that its computers have been compromised. Investments made by M to 


-
have economic roots. 
Is the national cybersecurity posture resulting from the investment 

-
of this question yields ﬁnoﬂ for an answerŠwhereas many in the private 
sector say ﬁyes.ﬂ This disagreement is at the heart of many disputes about 
what the nation can and should do about cybersecurity policy.
4.2.2
 Psychology
A wide variety of psychological factors and issues are relevant to 
cybersecurity.
Social Engineering


by breaking in or using technical hacking techniques.ﬂ
13


engineer might try to trick an employee into divulging his password by 
posing as an IT support person.
Social engineering is possible because the human beings who install, 

through deception and trickery. Spies working for an intruder may be 
unknowingly hired by the victim, and more importantly and commonly, 
users can be deceived into actions that compromise security. No malware 
operates by informing a human user that ﬁrunning this program or open
-
human into running a program with that effect.
Many instances involving the compromise of users or operators 

initiative of the intruder (often posing as someone known to the victim), 

13

http://www.csoonline.com/article/514063/social-engineering-the-basics.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
of the latter include links to appealing Web pages and or downloadable 

Another channel for social engineering is the service providers on 


-

also obtain cybersecurity services from third parties, such as a security 
software vendor that might be bribed or otherwise persuaded to ignore 
a particular virus. Service providers are potential security vulnerabilities, 
and thus might well be intermediate targets in an offensive operation 
directed at the true (ultimate) target. 
Decision Making Under Uncertainty
Decision making under conditions of high uncertainty will almost 


conditions of high uncertainty, crisis decision-making processes are often 


14

-sion-making process, Stein points to uncertainty about realities on the 

suboptimal outcomes because the actors involved do not have or under
-stand all of the relevant information about the situation. Uncertainties 

assessment), the intentions of the various actors (e.g., defensive actions by A are seen as provocative by B, inadvertent actions by A are seen as delib
-erate by B), the bureaucratic interests pushing decision makers in certain 
directions (e.g., cyber warriors pushing for operational use of cyber tools), 


-ing, Stein points out that because the information-processing capability of 
people is limited, they are forced in confusing situations to use a variety 

uncertainty, handle information, make inferences, and generate threat 
perceptions.ﬂ
15

14

The Oxford 
Handbook of Political Psychology

15
 Stein, ﬁThreat Perception in International Relations,ﬂ 2013.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 79˜˚
Interpret ambiguous information in terms of what is most easily 
available in their cognitive repertoire (availability). Thus, if a cyber disas
-ter (real or hypothetical) is easily recalled, ambiguous information about 
cyber events will seem to point to a cyber disaster.
˜˚


estimates of frequency (representativeness). Thus, if the available infor
-mation on a cyber event seems to point to its being a hostile action taken 
by a nation-state, it will be interpreted that way even if that nation-state 
has taken few such actions in the past.
˜˚
Estimate magnitude or degree by comparing it with an ﬁavailableﬂ 
initial value (often an inaccurate one) as a reference point and making a 
comparison (anchoring).
˜˚
Attribute the behavior of adversaries in terms of their disposition 
and animus but attribute their own behavior to situational factors. That 
is, ﬁtheyﬂ take certain actions because they want to challenge us, but ﬁweﬂ take the same actions because circumstances demanded that we do so.
Education for Security Awareness and Behavior
Users are a key component of any information technology system 
in use, and inappropriate or unsafe user behavior on such a system can 
easily lead to reduced security. Security education has two essential com
-ponents: security awareness and security-responsible behavior.
˜˚
Security awareness refers to user consciousness of the reality and 

motivates users to adopt safeguards that reduce the likelihood of security 
compromises and/or the effect of such compromises when they do occur.
˜˚
Security-responsible behavior refers to what users should and 
should not do from a security standpoint once they are motivated to take 
action.
To promote security awareness, various reports have sought to make 
the public aware of the importance of cybersecurity. In general, these 
reports point to the sophistication of the cybersecurity threat, the scale of 
the costs to society as a whole resulting from threats to cybersecurity, and 
the urgency of ﬁdoing somethingﬂ about the threat. But it is also likely 
that such reports do not motivate individual users to take cybersecurity 

that could entail substantial personal costs to them.
As for security-responsible behavior, most children do receive some 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY

when confronted with suspicious situations, and so on. But a comparable 
effort to educate children about some of the basic elements of cybersecu
-
To illustrate some of what might be included in education for secu
-rity-responsible behavior, a course taught at the University of Washington 
in 2006, intended to provide a broad education in the fundamentals of 
information technology for lay people, set forth the following objectives 
for its unit on cybersecurity:
16
˜˚
Learn to create strong passwords. 
˜˚

˜˚
Use Windows Update to keep your system up to date. 
˜˚
Update McAfee VirusScan so that you can detect viruses. 
˜˚
Use Windows Defender to locate and remove spyware.
Convenience and Ease of Use

-als to manage effectively or to use conveniently. Security is hard for users, 
administrators, and developers to understand, making it all too easy to 

Moreover, security and privacy technologies originally were developed 

-ity for security and privacy protections and in which the users tended 
to be sophisticated. Today, the user base is much widerŠincluding the 

householdsŠbut the basic models for security and privacy are essentially 
unchanged.
Security features can be clumsy and awkward to use and can pres
-
measures are all too often disabled or bypassed by the users they are 
intended to protect. Because the intent of security is to make a system 



balance between the two.

two systems because it is much easier than rekeying the data by hand. 
16
 See University of Washington, ﬁLab 11ŠComputer Security Basics,ﬂ Winter 2006, 
available at http://www.cs.washington.edu/education/courses/100/06wi/labs/lab11/
lab11.html.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 81But establishing an electronic link between the systems may add an access 
path that is useful to an intruder. Taking into account the needs of usable 
security might call for establishing the link but protecting it or tearing 
down the link after the data has been transferred.
In other cases, security techniques do not transfer well from one tech
-
password on a mobile device than on a keyboard, and yet many mobile 
applications for a Web service require users to use the same password for 
access as they do for the desktop computer equivalent.

well as technological and psychological ones. Researchers have found 
that the development of usable security requires deep insight into the 
human-interaction dimensions of the application for which security is 
being developed and of the alignment of technical protocols for security 

4.2.3
 Law
U.S. domestic law, international law, and foreign domestic law affect 
cybersecurity in a number of ways.
Domestic Law

-eral statutes addressing various aspects of cybersecurity either directly or 
indirectly.
17
 (The acts discussed below are listed with the date of original 
passage, and ﬁas amendedﬂ should be understood with each act.)

actions. These statutes include the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 
1986 (prohibits various intrusions on federal computer systems or on 
computer systems used by banks or in interstate and foreign commerce); 
the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA; prohibits 

1996 (outlaws theft of trade secret information, including electronically 
stored information, if ﬁreasonable measuresﬂ have been taken to keep 
it secret); the Federal Wiretap Act of 1968 as amended (often known as 
Title III; prohibits real-time surveillance of electronic communications 

of 1978 (FISA; establishes a framework for the use of ﬁelectronic surveil
-17
 Eric A. Fischer, 
Federal Laws Relating to Cybersecurity: Overview and Discussion of Pro
-posed Revisions

www.fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/R42114.pdf.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
lanceﬂ conducted to obtain information about a foreign power or foreign 
territory that relates to the national defense, the security, or the conduct of 

the foreign affairs of the United States, also known as ﬁforeign intelligence 

informationﬂ). As this report is being written, the scope and the nature 

of precisely how federal agencies have complied with various portions of 

FISA are under investigation.

event that important information is compromised. If such information is 



of the individuals with whom such information is associated. Federal 

securities law (the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act 



and accurate information about risks and events that is important to an 

investment decision. Under this authority, the Securities and Exchange 

Commission™s Division of Corporation Finance in 2011 provided volun
-

relating to cybersecurity risks and cyber incidents.
18
Several federal statutes assign responsibility within the federal gov
-ernment for various aspects of cybersecurity, including the Computer 

Security Act of 1987 (National Institute of Standards and Technology 

[NIST], responsible for developing security standards for non-national-

security federal computer systems); the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 



cybersecurity policies); the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 (agency heads 



policies and procedures); the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (HSA; 

Department of Homeland Security [DHS], responsible for cybersecurity 

for homeland security and critical infrastructure); the Cyber Security 

Research and Development Act of 2002 (NSF and NIST, research respon
-
-

cybersecurity responsibilities, established a central federal incident center, 



promulgating federal cybersecurity standards).
Finally, national security law may affect how the United States may 
itself use cyber operations in an offensive capacity for damaging adver
-sary information technology systems or the information therein. For 

example, the War Powers Act of 1973 restricts presidential authority to use 

the U.S. armed forces in potential or actual hostilities without congressio
-18
 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Division of Corporation Finance, ﬁCF 
Disclosure Guidance: Topic No. 2ŠCybersecurity,ﬂ October 13, 2011, available at http://

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 83

Powers Act is poorly suited to U.S. military forces that might engage in 


within which is resident a great deal of cybersecurity knowledgeŠcan 
cooperate with civil agencies on matters related to cybersecurity. 
International Law

cyber operations that cross international boundaries. However, one inter
-

related actions or activities, to improve national capabilities for inves
-tigating such crimes, and to increase cooperation on investigations.
19 That convention also obliges ratifying states to create laws allowing law 

in wiretapping, and obtain real-time and stored communications data, 
whether or not the crime under investigation is a cybercrime.
International law does potentially touch on hostile cyber operations 
that cross international boundaries when a hostile cyber operation is the 
instrumentality through which some regulated action is achieved. A par
-


Charter and the Geneva and Hague Conventions.
The UN Charter is the body of treaty law that governs when a nation 

how the UN Charter should be interpreted with respect to cyberattacks 
result from three fundamental facts: 
˜˚
The UN Charter was written in 1945, long before the notion of 
cyberattacks was even imagined. Thus, the framers of the charter could 

˜˚


be inferred from historical precedent and practice, and there are no such 

19
 Drafted by the Council of Europe in Strasbourg, France, the convention is available 
on the Web site of the Council of Europe at http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/
Html/185.htm.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
˜˚
The charter is in some ways internally inconsistent. It bans certain 
acts (uses of force) that could damage persons or property, but allows 
other acts (economic sanctions) that could damage persons or property. 
Offensive cyber operations may well magnify such inconsistencies.
The Geneva and Hague Conventions regulate how a nation engaged 

-
to be legally protected entities, such as hospitals); the principle of propor
-tionality (the military advantage gained by a military operation must not 

and the principle of distinction (military operations may be conducted 
only against ﬁmilitary objectivesﬂ and not against civilian targets). But as 
with the UN Charter, the Geneva Conventions are silent on cyberattack as 



-
one nation to acquire intelligence information from another. Espionage is 
an illegal activity under the domestic laws of virtually all nations, but not 
under international law. There are no limits in international law on the 
methods of collecting information, what kinds of information can be col
-lected, how much information can be collected, or the purposes for which 
collected information may be used.
As noted above, international law is also articulated through cus
-tomary international lawŠthat is, the general and consistent practices of 

in the form of treaties but rather is found in international case law. Here 
too, guidance for what counts as proper behavior in cyberspace is lack
-ing. Universal adherence to norms of behavior in cyberspace could help 
to provide nations with information about the intentions and capabilities 

such norms today.
Foreign Domestic Law
Foreign nations are governed by their own domestic laws that relate 

activities in cyberspace, the United States and that other nation are more 
likely to be able to work together to combat hostile cyber operations that 


the production of child pornography and spam.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 85But when security- or privacy-related laws of different nations are 
inconsistent, foreign law often has an impact on the ability of the United 
States to trace the origin of hostile cyber operations against the United 
States or to take action against perpetrators under another nation™s juris
-diction. Legal dissimilarities have in the past impeded both investigation 
and prosecution of hostile cyber operations that have crossed interna
-tional boundaries. 
4.2.4
 Organizational Purview

to a hostile operation in cyberspace by a nonstate actor is often char
-
requires a law enforcement response or a national security response. This 




a national security response paradigm, whereas a law enforcement para
-digm might call for strengthened passive defense measures to mitigate 
the immediate threat and other activities to identify and prosecute the 
perpetrators.

to be clear, and many factors relevant to a decision will not be known. For 

-mously, and clandestinely, knowledge about the scope and character of 
a cyberattack will be hard to obtain quickly. Attributing the incident to a 

period of time. Other nontechnical factors may also play into the assess
-ment of a cyber incident, such as the state of political relations with other 
nations that are capable of launching the cyber operations involved in 
the incident.
Once the possibility of a cyberattack is made known to national 
authorities, information must be gathered to determine perpetrator and 
purpose, and must be gathered using the available legal authorities. Some 
entity within the federal government integrates the relevant information, 
and then it or another higher entity (e.g., the National Security Council) 

a law enforcement or national security response is called for.
How might some of the factors described above be taken into account 

-ties are likely to predominate in the decision-making calculus if the scale 
of the attack is small, if the assets targeted are not important military 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
assets or elements of critical infrastructure, or if the attack has not created 

-
as a use of force or an armed attack on the United States had it been 
carried out with kinetic means would almost certainly be regarded as a 

-nation are the geographic origin of the attack and the nature of the party 
responsible for the attack (e.g., national government, terrorist group).
U.S. law has traditionally drawn distinctions between authorities 
granted to law enforcement (Title 18 of the U.S. Code), the Department 
of Defense (Title 10 of the U.S. Code), and the intelligence community 
(Title 50 of the U.S. Code), but in an era of international terrorist threats, 
these distinctions are not as clear in practice as when threats to the United 
States emanated primarily from other nations. That is, certain threats to 
the United States implicate both law enforcement and national security 
equities and call for a coordinated response by all relevant government 
agencies.
When critical infrastructure is involved, the entity responsible for 

taken has evolved over time. Today, the National Cybersecurity and Com
-
the U.S. government that fuses information on the above factors and inte
-grates the intelligence, national security, law enforcement, and private-

20
Whatever the mechanisms for aggregating and integrating informa
-tion related to a cyber incident, the function served is an essential oneŠ
and if the relationships, the communications pathways, the protocols for 

well in advance, responses to a large unanticipated cyber incident will be 
uncoordinated and delayed.
4.2.5
 Deterrence 
Deterrence relies on the idea that inducing a would-be intruder to 
refrain from acting in a hostile manner is as good as successfully defend
-ing against or recovering from a hostile cyber operation. Deterrence 
through the threat of retaliation is based on imposing negative conse
-quences on adversaries for attempting a hostile operation.
Imposing a penalty on an intruder serves two functions. It serves 
20
 See U.S. Department of Homeland Security, ﬁAbout the National Cybersecurity and 
Communications Integration Center,ﬂ available at http://www.dhs.gov/about-national-
cybersecurity-communications-integration-center.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 87the goal of justiceŠan intruder should not be able to cause damage with 
impunity, and the penalty is a form of punishment for the intruder™s 
misdeeds. In addition, it sets the precedent that misdeeds can and will 
result in a penalty for the intruder, and it seeks to instill in future would-
be intruders the fear that he or she will suffer from any misdeeds they 
might commit, and thus to deter such action, thereby discouraging further 
misdeeds.
What the nature of the penalty should be and who should impose the 
penalty are key questions in this regard. (Note that a penalty need not 

attribution of hostile action to a responsible party is also a threshold issue, 
because imposing penalties on parties not in fact responsible for a hostile 

For deterrence to be effective, the penalty must be one that affects 
the adversary™s decision-making process and changes the adversary™s 


to or destruction of the information technology assets used by the per
-petrator to conduct a hostile cyber operation; loss of or damage to other 
assets that are valuable to the perpetrator; or other actions that might 
damage the perpetrator™s interests.
But the appropriate choice of penalty is not separate from the party 

-tile operation might undertake destructive actions against a perpetrator 
raises the spectre of vigilantism and easily leads to questions of account
-ability and/or disproportionate response.
Law enforcement authorities and the judicial system rely on federal 

process in which a misdeed is investigated, perpetrators are prosecuted, 
and if found guilty are subject to penalties imposed by law. As noted in 
Section 4.2.3, a number of laws impose penalties for the willful conduct 


such laws will deter such violations.

national security, the penalty can take the form of diplomacy such as 
demarches and breaks in diplomatic relations, economic actions such as 
trade sanctions, international law enforcement such as actions taken in 
international courts, nonkinetic military operations such as deploying 
forces as visible signs of commitment and resolve, military operations 
such as the use of cruise missiles against valuable adversary assets, or 
cyber operations launched in response.

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
Deterrence was and is a central construct in contemplating the use of 
nuclear weapons and in nuclear strategyŠbecause effective defenses 

retaliation to persuade an adversary to refrain from using nuclear weap
-ons is regarded by many as the most plausible and effective alternative to 
ineffective or useless defenses. Indeed, deterrence of nuclear threats in the 
Cold War established the paradigm in which the conditions for successful 
deterrence are largely met.
It is an entirely open question whether cyber deterrence is a viable 
strategy. Although nuclear weapons and cyber weapons share one key 
characteristic (the superiority of offense over defense), they differ in many 


it is not plausible to assume the same for a large-scale cyberattack.
4.3
 ASSESSING CYBERSECURITY 

have strong intuitions that some systems are more secure than others, but 
assessing a system™s cybersecurity posture turns out to be a remarkably 
thorny problem. From a technical standpoint, assessing the nature and 

˜˚

precisely specify what it means for the system to operate securely. Indeed, 
many vulnerabilities in systems can be traced to misunderstandings or a 
lack of clarity about what a system should do under a particular set of 
circumstances (such as the use of penetration techniques or attack tools 
that the defender has never seen before).
˜˚
A system that contains functionality that should not be present 

-tionality may entail doing something harmful. Discovering that a system 

-
Viewing system security from an operational perspective rather than 
just a technical one shows that security is a holistic, emergent, multi
-
many factors other than technology affect the security of a system, includ
-
of the people using the system, the access control policy in place, the 
boundaries of the system (e.g., are users allowed to connect their own 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 89
threat against the system.
Accordingly, a discussion cast simply in terms of whether a system 
is or is not secure is almost certainly misleading. Assessing the security 


-
What does the discussion above imply for the development of cyber
-security metricsŠmeasurable quantities whose value provides informa
-
Metrics are intended to help individuals and companies make rational 
quantitative decisions about whether or not they have ﬁdone enoughﬂ 
with respect to cybersecurity. These parties would be able to quantify 

be able to determine if System A is more secure than System B. Good 
cybersecurity metrics would also support a more robust insurance market 
in cybersecurity founded on sound actuarial principles and knowledge.
The holy grail for cybersecurity analysts is an overall cybersecurity 
metric that is applicable to all systems and in all operating environ
-ments. The discussion above, not to mention several decades™ worth of 

be achieved for the foreseeable future. But other metrics may still be use
-ful under some circumstances.
It is important to distinguish between input metrics (metrics for what 
system users or designers do to the system), output metrics (metrics for 
what the system produces), and outcome metrics (metrics for what users 
or designers are trying to achieveŠthe ﬁwhyﬂ for the output metrics).
21
 ˜˚

-ment that are believed to be associated with desirable cybersecurity out
-

-rity are not validated in practice, and/or are established intuitively.
˜˚

-eters that are believed to be associated with desirable cybersecurity out
-
of cybersecurity incidents in a given year. Output metrics can often be 
assessed through the use of a red team. Sometimes known as ﬁwhite-hatﬂ 
21
 See Republic of South Africa, ﬁKey Performance Information Concepts,ﬂ Chapter 3 
in 
Framework for Managing Programme Performance Information
, National Treasury, Pretoria, 

framework/part3.pdf.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
or ﬁethicalﬂ hackers, a red team attempts to penetrate a system™s security 
under operational conditions with the blessing of senior management, 
and then reports to senior management on its efforts and what it has 
learned about the system™s security weaknesses. Red teaming is often the 


˜˚

-




number of cybersecurity incidents and thereby reduce the annual losses 

-curity budget unwisely, the presumed relationship between budget and 
number of incidents may well not hold.
Also, the correlation between improvement in a cybersecurity input 
metric and better cybersecurity outcomes may well be disrupted by an 

-ever, against adversaries that do not adaptŠand thus the resulting cyber
-security posture against the entire universe of threats may in fact be 
improved.
4.4
 ON THE NEED FOR RESEARCH
Within each of the approaches for improving cybersecurity described 


-lems. A good solution to a cybersecurity problem is one that is effective, is 


-
includes developing new knowledge on how to improve the prospects for 
deployment and use of known solutions to given problems.
Second, even assuming that everything known today about improv
-ing cybersecurity was immediately put into practice, the resulting cyber
-security postureŠalthough it would be stronger and more resilient than 
it is nowŠwould still be inadequate against today™s high-end threat, let 
alone tomorrow™s. Closing this gapŠa gap of knowledgeŠwill require 
substantial research as well.
Several principles, described in the 2007 NRC report 
Toward a Safer and 
More Secure Cyberspace
, should shape the cybersecurity research agenda:
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING CYBERSECURITY 91˜˚
Conduct cybersecurity research as though its application will be impor
-tant

-ing how cybersecurity technologies and practice can be applied in real-


factors as well as technological ones.
˜˚
Hedge against uncertainty in the nature and severity of the future 
cybersecurity threat
. A balance in the research portfolio between research 
addressing low-end and high-end threats is necessary. Operationally, it 
means that the R&D agenda in cybersecurity should be both broader 
and deeper than might be required if only low-end threats were at issue. 
(Because of the long lead time for large-scale deployments of any mea
-sure, part of the research agenda must include research directed at reduc
-ing those long lead times.)
˜˚
Ensure programmatic continuity
. A sound research program should 
also support a substantial effort in research areas with a long time hori
-
intermediate milestones, although such milestones should be treated as 
midcourse corrections rather than ﬁgo/no-goﬂ decisions that demoral
-
should engage both academic and industry actors, and it can involve col
-laboration early and often with technology-transition stakeholders, even 
in the basic science stages.
˜˚
Respect the need for breadth in the research agenda
. Cybersecurity 


to imagine that one or even a few promising approaches will prevent or 
even substantially mitigate cybersecurity risks in the future, and cyber
-security research must be conducted across a broad front. In addition, 
because qualitatively new attacks can appear with little warning, a broad 

develop countermeasures against these new attacks when they appear. 
Priorities are still important, but they should be determined by those in a 
position to respond most quickly to the changing environmentŠnamely, 
the research constituencies that provide peer review and the program 
managers of the various research-supporting agencies. Notions of breadth 
and diversity in the cybersecurity research agenda should themselves 
be interpreted broadly as well, and might well be integrated into other 
research
 programs such as software and systems engineering, operating 
systems, programming languages, networks, Web applications, and so on. 
˜˚
Disseminate new knowledge and artifacts (e.g., software and hardware 
prototypes) to the research community. 
Dissemination of research results 
beyond one™s own laboratory is necessary if those results are to have a 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
wide impactŠa point that argues for cybersecurity research to be con
-
be shared as widely as possible includes threat and incident information 
that can help guide future research.
As for the impact of research on the nation™s cybersecurity posture, 

-tial difference at all. Indeed, many factors must be aligned if research is 

regard security as a product attribute that is coequal with performance 
and cost; IT researchers must be willing to value cybersecurity research 
as much as they value research into high-performance or cost-effective 
computing; and IT purchasers must be willing to incur present-day costs 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.93
5Tensions Between Cybersecurity 
and Other Public Policy Concerns
As noted in Chapter 1, progress in public policy to improve the 
nation™s cybersecurity posture has not been as rapid as might have been 

-
measures taken to improve cybersecurity potentially have negative effects 

-cant tensions.
5.1
 ECONOMICS
Economics and cybersecurity are intimately intertwined in the public 
policy debate in two waysŠthe scale of economic losses due to adversary 

and nature of vendor and end-user investments in cybersecurity. (To date, 
the economic losses due to cyberattack are negligible by comparison.)
5.1.1
 Economic Approaches to Enhancing Cybersecurity 
As implied in Chapter 4, economic approaches to promote cyberse
-curity should identify actions that lower barriers and eliminate disincen
-

cybersecurity or actions that cause harm in cyberspace. Some of the pos
-
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
national consensus on which of these, if any, should be implemented as 
policy, and legislation has not been passed on any of these approaches. 
˜˚

  
Š One type of information is more and better information about 
threats and vulnerabilities, which could enable individual organi
-


victim to a given threat.
  
Š A second type of information is information about an individual 

-
appropriate best-practice cybersecurity measures for those sectors. 
Another party, such as a government regulatory agency in the case 

-
Commission for publicly held companies, would audit the adequacy 

results of such audits.
1 Publicity about such results would in prin
-
postures.
˜˚
Insurance. The insurance industry may have a role in incentiv
-
losses incurred because of cybercrime will have lower premiums if they 
have stronger cybersecurity postures, and thus market forces will help 
to drive improvements in cybersecurity. A variety of reasons stand in the 
way of establishing a viable cyber-insurance market: the unavailability 
of actuarial data to set premiums appropriately; the highly correlated 
nature of losses from outbreaks (e.g., from viruses) in a largely homoge
-
the intangible nature of losses and assets, and unclear legal grounds.
˜˚

. This approach is based on three 


-
-petitive position in the marketplace. Relevant standards-setting bodies 
include the National Institute of Standards and Technology for the U.S. 
1 President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, 
Immediate Opportunities 
for Strengthening the Nation™s Cybersecurity,
 November 2013, available at http://www.white
 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 95
the private sector.
˜˚
Nonregulatory public-sector mechanisms
. This approach uses some of 
the tools below to promote greater attention to and action on cybersecurity.
  
Š Procurement regulations can be used to insist that information 
technology systems delivered to government are more secure. With 
such systems thus available, vendors might be able to offer them to 
other customers as well.
  
Š The federal government can choose to do business only with 

  
Š The federal government itself could improve its own cybersecu
-


investment in cybersecurity.
  
Š Public recognition of adherence to high cybersecurity stan
-

  
Š Voluntary standards setting by government can specify cyberse
-
˜˚
Liability. This approach presumes that vendors and/or system 

-security breaches will make greater efforts than they do today to reduce 
the likelihood of such breaches. Opponents argue that the threat of liabil
-
secrets, and reduce the competitiveness of products subject to such forces. 
Moreover, they argue that vendors and operators should not be held 
responsible for cybersecurity incidents that can result from factors that 
are not under their control.
˜˚
Direct regulation
. Regulation would be based on enforceable man
-dates for various cybersecurity measures. This is the ultimate form of 
changing the business casesŠcomply or face a penalty. Direct regulation 

kinds of standards relating to cybersecurity ﬁbest practicesﬂ regarding 
the services they provide to consumers or their own internal practices. 
Opponents of direct regulation argue that several factors would make 

2 For 

used to address actual threats. Costs of implementation would be highly 
variable and dependent on a number of factors beyond the control of the 
2 
Security: Implications for Regulatory Policy,ﬂ 
Journal of Regulatory Economics
 31(1):37-55, 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
regulated party. Risks vary greatly from system to system. There is wide 

measures. 

-tant in cybersecurity, the present administration is promulgating its 
Cybersecurity Framework. Under development as this report is being 
written, the framework is a set of core practices to develop capabilities 
to manage cybersecurity.
3 To encourage critical infrastructure companies 


4˜˚
Special consideration in the awards process for federal critical 
infrastructure grants; 
˜˚
Priority in receiving certain government services, such as technical 
assistance in non-emergency situations;
˜˚
Reduced tort liability, limited indemnity, higher burdens of proof 
to establish liability, or the creation of a federal legal privilege that pre
-empts state disclosure requirements; and 
˜˚
Public recognition for adopters of the framework.
5.1.2
 Economic Impact of Compromises in Cybersecurity 
Regarding the negative economic impact of compromises in cyber
-security, numbers as high as $1 trillion annually have been heard in the 
public debate, and in 2012, the commander of U.S. Cyber Command 
asserted that the loss of industrial information and intellectual property 
through cyber espionage constitutes the ﬁgreatest transfer of wealth in 
history.ﬂ
5 But in point of fact, the uncertainty in the actual magnitude is 
quite large, and other analysts speculate that the actual numbersŠthough 

known estimates.

3 
-rity Framework,ﬂ available at http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/.
4 Michael Daniel, ﬁIncentives to Support the Adoption of the Cybersecurity Frame
-work,ﬂ August 6, 2013, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2013/08/06/
incentives-support-adoption-cybersecurity-framework. 
5

posts/2012/07/09/nsa_chief_cybercrime_constitutes_the_greatest_ transfer_of_wealth_in_

-sial and are discussed in Section 3.6 on threat assessment.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 97the negative economic impact of adversarial cyber operations. However, 
intellectual property is unlike physical property in some very important 
ways, not the least of which is the fact that ﬁstolenﬂ intellectual property is 
still available

control over it. ﬁStolenﬂ intellectual property is really copied intellectual 


the value of intellectual property what it cost to produce that intellectual 


is no assurance that a taker of intellectual property will be able to use it 
properly or effectively.
Uncertainties also apply to valuing the loss of sensitive business infor
-mation (such as negotiating strategies and company inside information). 

Company B, a competitor, knows it, Company B may be able to undercut 
Company A and unfairly win a contract. Insider information about Com
-pany C may lead to stock market manipulation. The loss of a contract is 
easy to value, but given that many factors usually affect the outcomes 
of such competitions, how could one tie a competitive loss to the loss of 


-vice disruptions often delay service but do not deny it, and a customer 
who visits a Web site that is inaccessible today may well visit it tomor
-row when it is accessible. Should the opportunity cost of a disruption 


-
company suffering a cybersecurity incident that is made public may see 
its stock price suffer, but a McAfee-CSIS report indicates that such a price 
drop usually lasts no more than a quarter.
6Last, a number of other factors also affect the reliability of various 


from reporting it. The surveys taken to determine economic loss are often 
not representative, and questions about loss can be structured in a way 
that does not allow erroneously large estimates to be corrected by errors 
on the other side of the ledger.
76 Center for Strategic and International Studies, 
The Economic Impact of Cybercrime and 
Cyber Espionage
rp-economic-impact-cybercrime.pdf.
7 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
Estimates of losses due to cybercrime are intended to motivate action 
to deal with the cybercrime problem, and larger estimates presumably 
make the problem more urgent for policy makers to address. But disputes 
about methodology can erode the credibility of demands to take imme
-diate action, even when the lower end of such estimates may be large 
enough from a public policy standpoint to warrant action.
Perhaps more important, even if the economic losses are large, users 
of information technology may be making a judgment that such losses are 
simply a cost of doing business. Although they may be loath to acknowl
-edge it publicly, some users argue that they will not invest in security 
improvements until the losses they are incurring make such an invest
-ment economically worthwhile. Although economic calculations of this 
nature are unlikely to be the only reason that users fail to invest at a level 


5.2
 INNOVATION
A stated goal of U.S. public policy is to promote innovation in prod
-ucts and services in the private sector. In information technology (as in 



offering, at least until a competitor comes along. During this period, the 
vendor has the chance to establish relationships with customers and to 

Furthermore, customers of the initial product or service may well be 
reluctant to incur the costs of switching to a competitor.
Policy actions that detract from the ability of the private sector to 
innovate are inherently suspect from this perspective, and in particular 
policy actions to promote greater attention to cybersecurity in the private 
sector often run up against concerns that these actions will reduce inno
-vation. The logic of reducing time to market for information technology 
products or services runs counter to enhancing security, which adds com
-

-ment is not conducive to focusing on security from the outset. Software 

are thrown away. In this environment, it makes very little sense to invest 
up front in that kind of adherence unless such adherence is relatively 

Furthermore, to apply secure development principles such as those 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 99very well and in some considerable detail just what the ultimate artifact 
is supposed to do. But some large software systems emerge from incre
-mental additions to small software systems in ways that have not been 
anticipated by the designers of the original system, and sometimes users 
change their minds about the features they want, or even worse, want 
contradictory features.
Functionality that users demand is sometimes in tension with secu
-rity as well. Users demand attributes such as ease of use, interoperability, 
and backward compatibility. Often, information technology purchasers 

ease of use, performance, and dominance in a market, although in recent 
years the criteria for product selection have broadened to include security 


-ping a productŠwhether to ship with the security features turned on or 

often get in the way of using the product, an outcome that may lead to 
frustration and customer dissatisfaction. Inability to use the product may 
also result in a phone call to the vendor for customer service, which is 

with security features turned off tends to reduce one source of customer 
complaints and makes it easier for the customer to use the product. The 

-rity breaches that may occur as a result, at which point tying those con
-
-stances, many vendors will chose to ship with security turned offŠand 
many customers will simply accept forever the vendor™s initial default 
settings.
Restricting users™ access privileges often has serious usability impli
-cations and makes it harder for users to get legitimate work done, as for 

a time-urgent basis. Program features that enable adversary access can be 
turned off, but doing so may disable functionality needed or desired by 
users. In some cases, closing down access paths and introducing cyberse
-curity to a system™s design slows it down or makes it harder to use. Other 

to respond quickly in an emergency situation.
At the level of the computer programs needed for an innovative 
product or service, implementing the checking, monitoring, and recovery 
needed for secure operation requires a lot of computation and does not 
come for free. In addition, user demands for backward compatibility at 
the applications level often call for building into new systems some of the 
same security vulnerabilities present in the old systems. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
5.3
 CIVIL LIBERTIES

substantial controversy. Civil liberties have an important informational 
dimension to them, and cybersecurity is in large part about protecting 
information, so it is not surprising that measures taken to enhance cyber
-security might raise civil liberties concerns.
5.3.1
 Privacy



information, the term ﬁprivacyﬂ usually refers to making ostensibly pri
-vate information about an individual unavailable to parties who should 
not have that information. Privacy interests attach to the gathering, con
-trol, protection, and use of information about individuals.
Privacy and cybersecurity intersect in a number of ways, although the 

-vacy.
8 In one basic sense, cybersecurity measures can protect privacyŠan 
intruder seeking ostensibly private information (e.g., personal e-mails or 

stymied by good cybersecurity measures.
But certain measures taken to enhance cybersecurity can also violate 



all
 in-bound network 

than its intended recipient is regarded by some as a violation of privacy, 

-
Another measure for enhancing cybersecurity calls for sharing tech
-
identifying and responding to intrusions. Technical information is infor
-mation associated directly with the mechanisms used to effect access, to 


8 What an individual regards as ﬁprivateﬂ may not be the same as what the law 
designates as being worthy of privacy protectionŠan individual may believe a record of 

law may say otherwise. No technical security measure will protect the privacy interests of 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 101˜˚
Malware (or intrusion) signatures
. Sharing such information could 
help installations identify malware before it has a chance to affect vulner
-able systems or networks. 
˜˚
Time-correlated information on intrusions
. Such information is an 
essential aspect of attack assessment, because simultaneous intrusions on 
multiple installations across the nation might signal the onset of a major 
attack. Important installations thus must be able to report their status to 
authorities responsible for coordinating such information.
˜˚
Frequency, nature, and effect of intrusions
. How often are intrusions of 


In some cases, real-time or near-real-time information sharing is a 
prerequisite for a prompt response. In other cases, after-the-fact coordina
-tion of information from multiple sources is necessary for forensic pur
-poses or for detecting similar intrusions in the future. Nonetheless, many 

about possible antitrust or privacy violations and loss of advantages with 

-times reluctant to share such information with government agencies, for 
fear of attracting regulatory attention. Similar issues also arise regarding 
the sharing of threat information among agencies of the U.S. government, 
especially those within the intelligence community. The result can be that 
a particular method of intrusion may be known to some (e.g., elements of 
the intelligence community or the military) and unknown to others (e.g. 
industry and the research community), thus impeding or delaying the 
development of effective countermeasures.


information is not removed from the information to be shared, or if the 
scope of the allowed purposes for sharing information goes beyond mat
-ters related to cybersecurity. The essential privacy point is that systemati
-
inspection of 
all

in any way. If the entities with whom the information is shared are law 
enforcement or national security authorities, privacy concerns are likely 
to be even stronger.
5.3.2
 Free Expression

of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly, and freedom to peti
-tion the government, encompasses civil liberties that are often infringed 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
when the causes involved are unpopular. In such cases, one way of pro
-
means for them to do so anonymously. Thus, an individual may choose 
to participate in an unattributable online discussion that is critical of 


-


to strong authentication at the packet level. Few people object to online 
banks using strong authenticationŠbut many have strong objections to 
mandatory strong authentication that is independent of the application in 
question, and in particular they are concerned that strong authentication 


that mandatory strong authentication should apply to a second Internet, 
which would be used by critical infrastructure providers and others who 
preferred to operate in a strongly authenticated environment. Although a 
new network with such capabilities would indeed help to identify attack
-ers under some circumstances, attackers would nevertheless invariably 
seek other ways to counter the authentication capabilities of this alterna
-tive, such as compromising the machines connected to the new network.
9In addition, a new network may come with a number of drawbacks, 
such as retaining the economies of the present-day Internet and prevent
-ing any connection, physical or logical, to the regular Internet through 

with large networks indicates that maintaining an actual air-gap isolation 
between two Internets would be all but impossibleŠnot for technical 
reasons but because of a human tendency to make such connections for 
the sake of convenience.
5.3.3
 Due Process
An important element of protecting civil liberties is due processŠthe 
state cannot deprive individuals of civil liberties in the absence of due 
process. Some cybersecurity measures can put pressure on due process. 

-

civilians in the process of responding to an adversarial cyber operation.
9 Steven
 M. Bellovin, ﬁIdentity and Security,ﬂ 
IEEE Security and Privacy
 8(2, March- 
April):88, 2010.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 103Also, it is often alleged that responses to cyber intrusions must happen 
very rapidlyŠin a matter of millisecondsŠbecause the intrusions occur 
very rapidly. Leaving aside the question of whether a rapid response is in 
fact required in all circumstances, even those situations in which a rapid 
response 
is
 necessary raise the question of whether due process can be 

-bution of a cyber intrusion to the legally responsible actor, may simply 
be impossible to accomplish in a short time, and yet accomplishment of 
these tasks may be necessary elements of due process.
5.4
 INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND NATIONAL SECURITY
5.4.1
 Internet Governance
In the international environment of the Internet, ﬁInternet gover
-
-net governance includes management and coordination of the technical 
underpinnings of the Internet such as the Domain Name System, and 
development of the standards and protocols that enable the Internet to 
function.
10

there is not broad international agreement, would include matters such 
as controlling spam; dealing with use of the Internet for illegal purposes; 
resolving the ﬁdigital divideﬂ between developed and developing coun
-tries; protecting intellectual property other than domain names; protect
-
e-commerce.
11International debates over what should constitute the proper scope 
of Internet governance are quite contentious, with the United States gen
-

security from threats in cyberspace.
But different nations have different conceptions of what constitutes 


the U.S. conception of cybersecurity. These nations argue that Internet 

poses threats to their national security and political stability (e.g., news 
10
 Lennard G. Kruger, ﬁInternet Governance and the Domain Name System: Issues for 
Congress,ﬂ Congressional Research Service, November 13, 2013, available at http://www.
fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42351.pdf.
11 
National Research Council, 
Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and 
Internet Navigation
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
stories about corruption at high levels of government) and thus that 



-ern nations have opposed such measures in multiple forums, and in 
particular have opposed attempts to broaden the Internet governance 

-nance are thus often disputes over content regulation in the name of 
Internet security.

-dards for passing information and what these protocols and standards 


both in other nations and in the United StatesŠthat would require packet-
level authentication in the basic Internet protocols in the name of pro
-moting greater security. Requiring authentication in this manner would 
implicate all of the civil liberties issues discussed above as well as the 
performance and feasibility issues discussed in Chapter 2. 
5.4.2
 Reconciling Tensions Between Cybersecurity and Surveillance
As is true for all nations, the United States has multiple policy objec
-
-ing cybersecurity internationally, as illustrated in the 2011 White House 
International Strategy for Cyberspace
, a document stating that ﬁassuring 

the security and privacy of data
 [emphasis 
added], and the integrity of the interconnected networks themselves are 
all essential to American and global economic prosperity, security, and the 
promotion of universal rights.ﬂ
12
The United States also collects information around the world for 
intelligence purposes, and much of such collection depends on the pen
-etration of information technology systems and networks to access the 
information transiting through them. Cybersecurity measures taken by 
the users, owners, and operators of these systems and networks thus tend 
to frustrate intelligence collection efforts, and according to public reports, 
the United States has undertaken a variety of efforts to circumvent or 
weaken these measures.
12
 White House, 
International Strategy for Cyberspace: Prosperity, Security, and Openness in 
a Networked World

rss_viewer/international_strategy_ for_cyberspace.pdf.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 105On the face of it, these two policy objectives are inconsistent with 
each otherŠone promotes cybersecurity internationally and the other 

makers have pursued mutually incompatible objectivesŠgovernments 

of incompatible objectives is to acknowledge the tension between them, 

of another, and the likely operational impact of policy tradeoffs made in 
different ways must be assessed and compared.
An illustration of this tradeoff is the Communications Assistance for 
Law Enforcement Act (CALEA) of 1994, which directs the telecommunica
-tions industry to design, develop, and deploy systems that support law 
enforcement requirements for electronic surveillance. Intelligence derived 
from electronic surveillance of adversaries (including criminals, hostile 
nations, and terrorists) is an important factor in shaping the U.S. response 
to adversary activities. But measures taken to facilitate CALEA-like access 

of the systems affected by those measures.
13
Efforts continue today to introduce means of government access 
to the infrastructure of electronic communications,
14
 and some of these 
efforts are surreptitious. Regardless of the legality and/or policy wisdom 
of these efforts, a fundamental tradeoff faces national policy makersŠ
whether reduced security for the communications infrastructure is worth 

-
-munications may be most obvious in the short term, whereas the costs of 
reduced security are likely to be felt in the long term. Advocates for main
-taining government access to adversary communications in this manner 


Opponents of this approach will argue the reverse.
13 

Affair,ﬂ 
IEEE Spectrum 

telecom/security/the-athens-affair.
14
 
in the NSA Surveillance Revelations,ﬂ 
IEEE Security and Privacy 

2013, available at http://www.computer.org/cms/Computer.org/ComputingNow/pdfs/
 MakingSenseFromSnowden-IEEESecurityAndPrivacy.pdf, and ﬁMaking Sense of Snowden, 

IEEE Security and Privacy 12(1, 

MSP.2013.161.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
5.4.3
 Norms of Behavior in Cyberspace 
International norms of behavior are intended to guide states™ actions, 
sustain partnerships, and support the rule of law.
15 Norms of international 
behavior are established in many ways, including the customary practice 

behavior that is permitted or proscribed.
The U.S. 
International Strategy for Cyberspace
 states that in cyberspace, 
the United States supports the development of a variety of norms for 
upholding fundamental freedoms; respect for property; valuing privacy; 
protection from crime; right of self-defense; global interoperability; net
-work stability; reliable access; multi-stakeholder governance; and cyber
-security due diligence. But even a casual inspection of this set of possible 
norms would suggest that an international consensus for these norms 
would not be easy to achieve.


to which other parties are in fact complying with themŠparties can 


-space to an appropriately responsible actor is problematic under many 


behavior in cyberspace.
For illustrative purposes, two domains in which norms may be rel
-evant to cybersecurity relate to conducting cyber operations for differ
-
acceptable and unacceptable behavior.
Distinguishing Between Cyber Operations Conducted for 
 Different Purposes
In the cybersecurity domain, norms of behavior are contentious as 

information related to national security and foreign policy and collecting 
information related to economic and business interests, arguing that the 

-tional law) and that the second constitutes theft of intellectual property 
and trade secrets for economic advantage. 
15
 White House, 
International Strategy for CyberspaceŠProsperity, Security, and Openness 
in a Networked World,
 May 2011, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 107Most other nations do not draw such a sharp line between these two 
kinds of information collection. But even were all nations to agree in 
principle that such a line should be drawn, how might these two types 
of information (information related to national security and information 




-
-
and others, remain to be answered.
And a further policy debate remains to be settled. Should the United 
States maintain the distinction between national security information and 

advantages and disadvantages, if any, to the United States of abandoning 

Today, the United States does not target intelligence assets for the 


on the desire of the United States to uphold a robust legal regime for the 

competitors from different countries to make their best business cases on 



proprietary information from the U.S. intelligence community about the 
future generations of foreign products, such as airplanes or automobiles, 
or about business operations and contract negotiating positions of their 
competitors.
Such a change in policy would require the U.S. government to wrestle 



-

well with foreign companies that they were trying to persuade to relo
-cate to the United States. And that use of its intelligence agencies might 
well undercut the basis on which the United States could object to other 

industries and lead to a ﬁWild Westﬂ environment in which anything 
goes.

-
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
cyberattacks use the same approaches to penetrating a system or net
-
if an intrusion is detected, the underlying intent may not be clear until 
some time has passed. Given that the distinction between an attack and 

States respond when it is faced with a cyber intrusion of unknown 


agents in some critical military networks of the United States to collect 
intelligence information. These agents are designed to be reprogrammable 
in placeŠthat is, Elbonia can update these agents with new capabilities. 
During a time of crisis, U.S. authorities discover some of these agents and 
learn that they have been present for a while, that they are sending back 
to Elbonia very sensitive information, and that their capabilities can be 
changed on a moment™s notice. Even if no harmful action has yet been 
taken, it is entirely possible that the United States would see itself as being 
the target of an impending Elbonian cyberattack.
The possibility of confusion also applies if the United States con
-
-tion is nondestructive, howŠif at allŠshould the United States inform 

are particularly important during periods of crisis or tension. During 
such periods, military action may be more likely, and it is entirely plau
-sible that both sides would increase the intensity of the security scans 
each conducts on its critical systems and networks. More intense secu
-rity scans often reveal offensive software agents implanted long before 
the onset of a crisis and that may have been overlooked in ordinary 
scans, and yet discovery of these agents may well prompt fears that an 
attack may be impending.
16

attack (or preparations for attack) should not preclude the possibility of 

suggest that the nature of a targeted entity can provide useful clues to 

measures in cyberspace, such as agreements to refrain from attacking 
certain kinds of facilities, can help as well. Such questions are open at 
this time.
16 
Strategic 
Studies Quarterly
 6(3):46-70, 2012.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 109Arms Control in Cyberspace
17
The intent of an arms control agreement in general is usually to 

-
or multilateral, and they can be cast formally as treaties, informally as 
memorandums of understanding, or even more informally as coordinated 
unilateral policies.
In principle, arms control agreements can limit or ban the signatories 
from conducting some combination of research, development, testing, 
production, procurement, or deployment on certain kinds of weapons; 
limit or ban the use of certain weapons and/or the circumstances under 
which certain weapons may or may not be used; or oblige signatories to 
take or to refrain from taking certain actions under certain circumstances 

-dence-building measures).
For cyber weapons (where a cyber weapon is an information tech
-nology-based capability for conducting some kind of cyber intrusion), 
any limit on research, development, testing, production, procurement, or 
deployment of certain kinds of weapons is unlikely to be feasible. One 

that such weapons have legitimate uses (e.g., both military and civilian 
entities use such weapons to test their own defenses). Distinguishing 
offensive capabilities developed for cyberattack from those used to shore 

impossible task.


-cial systems or power grids, much as nations today have agreed to avoid 
targeting hospitals in a kinetic attack. Agreements to restrict use are by 

has not prevented the world™s nations (including the United States) from 

-ableﬂ restrictions.

One issue is that nonstate actors may have access to some of the same 
cyber capabilities as do national signatories, and nonstate actors are 
unlikely to adhere to any agreement that restricts their use of such capa
-
17
 Much of the discussion in this section is based on Herbert Lin, ﬁA Virtual Necessity: 
Some Modest Steps Toward Greater Cybersecurity,ﬂ 
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 
Septem
-ber 1, 2012, available at http://www.thebulletin.org/2012/september/virtual-necessity-
some-modest-steps-toward-greater-cybersecurity. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110
 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
ultimate origin. If the ultimate origin of a cyberattack can be concealed 
successfully, holding the violator of an agreement accountable becomes 
problematic.

-plicate arms control agreements in cyberspace. A detected act of cyber 

-
-tation would go far beyond the current bounds of international law and 

for essentially all nations.

used to promote stability and mutual understanding when kinetic weap
-ons are involved. Some possible TCBMs in cyberspace include (but are 
not limited to):
˜˚

. Two or more nations agree to notify each other 
of serious cyber incidents, and to provide each other with information 
about these incidents.
˜˚
Joint exercises

a simulated cyber crisis that affects or involves both nations to see what 
information each side would need from the other.
˜˚
Publication of declaratory policies and/or doctrine
 about how a nation 
intends to use cyber capabilities, both offensive and defensive, to support 
its national interests.
˜˚

 regarding certain activities that might 
be viewed as hostile or escalatory. 
˜˚
Direct communication with counterparts
 during times of tension or 
crisis. 
˜˚
Mutual cooperation
 on matters related to securing cyberspace (e.g., 
jointly investigating the source of an attack). 
˜˚
Imposing on nation-states an obligation
 to assist in the investigation 
and mitigation of cyber intrusions emanating from their territories.
Perhaps the most important challenge to the development of useful 
TCBMs in cyberspace is that offensive operations fundamentally depend 

-sures are, as the name suggests, intended to be reassuring to an adversary; 
the success of most offensive operations depends on an adversary being 
falsely reassured. Thus, the misuse of these measures may well be an 
element of an adversary™s hostile use of cyberspace. In addition, many 
TCBMs are conventions for behavior (e.g., rules of the road) and as such 
do not speak to intentŠbut in cyberspace, intent may be the primary 
difference between a possibly prohibited act, such as certain kinds of 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 111
-ing in a multilateral way various nations™ views about the nature of cyber 
weapons, cyberspace, offensive operations, and so on could promote 
greater mutual understanding among the parties involved.

-tively refute, even in principle, the possibility of meaningful arms control 
agreements in cyberspace is open to question today. What is clear is that 
progress in cyber arms control, if it is feasible at all, is likely to be slow.
5.4.4
 Managing the Global Supply Chain for Information Technology

China play major roles in the IT industry, and Ireland, Israel, Korea, 


-


traces possible origins for some components of a laptop computer.) Inte
-grated circuits at the heart of a product might be designed and devel
-oped in the United States, fabricated in Taiwan, and incorporated into a 
TABLE 5.1
 Supply-Chain GeographyŠAn IllustrationComponent of 
 Laptop ComputerLocation of Facilities Potentially Used by Supplier(s)Liquid crystal display 

Slovac Republic, South Korea, Taiwan
Memory 

Puerto Rico, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, United 
StatesProcessor 
Canada, China, Costa Rica, Ireland, Israel, Malaysia, 
Singapore, United States, Vietnam
Motherboard 
Taiwan
Hard disk drive

Singapore, Thailand, United States

National Security-Related Agencies Need to 
Better Address Risks,
 
at http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-361.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112
 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
product assembled from components supplied from around the world. 
Similar considerations apply to softwareŠand software is important to 
any device, component, system, or network.
The global nature of the IT supply chain raises concerns that foreign 
suppliers may be subject to pressures from their governments to manipu
-late the supply of critical components of IT systems or networks or, even 
worse, introduce substandard, faulty, counterfeit, or deliberately vulner
-able components into the supply chain. U.S. users of these components, 
which include both commercial and government entities, would thus be 
using components that weakened their cybersecurity posture.

of the components it provides employ a number of strategies, sometimes 
in concert with each other:
18
˜˚
Using trusted suppliers
. Such parties must be able to show that they 
have taken adequate measures to ensure the dependability of the com
-ponents they supply or ship. Usually, such measures would be regarded 
as ﬁbest practicesﬂ that should be taken by suppliers whether they are 
foreign or domestic.
˜˚
Diversifying suppliers
. The use of multiple suppliers increases the 


˜˚
Reducing the time between choosing a supplier and taking possession 
of the components provided
. A shorter interval reduces the window within 

˜˚
Testing components
. Components can be tested to ensure that they 

rule, testing can indicate only the presence of a problemŠnot its absence. 
Thus, testing generally cannot demonstrate the presence of unwanted 
(and hostile) functionality in a component, although testing may be able 
to provide evidence that the component does in fact perform as it is sup
-posed to perform.
The strategies described above address some of the important process 
and performance aspects of ensuring the integrity of the IT supply chain. 
But implementing these strategies entails some cost, and many of the 
most stringent strategies (e.g., self-fabrication of integrated circuit chips) 

18 National Institute of Standards and Technology, ﬁNIST Special Publication 800-

2010, available at http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-53-Rev3/sp800-53-rev3-

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 113
fair to say that the risk associated with corruption in the supply chain can 
be managed and mitigated to a certain degreeŠbut not avoided entirely.
5.4.5
 Role of Offensive Operations in Cyberspace 
Policy regarding the use of offensive operations in cyberspace is gen
-
can be conducted for cyber defensive purposes and also for other purpos-es.
19
 Furthermore, according to a variety of public sources, policy regard
-ing offensive operations in cyberspace includes the following points:
˜˚
The United States would respond to hostile acts in cyberspace as it 
would to any other threat to the nation, and reserves the right to use all 
necessary meansŠdiplomatic, informational, military, and economicŠas 
appropriate and consistent with applicable international law, in order to 
defend the nation, its allies, its partners, and its interests.
20
˜˚
The laws of war apply to cyberspace,
21
 and because the United 
States has made a commitment to behaving in accordance with these laws, 

to the laws of war.
˜˚
Offensive operations in cyberspace offer ﬁunique and unconven
-tional capabilities to advance U.S. national objectives around the world 
with little or no warning to the adversary or target and with potential 
effects ranging from subtle to severely damaging.ﬂ
22
˜˚
Offensive operations likely to have effects in the United States 

23
˜˚
Cyber operations, including offensive operations, that are likely to 

against the United States; damage to property; serious adverse foreign 
policy or economic impacts) require presidential approval.
24
 19 National Research Council, 
Technology, Policy, Law, and Ethics Regarding U.S. Acquisition 
and Use of Cyberattack Capabilities
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2009.
20
 White House, 
International Strategy for CyberspaceŠProsperity, Security, and Openness 
in a Networked World,
 May 2011, available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/

21 

Inter-Agency Legal Conference, Ft. Meade, Md., September 18, 2012, available at http://
opiniojuris.org/2012/09/19/harold-koh-on-international-law-in-cyberspace/.
22 Robert Gellman, ﬁSecret Cyber Directive Calls for Ability to Attack Without Warning,ﬂ 
Washington Post

23
 Gellman, ﬁSecret Cyber Directive Calls for Ability to Attack Without Warning,ﬂ 2013.
24
 Glenn Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill, ﬁObama Orders U.S. to Draw Up Over
-seas Target List for Cyberattacks,ﬂ 
The Guardian

theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/07/obama-china-targets-cyber-overseas.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114
 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
However, despite public knowledge of these points, the United States 
has not articulated publicly a military doctrine for how cyber capabili
-ties might be used operationally. (As a notable point of comparison, U.S. 
approaches to using nuclear weapons were publicly discussed during the 
Cold War.)
A particularly important question about the use of offensive cyber 


-

especially in the nuclear domain, are unlikely to apply to escalation 
dynamics in cyberspace because of the profound differences between the 

the fact that attribution is much more uncertain, the ability of nonstate 

a multitude of states that have nontrivial capabilities to conduct cyber 
operations.
Last, the fact that the Department of Defense is willing to consider 
undertaking offensive operations in cyberspace as part of defending its 
own systems and networks raises the question of whether offensive oper
-ations might be useful to defend non-DOD systems, and in particular to 
defend entities in the private sector. Today, a private-sector entity that 
is the target of hostile actions in cyberspace can respond to such threats 

its defensive posture, and it can seek the assistance of law enforcement 
authorities to investigate and to take action to mitigate the threat.
Although both of these responses (if properly implemented) are 
helpful, their effectiveness is limited. Tightening security often reduces 
important functionality in the systems being locked downŠthey become 

posture is also costly. Law enforcement authorities can help, but they 
cannot do so quickly and the resources they can bring to bear are usually 
overwhelmed by the demands for their assistance.
A number of commentators and reports have suggested that a more 
aggressive defensive postureŠthat is, an active defenseŠis appropriate 
under some circumstances.
25
 Such an approach, especially if carried out 
25 
-Washington Post
, February 27, 2012, available at http://www.washington
 post.com/blogs/checkpoint-washington/post/active-defense-at-center-of-debate-on-

Hackers, Firms Salting Their Servers with Fake Data,ﬂ 
Washington Post

available at http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/to-thwart-

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TENSIONS BETWEEN CYBERSECURITY AND OTHER POLICY CONCERNS 115
by the targeted private-sector entities, raises a host of technical, legal, and 
policy issues. 
A U.S. policy that condones aggressive self-help might serve as a 
deterrent that reduces the cyber threat to private-sector entities. Alter
-natively, it might encourage a free-for-all environment in which any 

-ing offensive operations against the alleged offender. This debate is not 
likely to be settled soon.
d1ce6d0ed278_story.html; David E. Sanger and Thom Shanker, ﬁN.S.A. Devises Radio 
Pathway into Computers,ﬂ 
New York Times

nytimes.com/2014/01/15/us/nsa-effort-pries-open-computers-not-connected-to-internet.
html; and Thom Shanker, ﬁU.S. Weighs Its Strategy on Warfare in Cyberspace,ﬂ 
New York 
Times
, October 19, 2011, available at http://www.nytimes.com/2011/10/19/world/africa/
united-states-weighs-cyberwarfare-strategy.html.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116
6Findings and Conclusion
6.1
 FINDINGS
Finding 1. Cybersecurity is a never-ending battle. A permanently 
decisive solution to the problem will not be found in the foresee
-able future. 
For the most part, cybersecurity problems result from the inherent 

-nology systems, and human fallibility in making judgments about what 
actions and information are safe or unsafe from a cybersecurity perspec
-
None of these factors is likely to change in the foreseeable future, and thus 
there are no silver bulletsŠor even combinations of silver bulletsŠthat 
can ﬁsolve the problemﬂ permanently.
In addition, threats to cybersecurity evolve. As new defenses emerge 
to stop older threats, intruders adapt by developing new tools and tech
-niques to compromise security. As information technology becomes more 
ubiquitously integrated into society, the incentives to compromise the 
security of deployed IT systems grow. As innovation produces new infor
-mation technology applications, new venues for criminals, terrorists, and 
other hostile parties also emerge, along with new vulnerabilities that 

-ple with access to cyberspace multiplies the number of possible victims 
and also the number of potential malevolent actors.

-At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION 117

an ongoing process rather than something that can be done once and 
then forgotten. AdversariesŠespecially at the high-end part of the threat 
spectrumŠconstantly adapt and evolve their intrusion techniques, and 
the defender must adapt and evolve as well.
These comments should not be taken to indicate a standstill in the 


products in response to end-user concerns over security. Many of today™s 
products are by many measures more secure than those that preceded 

-cantly. And public awareness is greater than it was only a few years ago. 
Without these efforts, the gap between cybersecurity posture and threat 

with the concurrent rise in the use of IT throughout society.
Ultimately, the relevant policy question is not how the cybersecurity 
problem can be solved, but rather how it can be made manageable. Soci
-
drug abuse, and so on are rarely ﬁsolvedﬂ or taken off the policy agenda 

-
so decisively that they will never reappearŠand the same is true for 
cybersecurity. 
Finding 2. Improvements to the cybersecurity posture of individu
-
value in reducing the loss and damage that may be associated with 
cybersecurity breaches.
If an adversary has the resources to increase the sophistication of its 
attack and the motivation to keep trying even after many initial attempts 
fail, it is natural for users to wonder whether it makes sense to bother to 

deployed is surely a recipe for inaction that leaves one vulnerable to many 
lower-level threats.
The value of defensive measures is found in several points:
˜˚
Malevolent actors need some time to adapt to defensive measures. 
During this time, the victim is usually more secure than if no defensive 
measures had been taken.
˜˚
A target often has multiple adversaries, not just one. Even if it is 
true that adversary A will adapt to new defenses that are raised against 
A, adversaries B, C, and D may try the same kinds of techniques and tools 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118
 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
that A originally usedŠthese efforts by B, C, and D are likely to be less 
successful against the target.
˜˚


acts as a deterrent of harmful actions.
˜˚
Unsuccessful attempts to compromise system security cost the 
adversary timeŠand an adversary who works more slowly poses less of 

adversary may help to prevent him from being able to access everything 
on the targeted system.
˜˚
A well-defended target is usually less attractive to malevolent 

if a malevolent actor™s objectives do not call for compromising that spe
-
˜˚
Certain defensive measures may provide opportunities for the 
victim to gather intelligence on an intruder™s methods and tactics.
˜˚
Other defensive measures may enable the victim to know of the 
adversary™s presence and activities, even if the victim is not entirely suc
-cessful in thwarting the adversary™s efforts.
For all of these reasons, efforts to improve cybersecurity postures 

Finding 3. Improvements to cybersecurity call for two distinct kinds 
of activity: (a) efforts to more effectively and more widely use what 
is known about improving cybersecurity, and (b) efforts to develop 
new knowledge about cybersecurity. 
The current U.S. national cybersecurity postureŠas it actually isŠis 
determined by knowledge that we have and that we actually use to build 
a posture that is as robust as we can make it. The gap in security between 
our national cybersecurity posture and the cyber threat has two essential 
parts. 

posture could be if currently known best cybersecurity practices and tech
-nologies were widely deployed and used. Illustrative of things that we 
know but ignore or have forgotten about, the Part 1 gap is in some sense 
the difference between the average cybersecurity posture and the best 
cybersecurity posture possible with known best practices and technolo
-
cybersecurity postures that are not the best. The second partŠPart 2Šis 
the gap between the strongest posture possible with known practices and 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION 119
Part 1 gap were fully closed, the resulting cybersecurity posture would 

especially the high-end threat. 

the development of entirely new approaches to cybersecurityŠis the 
focus of traditional cybersecurity research. A properly responsive research 
program is broad and robust, and it addresses both current and pos
-sible future threats. Knowledge about new cybersecurity technologies, 

strengthen defenses against an ever-evolving threat. Attending to Part 2 


that increases the ability to respond quickly in the future when threats 
unknown today emerge.
Note that the Part 1 gap is primarily nontechnical in nature (requir
-ing, e.g., research relating to economic or psychological factors regarding 
the use of known practices and techniques, enhanced educational efforts 
to promote security-responsible user behavior, and incentives to build 

-ing the Part 1 gap does not require new technical knowledge of cyberse
-
Research is thus needed to understand how better to promote deployment 
and use of such knowledge. By contrast, Part 2 of the cybersecurity gap 
is the domain where new technologies and approaches are primarily rel
-
Finding 4. Publicly available information and policy actions to date 


States as a nation.
In 2007, a National Research Council report titled 
Toward a Safer and 
More Secure Cyberspace
 called for policy makers to ﬁcreate a sense of 
urgency about the cybersecurity problem commensurate with the risksﬂ 
(p. 229). The report argued that the necessary sense of urgency might be 
motivated by making publicly available a greater amount of authorita
-tive information about cybersecurity problems and threats and also by 

end-user attention on the short-term costs of improving their cybersecu
-rity postures.
In the period since that report was issued, the cybersecurity issue has 
received increasing public attention, and even more authoritative infor
-mation regarding cybersecurity threats is indeed available publicly. But all 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
too many decision makers still focus on the short-term costs of improving 



-more, little has been done to harness market forces to address matters 
related to the cybersecurity posture of the nation as a whole.

A culture of security would pervade the entire life cycle of IT sys
-tems operations, from initial architecture, to design, development, testing, 
deployment, maintenance, and use. Such a culture would entail, among 
other things, collaboration among researchers; effective coordination and 
information sharing between the public and the private sector; the cre
-
state of the art; the broad-based education of developers, administrators, 
and users that would make security-conscious practices second nature, 

make it easy and intuitive for developers and users to ﬁdo the right 
thingﬂ; the employment of business drivers and policy mechanisms to 
facilitate security technology transfer and diffusion of R&D into com
-mercial products and services; and the promotion of risk-based decision 
making (and metrics to support this effort).
Consider what such a culture might mean in practice:
˜˚
Developers and designers of IT products and services would use 
design principles that build security into new products and services, and 
that focus on security and attack resilience as well as performance and 
functionality.
˜˚
Security would be an integral part of the initial designs for future 
secure and attack-resilient computer architectures, and it would be inte
-grated into every aspect of the hardware and software design life cycles 
and research agendas. 
˜˚


user mistakes and malicious adversaries.
˜˚
Security features would be much simpler to use than they are 
today.
˜˚
Designers and developers would assume that systems are insecure 
until evidence suggests their resistance to compromise.
˜˚
End users would be aware of security matters and diligent in their 
efforts to promote security. 
˜˚

high degree of security awareness is the norm, would be willing to accept 

-At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION 121tional goals in order to improve their cybersecurity postures, and would 

˜˚
Policy makers would be willing to make decisions about tradeoffs 

those decisions to the nation.
As for market forces and cybersecurity, private-sector entities will 

today™s business cases. In the absence of a market for a higher level of 
security, vendors will also not provide such security. Accordingly, if the 
nation™s cybersecurity posture is to be improved to a level that is higher 
than the level to which today™s market will drive it, the market calculus 

altered somehow, and the business cases for the security of these organi
-
Finding 5. Cybersecurity is important to the United States, but the 

imperatives of cybersecurity. Tradeoffs are inevitable and will have 
to be accepted through the nation™s political and policy-making 
processes.



proliferation and terrorism or to rebalancing U.S. military forces to focus 




nuclear weapons at Hiroshima in 1945,
1 one critical difference is that the 
use of a nuclear weapon provides a very important thresholdŠthere is no 
sense in which the use of even a single nuclear weapon could be regarded 

anywhere in the world, especially one that does damage, is unambigu
-1
Van
-ity Fair, April 2011, available at http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2011/04/

The Atlantic
, March 4, 2011, available at http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2011/03/ 

-
Christian Science Monitor
, September 22, 2011, 
available at http://www.csmonitor.com/ USA/2011/0922/From-the-man-who-discovered-

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
ously detectable. By contrast, cyberattacks are often conducted, not nec
-essarily with government sponsorship or approval (although sometimes 

also occurs on a large scale, often with no one noticing.
But the likelihood of the detonation of a nuclear weapon on U.S. soil 
is much lower than that of a cyberattack on the United States. So is the 
nuclear issue, which is more consequential but less likely compared to 




relations as well, given that the United States usually has many interests 


very large scale. But China is also the largest single holder of U.S. debt 
and one of the largest trading partners of the United States. China is the 

States and China are arguably the most important nations regarding the 
mitigation of global climate change. And this list goes on. What is the 

-

common interests with Russia are different.
The need to manage multiple common interests with China or Russia 
or any other nation generally requires policy makers to make tradeoffsŠ
pursuing one item on the agenda less vigorously in order to make prog
-ress on another item. Moreover, making such tradeoffs almost always 
results in domestic winners and losers, a fact that makes the losers very 
unhappy and increases their incentives to make their unhappiness known.
Nor is the competition for policy-maker attention limited to national 
security and foreign relations. Domestic concerns about unemployment, 
access to health care, and climate change are also important to the nation, 
and who is to say whether cybersecurity is a more important problem for 

In an environment of many competing priorities, reactive policy mak
-ing is often the outcome. It is an unfortunate fact of policy and politics 
that tough decisions are often deferred in the absence of a crisis that forces 
policy makers to respond. (The same can be true in the private sector as 
well.) Support for efforts to prevent a disaster that has not yet occurred 
is typically less than support for efforts to respond to a disaster that has 
already occurred.

or few attempts have yet been made to compromise the cybersecurity 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION 123of application 
X
justifying why immediate attention and action to improve the cybersecu
-rity posture of application 
X can be deferred or studied further. Reactive 

discounting of future events but has many other causes as well.
Progress in cybersecurity policy has also stalled at least in part because 

we also want a private sector that innovates rapidly, and the convenience 
of not having to worry about cybersecurity, and the ability for applica
-tions to interoperate easily and quickly with one another, and the right to 
no diminution of our civil liberties, and so on.
But the tradeoffs between security and these other national interests 


case entail sharper and starker tradeoffs than are necessary and that the 

Indeed, proposals may be developed that may advance both interests 


posture for the nation might also provide better protection for intellectual 
property, thereby enhancing the nation™s capability for innovation. More 
usable security technologies or procedures could provide better security 
and also increase the convenience of using information technology. 
Nonetheless, irreconcilable tensions will sometimes be encountered. 
At that point, policy makers will have to confront rather than side
-step those tensions, and honest acknowledgment and discussion of the 
tradeoffs (e.g., a better cybersecurity posture may reduce the nation™s 
innovative capability, may increase the inconvenience of using informa
-tion technology, may reduce the ability to collect intelligence) will go a 
long way toward building public support for a given policy position.
Finding 6. The use of offensive operations in cyberspace as an 
instrument to advance U.S. interests raises many important techni
-
the U.S. government.
As noted in Chapter 5, it is a matter of public record that the United 
States possesses offensive capabilities in cyberspace, including capabili
-
established U.S. Cyber Command as an entity within the Department of 
Defense that 


At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
information networks and prepare to, and when directed, conduct full 
spectrum military cyberspace operations in order to enable actions in all 
domains, ensure US/Allied freedom of action in cyberspace and deny 
the same to our adversaries.
2 The United States has publicly stated that it does not collect intel
-ligence information for the purpose of enhancing the competitiveness or 
business prospects of U.S. companies. And it has articulated its view that 
established principles of international lawŠincluding those of the law of 

But beyond these very general statements, the U.S. government has 
placed little on the public record, and there is little authoritative informa
-tion about U.S. offensive capabilities in cyberspace, rules of engagement, 

-ties within the Department of Defense and the intelligence community, 
and a host of other topics related to offensive operations.

discussed at length. But a full public discussion of issues in these areas has 

thinking on these issues highly opaque. Such opacity has many undesir
-able consequences, but one of the most important consequences is that the 
role offensive capabilities could play in defending important information 
technology assets of the United States cannot be discussed fully.
What is sensitive about offensive U.S. capabilities in cyberspace is 

(rather than the nature of that technology itself); fragile and sensitive 


-ticular vulnerability, a particular operational program); or U.S. knowledge 



-vides a generally reasonable basis for understanding what can be done 
and for policy discussions that focus primarily on what should be done.
6.2
 CONCLUSION


limited to computer science and information technology, psychology, eco
-2 Fact sheet on U.S. Cyber Command, available at http://www.stratcom.mil/
 factsheets/2/Cyber_Command/, accessed March 8, 2014. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION 125
decision sciences, international relations, and law. In practice, although 
technical measures are an important element, cybersecurity is not primar
-ily a technical matter, although it is easy for policy analysts and others 
to get lost in the technical details. Furthermore, what is known about 
cybersecurity is often compartmented along disciplinary lines, reducing 

This primer seeks to illuminate some of these connections. Most of all, 
it attempts to leave the reader with two central ideas. The cybersecurity 
problem will never be solved once and for all. Solutions to the problem, 
limited in scope and longevity though they may be, are at least as much 
nontechnical as technical in nature. 
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.129
ACommittee Members and Staff
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
DAVID CLARK, 
Chair
, is a senior research scientist at the MIT Computer 

receiving his Ph.D. there in 1973. Since the mid-1970s, Clark has been 
leading the development of the Internet; from 1981 to 1989 he acted as 
chief protocol architect in this development, and he chaired the Internet 

-tural underpinnings of the Internet and at the relationship of technology 
and architecture to economic, societal, and policy considerations. He is 

Design program. Clark is past chair of the Computer Science and Tele
-communications Board of the National Research Council and has contrib
-uted to a number of studies on the societal and policy impact of computer 
communications. He is co-director of the MIT Communications Futures 
program, a project for industry collaboration and coordination along the 
communications value chain.
THOMAS BERSON is founder and president of Anagram Laboratories 
and a visiting scholar at Stanford University. He has been a researcher 

Valley entrepreneur three times. He is attracted most strongly to security 


Art of War
 and its applicability to modern 

At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130 AT THE NEXUS OF CYBERSECURITY AND PUBLIC POLICY
the International Association for Cryptologic Research. His citation reads, 
ﬁFor visionary and essential service and for numerous valuable contribu
-tions to the technical, social, and commercial development of cryptology 
and security.ﬂ Berson was an editor of the 
Journal of Cryptology
 for 14 
years. He is a past chair of the IEEE Technical Committee on Security and 
Privacy and a past president of the International Association for Cryp
-tologic Research. Berson has been a member of three previous National 
Research Council committees: the Committee on Computer Security in 
the Department of Energy, the Committee to Review DoD C4I Plans and 
Programs, and the Committee on Offensive Information Warfare. Berson 

and a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of London in 1977. 
He was a visiting fellow in mathematics in the University of Cambridge, 
and he is a life member of Clare Hall, Cambridge. Berson™s Erdös number 
is 2; his amateur radio call sign is ND2T.

1
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) in May 2013, 
after a decade combining academic leadership at Georgetown University 
with research and advisory activities (including as a RAND adjunct) 
aimed at understanding Internet and cybersecurity technology trends and 
policy implications. She stewards the council and its program of analyses 
(spanning science and technology) that culminate in policy recommen
-dations to the President and the Administration. In fall 2013, PCAST 
published 
Immediate Opportunities for Strengthening the Nation™s Cybersecu
-rity
. Blumenthal joined Georgetown University in August 2003 as associ
-ate provost, academic, engaging in campus-wide strategy and oversee
-ing academic units and special initiatives. She led efforts to strengthen 
Georgetown sciences (culminating in the 2012 opening of a new science 
building and launch of a new computer science Ph.D. program), and 
she promoted innovation in teaching, launching Online@GU and co-
developing the Initiative for Technology-Enhanced Learning. Between 

Research Council™s Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 
(CSTB). Several of the more than 60 reports produced with her leader
-ship affected public policy and/or became trade books. Her cybersecurity 

Computers at Risk
. Blumenthal did her 
undergraduate work at Brown University and received her M.S. in public 
policy at Harvard University.
1 Ms. Blumenthal resigned from the committee on May 1, 2013.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 131STAFF
HERBERT S. LIN is chief scientist at the Computer Science and Telecom
-munications Board, National Research Council of the National Academies, 
where he has been the study director of major projects on public policy 
and information technology. These projects include a number of studies 
related to cybersecurity: 
Cryptography™s Role in Securing the Information 
Society
 (1996); 
Realizing the Potential of C4I: Fundamental Challenges 
(1999); 
Engaging Privacy and Information Technology in a Digital Age
 (2007); 
Toward 
a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace
 (2007); 
Technology, Policy, Law, and Eth
-ics Regarding U.S. Acquisition and Use of Cyberattack Capabilities
 (2009); and 
Proceedings of a Workshop on Deterring Cyberattacks: Informing Strategies and 
Developing Options
 (2010). Prior to his NRC service, he was a professional 
staff member and staff scientist for the House Armed Services Committee 
(1986-1990), where his portfolio included defense policy and arms control 
issues. He received his doctorate in physics from MIT. 
ERIC WHITAKER is a senior program assistant at the Computer Science 
and Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council. Prior to 
joining the CSTB, he was a realtor with Long and Foster Real Estate, Inc., 
in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. Before that, he spent several 

associate in the Corporate Support Department. He has a B.A. in com
-munication from Hampton University.
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132
BBibliography
This bibliography lists the reports from the National Research Coun
-cil™s Computer Science and Telecommunications Board from which this 
report takes much of its material. All were published by and are available 
from the National Academies Press, Washington, D.C. 
Chapter 1
˜˚
Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age 
(1991)
 ˜˚
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace 
(2007)
Chapter 2
˜˚
˚Computing the Future: A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and 
Engineering  
(1992)
˜˚
Trust in Cyberspace 
(1999)
˜˚
Being Fluent with Information Technology 
(1999)
˜˚
The Internet™s Coming of Age 
(2001)
˜˚
˚Signposts in Cyberspace: The Domain Name System and Internet Navi
-gation 
(2005)
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 133Chapter 3
˜˚
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace 
(2007)
˜˚
˚Technology, Policy, Law, and Ethics Regarding U.S. Acquisition and Use 
of Cyberattack Capabilities 
(2009)
 Chapter 4
˜˚
Cryptography™s Role in Securing the Information Society 
(1996)
 ˜˚
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Privacy 
(2003)
˜˚
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace 
(2007)
˜˚
˚Technology, Policy, Law, and Ethics Regarding U.S. Acquisition and Use 
of Cyberattack Capabilities 
(2009)
 ˜˚
˚Toward Better Usability, Security, and Privacy of Information Technol
-ogy: Report of a Workshop 
(2010)
˜˚
˚Letter Report from the Committee on Deterring Cyberattacks: Informing 
Strategies and Developing Options for U.S. Policy 
(2010)
Chapter 5
˜˚
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace 
(2007)
˜˚
Engaging Privacy and Information Technology in a Digital Age 
(2007) 
˜˚
˚Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D 
Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in an Increasingly Global Environment 
(2009)
˜˚
˚Technology, Policy, Law, and Ethics Regarding U.S. Acquisition and Use 
of Cyberattack Capabilities 
(2009) 
Chapter 6
˜˚
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace 
(2007)
˜˚
˚Technology, Policy, Law, and Ethics Regarding U.S. Acquisition and Use 
of Cyberattack Capabilities 
(2009)
 At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and IssuesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.