DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/18961Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation forAllocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study ofMolecular Dynamics: Fifth Round29 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-31301-8 | DOI 10.17226/18961Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for theStudy of Molecular Dynamics, Fifth Round; Board on Life Sciences; Division onEarth and Life Studies; National Research CouncilReport of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics, Fifth Round  Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allo
cation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics, Fifth Round  Board on Life Sciences 
Division on Earth and Life Studies       Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1  September 19, 2014 
 Jodi Swidzinski Hezky, Ph.D. 

D. E. Shaw Research 

120 West 45th Street, 39th Floor 
New York, NY 10036 
 
Dear Dr. Hezky: 

 
This letter describes the work and transmits the fi
nal report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation 
for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the 
Study of Molecular Dynamics, Fifth Round. 
 The committee evaluated submissions received in 
response to a Request for Proposals (RFP) for 
Biomolecular Simulation Time on Anton, a supe
rcomputer designed and built by D. E. Shaw 
Research (DESRES). Over the past four years (O
ctober 1, 2010 Œ September 30, 2014), DESRES has 
made an Anton system housed at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center (PSC) available to the non-
commercial research community, based on the advice of previous National Research Council 
committees convened in 2010 Œ 2013. As in prior r
ounds, the goal of the fifth RFP for simulation 
time on Anton is to continue to facilitate breakthr
ough research in the study of biomolecular systems 
by providing a massively parallel system specia
lly designed for molecular dynamics simulations. 
These capabilities allow multi-microsecond simulation timescales, which previously had been 

unobtainable. The program seeks to continue to
 support research that addresses important and high 
impact questions demonstrating a clear 
need for Anton™s special capabilities.   
The success of the program has led DESRES to make
 the Anton machine housed
 at PSC available for 
an additional 3,300,000 node-hours over the pe
riod following October 2014, and DESRES has asked 
the National Research Council to once again facilit
ate the allocation of time to the non-commercial 
research community. The work of the National Res
earch Council committee to evaluate proposals for 
time allocations was supported by a contract be
tween D. E. Shaw Research and the National 
Academy of Sciences and was performed under th
e auspices of the National Research Council™s 
Board on Life Sciences. 

 To undertake this task, the National Research Counc
il convened a committee of experts to evaluate 
the proposals submitted in response to the RFP. The committee of 16 was chaired by Dr. Angel 

Garcia, Department Head and Professor of Physi
cs, and Senior Constellation Chaired Professor in 
Biocomputation and Bioinformatics at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. The committee members 

were selected for their expertise in molecular 
dynamics simulations and their experience in the 
subject areas represented in the 55 proposals that we
re considered by the committee. They comprised 
a cross section of the biomolecular dynamics field 
in academia, industry, and government including 
both senior and junior investigators. 
  
 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 The Anton RFP described the thr
ee criteria against which the co
mmittee was asked to evaluate 
proposals: 
  Scientific Merit
, including the potential to advance understanding on an important problem 
or question in the field; potential for break
through science resulting in new discoveries and 
understanding; the impact that successful comple
tion of the proposed research would have on 
knowledge, methods, and current barriers in the fi
eld; and a scientifically and technologically 
feasible project with clear, well-developed, and 
appropriate goals, objectives, and approach to 
the proposed studies.   Justification for Requested Time Allocation
, including a clear and well-justified need for 
multi-microsecond simulation timescales and a clea
r and convincing justification that the 
length and number of proposed simulation r
uns and node-hours requested are necessary and 
sufficient to achieve the scientific objectives. 
  Investigator Qualifications and Past Accomplishments
, including the appropriate 
experience and training to successfully conduc
t the proposed studies, evidence of knowledge 
and prior experience in molecular simulations, and past publications. 
 
Proposals from investigators who had previously received an allocation of time on Anton were 

required to include progress reports. Following 
guidance provided by DESRES and PSC, the 
committee drew on these progress reports as supplementa
l material in its consideration of proposals. 
The committee also received information from PSC
 on the number of node-hours of simulation time 
remaining on 2013 Anton allocations.
1 As explained in the RFP, staff at PSC conducted an initial 
assessment of all proposal submissions for comple
teness and to determine whether they were 
technically feasible for simulation on Anton. A memb
er of the PSC staff was present as an observer 
throughout the review committee™s discussions to 
address any additional questions that arose on 
Anton™s technical capabilities or on how the comput
er will be made available to researchers during 
the period of the project. 

 
The committee was asked to identify proposals that b
est met the selection criteria defined above. As 
in the previous rounds of Anton time allocati
ons, 100,000 node-hours was the maximum amount of 
time available to a proposal. Principal investigators 
could also request a lesser time allocation. The 
committee was further asked to allocate at least 25%
 of the time to principal investigators who had 
not previously received an Anton allocation. Th
e judgments of the committee are based on which 
proposals best met the selection criteria described above and on the estimates of required simulation 

time provided by the applicants. The committee was 
permitted to consider a modified time allocation 
if it concluded that the proposed research require
d a greater or lesser number of node-hours than 
initially requested by an applicant. 
 
Initial reviews of the proposals were provided by
 the 16 committee members. Each proposal was 
assigned a minimum of two primary reviewers who we
re asked to evaluate the proposal based on the 
RFP and guidelines described above. Review assignme
nts were made so that proposals were not 
evaluated by reviewers from the applicant™s 
same institution or who had close collaborative 
relationships with an applicant. 
                                                  1 This information was provided as of August 12, 2014. The committee was advised that approximately two 
months of simulation time remained on the 2013 round of allocations, and thus investigators who had not yet 
used their full allocation of simulation time may still be able to do so. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3 The committee held its meeting in Washington, D.C. on August 15, 2014. At the meeting, members 
undertook a detailed discussion of the proposals.
 The two primary reviewers were asked to 
summarize their review for the committee, whic
h was followed by discussion of the proposed 
research. As described in detail above, committ
ee members considered the scientific merit, 
justification of the requested time, and the quali
fications of the principal investigator and key 
personnel. The committee then considered the sl
ate of proposals, came to a consensus on which 
proposals it judged best met the selection criteria, and,
 in some cases, decided to suggest a modified 
allocation of time on Anton. Detailed comments for each of the 55 proposals are included in 

Appendix B. The committee has often included cons
tructive suggestions for improvements in the 
research plans, which is of significant benefit to the broader community. 
 
The committee concluded that the proposals listed belo
w best met the selection criteria set forth in the 
RFP for Biomolecular Simulation Time on Anton. Of
 these 45 proposals, 18 proposals were selected 
for a modified allocation (identified below with an *). 
 In numerical order by proposal submission numbe
r, the proposals judged by
 the committee as best 
meeting the selection criteria of the RFP are: 
 
PSCA14002P 
Mechanical Control of Kinesin™s ATPase Machinery
; PI: Wonmuk Hwang, Texas 
A&M University 
[Returning user, identifie
d for 50,000 node-hours]* 
 
PSCA14003P 
Multi-Microsecond Simulations of A Model Two-Domain Protein
; PI: Lillian Chong, University of Pittsburgh 
[Returning user, identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
 
PSCA14004P 
The Roles of Protein Conformational Dy
namics and Lipid Membrane Properties 
in the Function of 
-Barrel Assembly Machinery
; PI: Karen Fleming, Johns Hopkins University
 [New user, identified for 100,000 node-hours]
  PSCA14005P 
Roles of N-linked Glycans and GPI Anchor in Human Prion Protein Misfolding
; PI: Wonpil Im, University of Kansas
 [Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA14006P 
Molecular Basis of G Protein-Biased Agonism at the Mu-Opioid Receptor
; PI: Marta Filizola, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 
node-hours] 
 PSCA14007P 
Investigation into the Coupling between Helix 6 Opening, RNA Binding and the 
Oligomeric State of the Lassa Virus Nucleoprotein
; PI: Eric May, University of Connecticut
 [New 
user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]*
  PSCA14008P 
Microsecond Simulations to Study 
Microbial Infection Mechanisms
; PI: Jianing Li, 
University of Vermont 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]*
  PSCA14010P 
Molecular Machinery Controllin
g Synaptic Vesicle Fusion
; PI: Maria Bykhovskaia, 
Universidad Central del Caribe [Returning user, identifie
d for 50,000 node-hours]*
  
PSCA14011P 
Dynamics of the Translational Machinery
; PI: Zaida Luthey-Schulten, University of 
Illinois [Returning user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]
  PSCA14012P 
The Molecular Determinants of Selectiv
e Ion Binding in the Sodium-Potassium 
Pump ATPase
; PI: Benoît Roux, University of Chicago 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-
hours] 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4  PSCA14013P 
The Structure of Peptide and Protein-induced Pores in Lipid Membranes
; PI: Themis Lazaridis, City College of New York
 [Returning user, identifie
d for 50,000 node-hours]*
  PSCA14014P 
Sensing and Binding Mechanisms of Membrane Proteins
; PI: Gregory Voth, University of Chicago 
[Returning user, identified for 84,000 node-hours]
  
PSCA14015P 
Self-assembly of Transmembrane Signaling Proteins
; PI: Klaus Schulten, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA14016P 
Charting the Microscopic Pathway of DNA Branch Migration
; PI: Aleksei 
Aksimentiev, University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 
node-hours] 
 
PSCA14023P 
Mechanism of Allosteric Coupling in 
the Voltage-Sensing Phosphatase Ci-VSP
; PI: Eduardo Perozo, University of Chicago 
[Returning user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
 
PSCA14025P 
MD Simulations of Interactions and Misfolding of Amyloid Beta (Aß) Proteins
; PI: Yuri Lyubchenko, University of Nebraska Medical Center 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-
hours]* 

 PSCA14026P 
Substrate-Specific Allosteric Behavior in 
the Leucine Transporter from Analysis 
of Microsecond-Scale Molecular Dynamics Simulations
; PI: Harel Weinstein, Weill Cornell 
Medical College of Cornell University 
[Returning user, identified 
for 91,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA14027P 
Molecular Determinants in Folding of 
Voltage-Gated Potassium Channel Kv1.3 
Pore Helix; PI: Tobin Sosnick, University of Chicago 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
 PSCA14030P 
Yeast Membrane Simulations with Inositol Phosphoceramide with Applications to 
Lateral Organization and binding of a Peripheral Membrane Protein
; PI: Jeffery Klauda, 
University of Maryland 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA14031P 
Characterizing the Disordered FG Repe
at Domains of Nuclear Pore Complexes 
by Simulation and Experiment
; PI: David Cowburn, Albert Ei
nstein College of Medicine 
[Returning user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]*
  
PSCA14032P 
Glutamate Receptor Ligand Binding and Desensitization
; PI: Albert Lau, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours]
  
PSCA14033P 
Large-Scale Exploration of Sodium Cha
nnel Interactions with Small Molecules 
and Peptide Toxins; PI: Vladimir Yarov-Yarovoy, University of California, Davis 
[New user, 
identified for 100,000 node-hours]
  PSCA14034P 
Formation and Breakdown of Peptide-Li
pid Pores by the Antimicrobial Peptide 
Piscidin 1 in POPC/POPG Bilayers
; PI: Richard Pastor, National Institutes of Health 
[New user, 
identified for 100,000 node-hours]
  
PSCA14035P 
Exploring Protein Core Plasticity and 
Rapid Ligand Access to Buried Binding 
Sites; PI: Rommie Amaro, University of California, San Diego 
[Returning user, identified for 
100,000 node-hours] 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 PSCA14036P 
Revealing the Structural Basis of Functional Selectivity in GPCRs
; PI: Ron Dror, 
Stanford University 
[New user, identified for 100,000 node-hours]
  PSCA14037P 
The Conformational Rearrangement of Influenza Hemaggluinin: Molecular 
Details of the Initial Order-Disorder Transition
; PI: Jose Onuchic, Rice University 
[Returning 
user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
 PSCA14038P 
The Electron Transfer Rate in Ferredoxins
; PI: Toshiko Ichiye, Georgetown 
University [New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]
  PSCA14039P 
Atomistic Modeling of the Resting a
nd Activated States of the Human Hv1 
Voltage-Gated Proton Channel
; PI: Douglas Tobias, University of California, Irvine
 [Returning 
user, identified for 75,000 node-hours]* 
 
PSCA14040P 
Structure, Conductance and Mechanism of Action of Calcium Channels Involved 
In Human Diseases
; PI: Andrew Pohorille, University of California, San Francisco 
[Returning user, 
identified for 50,000 node-hours]
  PSCA14041P 
Long Time Scale Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Protein Folding
; PI: Martin 
Gruebele, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-
hours]* 
 PSCA14042P 
Characterizing Conformational Dynamics of Sugar Transporters GLUT1 and 
XylE; PI: Emad Tajkhorshid, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
 [Returning user, identified 
for 100,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA14043P Simulations of Protein Association and Transmembrane Peptides
; PI: Matthias 
Buck, Case Western Reserve Univ
ersity [Returning user, iden
tified for 50,000 node-hours] 
 
PSCA14044P 
Determining the Mechanisms of Protein Folding in Membranes
; PI: James 
Gumbart, Georgia Institute of Technology 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours]
  
PSCA14045P 
Ligand-Specific Conformational Changes in
 CCR7 Coupled to Signaling Pathway 
Selection; PI: Dimitrios Morikis, University of California, Riverside 
[New user, identified for 
100,000 node-hours] 
 
PSCA14047P 
Functional Mechanism of a Bile Acid Transporter
; PI: Fatemeh Khalili-Araghi, 
University of Illinois at Chicago
 [New user, identified for 43,000 node-hours] 
 
PSCA14048P 
Real Time Exploration of Photosynthetic Light Harvesting Complex 2 (LH2) and 
Their Membrane Environments
; PI: Seogjoo Jang, Queens College of the City University of New 
York [New user, identified for 60,000 node-hours] 
 
PSCA14051P 
Beyond Active Site Catalysis: Determin
ing the Role of Remote Mutations and 
Solvent in Substrate Recognition 
by Microsecond Molecular Dynamics
; PI: Kendall Houk, University of California, Los Angeles 
[Returning user, identifie
d for 100,000 node-hours]
  PSCA14052P 
Microsecond Dynamics of HIV-1 Stem Loop1 RNA and A-Tract DNA for 
Computation of NMR Order 
Parameters and Comparison
; PI: Ioan Andricioaei, University of 
California, Irvine [Returning user, identifie
d for 50,000 node-hours]
  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 PSCA14053P 
Evolution of Allosteric Signatures in GPCR
; PI: Brian Dominy, Clemson University 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
 
PSCA14054P 
Receptor-Specific Distinction of Functional Mechanisms in G Protein Coupled 
Receptors
; PI: Nagarajan Vaidehi, Beckman Research In
stitute at City of Hope Medical Center 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours]
  PSCA14057P 
Bacterial Membrane Selectivity in Antimicrobial Peptides
; PI: Jeffrey Comer, 
Kansas State University
 [New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]*
  PSCA14058P 
Molecular Modeling Studies of Drug Binding to Human P-glycoprotein
; PI: 
Alfredo Freites, University of California, Irvine [Returning user, identified for 75,000 node-hours]* 
 
PSCA14059P 
The Role of Nascent Chain Tension in Modulating Codon Translation Rates
; PI: 
Edward O'Brien, Pennsylvania State University 
[New user, identified for 75,000 node-hours]*
  
PSCA14062P 
The Role of Long-Range Interaction Form
ation in Determining Protein Topology 
at the Onset of Folding
; PI: Jennifer Poutsma, Old Dominion University 
[New user, identified for 
50,000 node-hours]* 
 PSCA14063P 
How Do Small-Molecule Interactions Al
ter the Conformational Landscape of 
Intrinsically Disordered P27?
; PI: Chakra Chennubhotla, University of Pittsburgh 
[New user, 
identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
 The time allocations for the 45 proposals identifie
d by the committee as best meeting the selection 
criteria for time allocations total approximately 3,30
3,000 node-hours. Of the 45 proposals identified, 
23 were identified at the approximately 100,000 
node-hour level and 22 at the 50,000 node-hour 
level.2 A total of approximately 1,128,000 node-hours we
re allocated to 17 proposals whose principal 
investigator did not receive time on Anton during th
e past four years (identified as ﬁnew usersﬂ). 
Approximately 34% of the available simulation time thus was allocated to new users of Anton. The 
remaining 2,175,000 node-hours are allocated to 28 
proposals from investigators who had received 
allocations of time on Anton in previous
 rounds (identified as ﬁreturning usersﬂ). 
In carrying out its task, the committee identified 
as many promising proposals as possible given the 
constraints on the total available simulation time.  

 
The committee also wishes to raise two questions th
at arose during the proposal discussions. The first 
involves the restriction stated in the RFP that ﬁeach
 investigator can serve as a PI for only a single 
application for computer time on Anton.ﬂ It is co
mmon for proposals to include co-PIs and other key 
personnel in addition to the stated PI. The committee
 observed that it was also common for experts in 
molecular dynamics simulations to be 
associated with multiple proposals.
3 The committee encourages 
D. E. Shaw Research and the Pittsburgh Superc
omputing Center to consider whether additional 
guidance on the maximum number of proposals with 
which a senior investigator may be affiliated 
would add clarity to any future rounds of proposal solicitations. 

                                                  2 The 100,000 node-hour level is defined as proposals that were identified for 70,000 node-hours or greater.  
The 50,000 node-hour level is defined as proposals that were identified for less than 70,000 node-hours. 
3 With the intention solely of pointing to an example from among the current round of proposals, Professor 
Benoît Roux was listed as PI on one proposal and co-PI on
 two additional proposals. This type of situation was 
not unique to Professor Roux. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7 Finally, the committee encountered a request for si
mulation time awarded in the fourth round (2013-
2014) to carry over into the fifth round of alloca
tions (2014-2015). In this instance, the committee 
declined to recommend a time extension. However, 
the committee would like to note this request so 
that D. E. Shaw Research and the Pittsburgh Su
percomputing Center can consider whether a policy 
on time extensions should be made. 

 
The committee would like to thank D. E. Shaw R
esearch, the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, and 
all of the 2014 Anton applicants for the opportunity 
to assist in identifying the proposals best meeting 
the selection criteria for time allocations on th
e Anton machine. The committee members were 
universally enthusiastic about the potential advances 
in the field that are facilitated by Anton and are 
looking forward to seeing the important new results from the Anton users. 

 Sincerely, 
 Angel Garcia Chair  
cc:  Dr. Markus Dittrich, Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center 
Dr. Gregory Symmes, National Research Council 
   Dr. Frances Sharples, National Research Council  
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9 Appendices: A. Table 1: Proposals Reviewed by the Committee 
B. Individual Proposal Summary Evaluations 
C. Proposal Evaluation Criteria 
D. Roster and Biographical Sketches of Committee Members 

E. The Board on Life Sciences, the Board on
 Chemical Sciences and Technology, and the 
National Academies 
F. Acknowledgment of Report Reviewer 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10   Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11 APPENDIX A TABLE 1: PROPOSALS REVI
EWED BY THE COMMITTEE  This appendix is not available to the public. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12   Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13  APPENDIX B INDIVIDUAL PROPOSAL SUMMARY EVALUATIONS 
 This appendix is not available to the public. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15  APPENDIX C PROPOSAL REVIEW CRITERIA 
 The committee used the points below to help guide 
its review of the proposals. The reviewers were 
asked to comment on the strengths and weaknesses 
of the proposals by cons
idering the following:  
 Level of scientific merit
  1. Potential to advance understanding of an important
 problem or question in the field; potential 
for breakthrough science resulting in ne
w discoveries and understanding 2. Impact that successful completion of the proposed research would have on the knowledge, 
methods, and current barriers in the field  
3. Project is scientifically and technologically
 feasible with clear, well-developed, and 
appropriate goals, objectives, and approach to the proposed studies  Justification for requested time allocation 
1. Clear and well-justified need for multi-microsecond simulation time 
Clear and convincing justification that the le
ngth and number of proposed simulation runs and 
node-hours requested are necessary and suffi
cient to achieve the scientific objectives
  Investigator qualifications and past accomplishments
 1. Appropriate experience and training to 
successfully conduct the proposed studies 
2. Evidence of knowledge and prior experience with molecular simulations 
3. Past publications Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17  APPENDIX D COMMITTEE ON PROPOSAL EVALUATION FOR ALLOCATION OF 
SUPERCOMPUTING TIME FOR THE 
STUDY OF MOLECULAR DYNAMICS, FIFTH ROUND  Members 
 ANGEL GARCIA
 (Chair), Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York ORLANDO ACEVEDO
, Department of Chemistry and 
Biochemistry, Auburn University, 
Alabama 

IVET BAHAR, Department of Computational a
nd Systems Biology, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 

DAVID BERATAN
, Department of Chemistry, D
uke University, North Carolina BERNARD BROOKS, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
THOMAS CHEATHAM III, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City 
DONALD HAMELBERG, Department of Chemistry, 
Georgia State University 
ANDRZEJ KLOCZKOWSKI
, Battelle Center for Mathematical Medicine, Nationwide 
Children™s Hospital, Columbus, Ohio 

MARIA KURNIKOVA, Department Chemistry, Carnegie
 Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 
EDWARD LYMAN, Department of Physics and Astr
onomy, University of Delaware, 
Newark ALEXANDER MACKERELL
, School of Pharmacy, University of Maryland, Baltimore 
SERGEI NOSKOV, Department of Biological Sciences
, University of Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada 
JED PITERA
, IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose, California 
SCOTT SHOWALTER
, Department of Chemistry, Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park 

CHUNG WONG, Department of Chemistry and Bioche
mistry, University of Missouri-St. 
Louis 
TROY WYMORE, Center for Molecular Biophysics, University of Tennessee-Knoxville and Oak Ridge National Laboratory  National Research Council Staff 
 KATHERINE BOWMAN
, Senior Program Officer, 
Board on Life Sciences CAMLY TRAN
, Postdoctoral Fellow, Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology 
LAUREN SONI
, Senior Program Assistant, Board on Life Sciences
  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
 Chair  Angel Garcia, Ph.D., is Department Head of the 
Physics, Applied Physics and Astronomy 
Department at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
. He is also Professor of Physics and Senior 
Constellation Chaired Professor of Biocomputation a
nd Bioinformatics. The Garcia Research Group 
focuses on the use of theoretical and computational 
methods to study aspects related to biomolecular 
dynamics and statistical mechanics. Their main 
research objectives are to understand the folding, 
dynamics and stability of biomolecules. Research 
interests include the hydrophobic effect, enzyme 
catalysis, nucleic acid structure and dynamics, RNA 
folding, electrostatics, protein hydration, and 
peptide interactions with membranes. Dr. García 
received a Ph.D. in Theoretical Physics from Cornell 
University. He is a fellow of the American Phys
ical Society and a member of the Biophysical 
Society, The Protein Society, the AAAS, and the 
American Chemical Society. He received the 
Edward Bouchard prize of the American Physical So
ciety in 2006. Dr. García is an Associate Editor 
of Proteins, Structure, Function and Bioinformatics, a member of the editorial board of the 
Biophysical Journal, Molecular Simulations, and a member of the Faculty of 1000 for BioMed 
Central. 
 Members 
 
Orlando Acevedo
, Ph.D., is an S. D. and Karen H. Worl
ey Associate Professor of Chemistry and 
Biochemistry at Auburn University. Dr. Acevedo's 
research program focuses upon the application and 
development of new computational tools that target 
organic and enzymatic catalyst design, alternative 
environmentally friendly solvent design, and drug 
discovery. Fundamental problems in organic and 
medicinal chemistry are probed, such as eluc
idation of enzymatic reactions, controlling 
enantioselectivity for chiral compounds, transition structure prediction, de novo design of high-
affinity inhibitors, and origins of drug resist
ance. Obtaining quantitative success with large-scale 
quantum and molecular mechanical calculations in
volves the development of improved force fields, 
software, and methodology. Dr. Acevedo received his 
B.S. from Florida International University, his 
Ph.D. from Duquesne University and complete
d postdoctoral work at Yale University. 
 Ivet Bahar
, Ph.D., is Distinguished Professor and JK Vries Chair in the Department of 
Computational and Systems Biology at the Universi
ty of Pittsburgh School Of Medicine. She is also 
Associate Director of the University of Pittsbur
gh Drug Discovery Institute and Co-Director of the 
Molecular and Systems Modeling Core of the Clinic
al and Translational Scie
nce Institute. Dr. Bahar was the Founding Chair of the University of Pi
ttsburgh School of Medici
ne™s Department of 
Computational Biology and Founding Director of the joint University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie 
Mellon University Ph.D. program in computationa
l biology. Her research focuses on biomolecular 
systems dynamics at multiple scales, the evolution 
of protein sequence, structure, dynamics and 
function, computer-aided drug discovery and polyph
armacology, network models for protein-protein 
interactions, modeling and simulati
on of membrane proteins dynamics,
 and mechanisms of membrane 
protein interactions. Dr. Bahar has served on the 
Council and the Executive Board of the Biophysical 
Society and as member and chair of NIH study sections including Modeling and Analysis of 
Biological Systems, National Technology Centers 
for Networks and Pathways, and Computational 
Biology, Image Processing, and Data Mining. Sh
e received her Ph.D. in Chemistry from Istanbul 
Technical University, Turkey. 

 
David Beratan, Ph.D., is the R. J. Reynolds Professor of
 Chemistry, Biochemistry, and Physics at 
Duke University. Through his research, Dr. Berata
n has established a molecular-level theory that 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19 describes the rate of charge tunneling reactions in
 biomolecules, thus establishing the theoretical 
underpinnings for biological energy capture a
nd conversion processes. He has also developed 
theoretical methods to assign the absolute chirality
 of complex natural produc
ts and is developing 
theoretical methods to navigate molecular space in 
order to discover promising new structures of use 
in biomedical, energy, and materials science. Dr
. Beratan was a National Research Council Resident 
Research Associate at NASA™s Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
and later a member of the technical staff. In 
1992, he moved to the University of Pittsburgh 
as Associate Professor of Chemistry; he was 
promoted to the rank of Professor in 1997. Dr. Bera
tan became the R. J. Reynolds Professor at Duke 
in 2001, where he served as Chair of Chemistry from 2004 to 2007. He has been a visiting Professor 
at All Souls CollegeŠUniversity of Oxford, Conr
ad E. Ronneberg Visiting ScholarŠUniversity of 
Chicago, and Ralph and Lucy Hirschmann Visiting 
ProfessorŠUniversity of Pennsylvania. He has 
received the National Science Foundation National Y
oung Investigator award, is a Fellow of the 
American Physical Society, and is a Fellow of 
the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science. He received a bachelor of science from 
Duke University and Ph.D. in chemistry from 
California Institute of Technology.  Bernard Brooks
, Ph.D., is Chief of the Laboratory of Com
putational Biology at the National Heart, 
Lung, and Blood Institute of the National Institutes 
of Health. He also directs the Computational 
Biophysics Section of the Laboratory, which de
velops simulation and modeling techniques and 
applies them to the study of problems of biological significance. Techniques employed include 
molecular dynamics, quantum and molecular mechan
ics, ab initio analysis of small molecule 
structures, molecular modeling, and electron microscopy image analysis. 

 
Thomas E. Cheatham III
, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor in the Department of Medicinal 
Chemistry and an Adjunct Associate Professor in the 
Department of Bioengineering at the University 
of Utah. He is also a member of the Henry Eyring
 Center for Theoretical Chemistry, a senior fellow 
of the Center for High Performance Computing, a me
mber of the NSF Teragrid Scientific Advisory 
Board, and a member of the University of Utah 
Information Technology Council and the University 
of Utah Cyberinfrastructure Council. He serves 
as a member of the board of editors of the 
Journal of 
Biomolecular Structure & Dynamics
. Dr. Cheatham™s research focuses on the development of 
molecular dynamics, free energy simulation, and tr
ajectory analysis methodologies in applications 
aimed at better understanding biomolecular structur
e, dynamics and interactions including the 
representation of nucleic acid systems in solution. He
 received his Ph.D. in pharmaceutical chemistry 
from the University of California, San Francisco, 
and B.A. degrees in chemistry and in mathematics 
and computer science from Middlebury College. He 
was subsequently an NRC postdoctoral fellow in 
the Computational Biophysics Section of the Labor
atory of Biophysical Chemistry at the National 
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health.  
 Donald Hamelberg
, Ph.D., is Associate Professor of Computational Biophysical Chemistry and 
Associate Graduate Director of Computational Chem
istry and Biophysical Chemistry at Georgia State 
University. His research focuses on the application 
and development of theoretical and computational 
methods for understanding biological functions. Ma
ny interactions in cell signaling pathways are 
mediated by networks of interacting proteins 
and RNA molecules. Deregulation of these pathways 
could trigger cellular transformation, oncogenesis, and other diseases. The research in Dr. 

Hamelberg™s laboratory seeks to decipher the 
underlying principles 
governing cell signaling 
mechanisms and biomolecular interactions involving 
proteins and RNA. In th
ese endeavors, he uses 
simulation based approaches, statis
tical mechanics, and classical and 
quantum mechanical methods as 
a complementary tool to experiments. Dr. Hamelberg received his Ph.D. from Georgia State 
University. He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at
 the University of Illinois, Chicago (2001-2003) 
and at Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the University of California, San Diego (2003-2005). 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 Andrzej Kloczkowski
, M.D., is a Principal Investigator in the Battelle Center for Mathematical 
Medicine of The Research Institute at Nationwid
e Children™s Hospital. He is also a Professor of 
Pediatrics at The Ohio State University College
 of Medicine. Dr. Kloczkowski completed his 
graduate education at Warsaw University, received 
his MD from the Institute of Physical Chemistry 
of the Polish Academy of Sciences, and completed hi
s postdoctoral work at Stanford University and 
Warsaw University. Dr. Kloczkowski™s NIH-f
unded research program focuses on computational 
structural biology and bioinformatics, including protein structure prediction from the amino acid 

sequence, prediction of biomacromolecular dynamics
 using elastic network 
models, development of 
coarse grained models and potentials for proteins 
and nucleic acids, and studies of protein-protein and 
protein-nucleic acid integrations. He
 is also interested in application of machine learning methods to 
various biomedical and clinical problems, and h
as ongoing collaboration with several experimental 
and clinical centers. 

 
Maria Kurnikova, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor of Chem
istry at Carnegie Mellon University. Her 
research focuses on the area of computational chemistry and biophysics. She is interested in 
understanding the work of membrane proteins, such
 as receptors, signal transduction proteins, toxins 
and ion channels. The goal is to 
model and predict structure-functi
on relationships in these proteins 
associated with ligand binding, gating of channels 
and mechanisms of selectivity and mobility in the 
confined environment of the channel. The systems 
she is interested specifi
cally include Glutamate 
Receptors (AMPA and NMDA types), alpha-Hemolysin
, Diphteria Toxin t-domain, Gramicidin A, 
PDZ-domain Š ligand interaction of the NHERF1 prot
ein. The approach her research group is taking 
includes a combination of physics-based computational methodologies, such as molecular dynamics 

simulations, continuum electrostatics and quantum 
chemistry. Dr. Kurnikova received her Ph.D. in 
Theoretical Chemistry from the University of Pittsburgh. 

 Edward Lyman
, Ph.D., is an Assistant Professor within the Department of Physics and Astronomy at 
the University of Delaware. He received his Ph.D
. in physics from Virginia Tech, where he studied 
nonequilibrium critical phenomena with Beate Schmittma
nn. He then did postdoctoral research in the 
Department of Computational Biology at the Univer
sity of Pittsburgh with Dan Zuckerman. While in 
Pittsburgh he focused on methods development for 
biomolecular simulation, with an emphasis on 
statistically rigorous approaches for sampling prot
ein conformation space. He then moved to Salt 
Lake City, Utah, where he joined the lab of Greg
 Voth. In Utah he worked on membrane protein 
simulation and multiscale simu
lation methods development. 
 Alexander MacKerell
, Ph.D., is the Grollman-Glick Professor of Pharmaceutical Sciences at the 
University of Maryland School of Pharmacy. 
Research in Dr. MacKerell™s lab involves the 
development and application of co
mputational methods to investigate the relationships of structure 
and dynamics to function in a 
range of biological and chemical
 systems. These efforts range from 
empirical force field development, implementati
on of novel sampling methodologies, understanding 
the physical forces driving the structure and dyna
mics of proteins, nucleic acids and carbohydrates 
and computer-aided drug design (CADD) studies. Dr. MacKerell received his B.S. in Chemistry from 
the University of Hawaii, Honolulu and completed hi
s Ph.D. in Biochemistry at Rutgers University. 
 Sergei Noskov
, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor at the Ins
titute of Biocomplexity and Informatics at 
the University of Calgary. His research interests 
include molecular modeling, membrane proteins (ion 
channels and ion-coupled transpor
ters), quantum chemistry of biol
ogically relevant molecules, free 
energy profiles, and protein structure/function predicti
on. Dr. Noskov™s lab is comprised of a group of 
theoretical biologists and chemists interested in
 the understanding of mole
cular determinants of 
ligand transport across cellular membranes. Projects in his lab focus on studies of the family of 

fundamentally important ion-coupled neurotransmitter
 transporters implicated in diverse mechanisms 
of signal transduction in the brain. Their studies r
esulted in series of methods and software developed 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21 in close collaboration with other theoretical groups
 across the world. Dr. Noskov received his Ph.D. 
from the Russian Academy of Sciences and complete
d his postdoctoral studies within the Department 
of Biochemistry and Structural Biology at Weill 
Medical College of Cornell University. Dr. Noskov 
is a recipient of AHFMR Scholar, CIHR New Investigator; and AIF New Faculty Awards (Canada); 
INTAS Young Scientist Award (European Union); and the Academia Sinica Research Fellowship and 
the American Epilepsy Foundation 
Post-Doctoral Fellowship (USA).  
Jed Pitera, Ph.D., is a Research Staff Member in Sc
ience and Technology at the IBM Almaden 
Research Center. His research focuses on the use 
of computer simulation to address questions in 
biology and chemistry, particularly in the areas of protein folding, molecular recognition, self-
assembly, and computer-aided materials design. His 
current research projects include simulations of 
polymeric materials for lithography, desalination, a
nd drug delivery applications. Dr. Pitera received 
undergraduate training in Biology a
nd Chemistry at the California Institute of Technology, where he 
worked in Prof. Pamela Bjorkman™s protein cr
ystallography group. Subsequently, he pursued 
graduate studies in Biophysics at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) in the 
laboratory of Prof. Peter Kollman. In Dr. Kollman™
s group, he developed an interest in the use of 
biomolecular simulation and free energy calculati
ons in the rational design of proteins and 
pharmaceuticals. He pursued similar work in a po
stdoctoral position with 
Prof. Dr. Wilfred van 
Gunsteren at the ETH in Zurich, Switzerland, 
where his research focused on novel methods to 
calculate free energies for ligand design. Dr. Pitera
 is also an adjunct assistant professor in the UCSF 
Department of Pharmaceutical Chem
istry, and maintains active colla
borations with groups at UCSF 
and Stanford.   Scott Showalter
, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor of Chemis
try at Pennsylvania State University. He 
received his B.S. from Cornell University, his Ph.D. from Washington University School of 
Medicine, and completed his postdoctoral research 
at The National High Magnetic Field Laboratory 
in Tallahassee, Florida. Dr. Show
alter's lab applies biophysical ch
emistry techniques to understand 
the function of partially disordered proteins a
nd work to define the features of protein-RNA 
interactions. 
 Chung Wong
, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at 
the University of Missouri-Saint Louis. He received his B.Sc. (Hons.) degree from the Chinese 

University of Hong Kong and his Ph.D. degree from 
the University of Chicago. He completed his 
postdoctoral work at the University of Houston. 
He has held academic and industrial positions at the 
University of Houston, Mount Sinai School of Medi
cine, SUGEN, Inc., University of California-San 
Diego, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute before
 joining the faculty of University of Missouri, 
St. Louis in 2004. His research involves the develo
pment and applications of computational methods 
to study biomolecular structure, dynamics, a
nd function and to aid the design of bioactive 
compounds. He has served on multiple grant review pa
nels for the National Institutes of Health and 
the European Union and as a mentor for students 
in the Student Teacher as Research Scientist 
(STARS) program, a joint venture among University of Missouri-Saint Louis, Washington 
University, Saint Louis University, and several non-profit and for-profit institutions in Saint Louis to 
provide research opportunities to high-school students and teachers. 

 
Troy Wymore
, Ph.D., is a Research Assistant Professor in the Department of Biochemistry, Cellular 
and Molecular Biology at the University of Tenn
essee-Knoxville. He completed his B.S. and Ph.D. in 
Chemistry at the University of Missouri-Columb
ia. His research focuses on applying hybrid QC/MM 
simulations to investigate the enzymatic mechan
isms of DFPase, Xylose Isomerase, and 5-epi-
aristolocholene synthase. The results of these studi
es provide insight into strategies for redesigning 
these enzymes to more effectively degrade nerve ag
ents (DFPase) and improve the process of biofuel 
and pharmaceutical agent production. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23  APPENDIX E THE BOARD ON LIFE SCIENCES, THE 
BOARD ON CHEMICAL SCIENCES AND 
TECHNOLOGY, AND THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES 
 BOARD ON LIFE SCIENCES 
Members 
 JAMES P. COLLINS 
(Chair), Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 
ENRIQUETA C. BOND
, Burroughs Wellcome Fund, Marshall, Virginia 
ROGER D. CONE
, Vanderbilt University Medical
 Center, Nashville, Tennessee JOSEPH R. ECKER, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, LaJolla, California
 SEAN EDDY, HHMI Janelia Farm Research
 Campus, Ashburn, Virginia SARAH C.R. ELGIN, Washington Universit
y, St. Louis, Missouri DAVID R. FRANZ
, Consultant, Frederick, Maryland STEPHEN FRIEND, Sage Bionetworks, Seattle, Washington 
ELIZABETH HEITMAN
, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee  
JOHN G. HILDEBRAND, University of Arizona, Tucson RICHARD A. JOHNSON, Arnold & Porter, LLC, Washi
ngton, District of Columbia 
JUDITH KIMBLE, University of Wiscons
in, Madison, Wisconsin MARY E. MAXON, 
Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkley, California KAREN E. NELSON
, J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, Maryland 
ROBERT M. NEREM
, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia MARY E. POWER, 
University of Californi
a, Berkeley, California
 MARGARET RILEY
, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
  LANA SKIRBOLL, Sanofi, Washington, District of Columbia 
JANIS C. WEEKS
, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon MARY WOOLLEY
, Research!America, Alexandria, Virginia 
 National Research Council Staff  FRANCES E. SHARPLES
, Director JO L. HUSBANDS, Scholar/Senior Project Director
 JAY B. LABOV
, Senior Scientist/Program Director for Biology Education 
KATHERINE W. BOWMAN
, Senior Program Officer 
MARILEE K. SHELTON-DAVENPORT
, Senior Program Officer 
KEEGAN SAWYER, Program Officer 
AUDREY THEVENON
, Associate Program Officer
 BETHELHEM M. BANJAW, Financial Associate ANGELA KOLESNIKOVA
, Administrative Assistant 
JENNA OGILVIE, Senior Program Assistant LAUREN SONI
, Senior Program Assistant 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 BOARD ON CHEMICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY 
 Members 
 TIMOTHY SWAGER (Co-Chair), Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge  
DAVID WALT
 (Co-Chair), Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts  HÉCTOR D. ABRUÑA
, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York  JOEL C. BARRISH
, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Princeton, New Jersey  MARK A. BARTEAU
, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor  DAVID BEM
, The Dow Chemical Company, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania  ROBERT G. BERGMAN, University of California, Berkeley  JOAN BRENNECKE
, University of Notre Dame, Indiana  
HENRY E. BRYNDZA
, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Delaware  
MICHELLE V. BUCHANAN
, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee  DAVID W. CHRISTIANSON
, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia  
RICHARD EISENBERG, University of Rochester, New York  JILL HRUBY, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico  FRANCES S. LIGLER, University of Chapel Hill and 
North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh  
SANDER G. MILLS
, Merck Research Laboratories (Ret.), Scotch Plains, New Jersey  JOSEPH B. POWELL, Shell, Houston, Texas  ROBERT E. ROBERTS, Institute for Defense Analyses, Alexandria, Virginia  
PETER J. ROSSKY
, Rice University, Houston, Texas  DARLENE SOLOMON, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, California 
 National Research Council Staff  TERESA FRYBERGER
, Director  KATHRYN HUGHES, Senior Program Officer  
DOUGLAS FRIEDMAN
, Senior Program Officer  
CARL GUSTAV-ANDERSON
, Research Associate  
ELIZABETH FINKELMAN
, Program Coordinator  
NAWINA MATSHONA, Senior Program Assistant  
CAMLY TRAN
, Postdoctoral Fellow Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25   The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished 
scholars engaged in scientific and engineering resear
ch, dedicated to the furtherance of science and 
technology and to their use for the general welfare. 
Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by 
the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate th
at requires it to advise the federal government on 
scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Ci
cerone is president of the National Academy of 
Sciences. 
 The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the National 
Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of
 outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its 
administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences 

the responsibility for advising the federal governme
nt. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting na
tional needs, encourages education and research, 
and recognizes the superior achievements of engin
eers. Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president of the 
National Academy of Engineering. 

 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the Natio
nal Academy of Sciences to secure 
the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters 
pertaining to the health of the public. The Institu
te acts under the responsibility given to the National 
Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to 
be an adviser to the federal government and, 
upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical 
care, research, and education. Dr. Victor J. Dzau 
is president of the Institute of Medicine. 

 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to 
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of furthering 
knowledge and advising the federal government. F
unctioning in accordance with general policies 
determined by the Academy, the Council has beco
me the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Acad
emy of Engineering in providing services to the 
government, the public, and the scientific and engine
ering communities. The Council is administered 
jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Me
dicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. C. D. Mote, 
Jr., are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council. 
 www.national-academies.org 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26   Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Fifth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27  APPENDIX F ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REPORT REVIEWER 
 This report has been reviewed in draft form by an
 individual chosen for his perspective and technical 
expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report 

Review Committee. The purpose of this independe
nt review is to provide candid and critical 
comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to 
ensure that the report meets institutional standards 
for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the 
study charge. The review comments and draft manuscr
ipt remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the fo
llowing individual for his review of this report:  
 Robert Jernigan, Iowa State University 
 Although the reviewer listed above has provided 
many constructive comments and suggestions, he 
was not asked to endorse the conclusions. In addition, he was asked to ensure that an independent 
examination of this report was carried out in acco
rdance with institutional procedures and that all 
review comments were carefully considered. Respons
ibility for the final content of this report rests 
entirely with the authoring committee and the institution. 

 