DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/1914Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: SystemsIntegration106 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-04544-5 | DOI 10.17226/1914Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Commission on Physical Sciences,Mathematics, and Applications, National Research CouncilKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEEPING THE U.S.COMPUTER INDUSTRYCOMPETITIVE: SYSTEMSINTEGRATIONA COLLOQUIUM REPORT BY
THE COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
BOARDCOMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES, MATHEMATICS,
AND APPLICATIONSNATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWASHINGTON, D.C. 1992
iKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the

National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-

ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distin-
guished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of sci-

ence and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter

granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the fed-

eral government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Frank Press is president of the National

Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous

in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sci-

ences the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering

also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and

research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Robert M. White is president

of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to
secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy mat-

ters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the

National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal govern-

ment and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr.

Stuart Bondurant is acting president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of further-

ing knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general poli-

cies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the

National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to

the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is adminis-

tered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Frank Press and Dr. Robert M.

White are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.
Support for this project was provided by the following organizations and agencies: Air Force
Office of Scientific Research (Grant No. N00014-87-J-1110), Apple Computer, Inc., Control Data

Corporation, Cray Research, Inc., the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (Grant No.

N00014-87-J-1110), Digital Equipment Corporation, Hewlett Packard, IBM Corporation, the

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Grant No. CDA-860535), the National Science

Foundation (Grant No. CDA-860535), the Office of Naval Research (Grant No. N00014-87-

J-1110), and Pacific Bell.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 91-62172

International Standard Book Number 0-309-04544-4

Available from: National Academy Press2101 Constitution Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20418

S404
Printed in the United States of America
iiKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
BOARDJOSEPH F. TRAUB, Columbia University, 
ChairmanALFRED V. AHO, Bellcore

RUZENA BAJCSY, University of Pennsylvania

DAVID J. FARBER, University of Pennsylvania

SAMUEL H. FULLER, Digital Equipment Corporation

JOHN L. HENNESSY, Stanford University

MITCHELL D. KAPOR, ON Technology, Inc.

SIDNEY KARIN, San Diego Supercomputer Center

KEN KENNEDY, Rice University

LEONARD KLEINROCK, University of California at Los Angeles

ROBERT L. MARTIN, Bell Communications Research

ABRAHAM PELED, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

WILLIAM PRESS, Harvard College Observatory

RAJ REDDY, Carnegie Mellon University

JEROME H. SALTZER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

MARY SHAW, Carnegie Mellon University

EDWARD SHORTLIFFE, Stanford University School of Medicine

IVAN E. SUTHERLAND, Sun Microsystems

LAWRENCE G. TESLER, Apple Computer, Inc.

GEORGE L. TURIN, Teknekron Corporation

WILLIS H. WARE, The RAND Corporation

WILLIAM WULF, University of Virginia

MARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Staff Director

HERBERT LIN, Staff Officer

MONICA B. KRUEGER, Staff Officer

RENEE A. HAWKINS, Staff Associate

FRANK PITTELLI, CSTB Consultant

DONNA F. ALLEN, Administrative Secretary

CATHERINE A. SPARKS, Project Assistant

ARTHUR L. McCORD, Project Assistant
iiiKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,
MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONS
NORMAN HACKERMAN, Robert A. Welch Foundation, 
ChairmanPETER J. BICKEL, University of California at Berkeley

GEORGE F. CARRIER, Harvard University
DEAN E. EASTMAN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

MARYE ANNE FOX, University of Texas

PHILLIP A. GRIFFITHS, Institute for Advanced Study

NEAL F. LANE, Rice University

ROBERT W. LUCKY, AT&T Bell Laboratories

CLAIRE E. MAX, Lawrence Livermore Laboratory

CHRISTOPHER F. McKEE, University of California at Berkeley

JAMES W. MITCHELL, AT&T Bell Laboratories

RICHARD S. NICHOLSON, American Association for the Advancement of
ScienceALAN SCHRIESHEIM, Argonne National Laboratory

KENNETH G. WILSON, Ohio State University

NORMAN METZGER, Executive Director
ivKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceThis report on systems integration is the second in a series of Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) reports focusing on the

competitive status of the U.S. computer industry. In CSTB's initial report,

Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the Agenda
 (NationalAcademy Press, Washington, D.C., 1990), leaders of the computing field

surveyed each of the major sectors of the computer industry. To no one's

surprise, the hardware sector was considered to be under serious competitive
pressure, with the semiconductor memory market all but ceded to Japanese

companies. The U.S. competitive position in the software market was deemed to

be strong but precarious, given the weakness in basic hardware components.

However, systems integration was identified as a large and rapidly growing

market in which the United States was a clear leader; unfortunately, few could

agree on just what systems integration was!
The present report is based on a colloquium held in January 1991 in which
participants from industry, academia, and government discussed what systems
integration is, its importance and prospects for growth, and why the United States

is perceived to have a strong competitive advantage. A distillation of the

colloquium discussions, this report is designed, in particular, to inform

policymakers, but it should also be of value to anyone with an interest in

computing and telecommunications.
The colloquium was organized by a steering committee chaired by Laszlo
Belady, then vice president for Software Technology and Advanced Computing

Technology Programs at the Microelectronics and Computer Technology

Corporation (he is now chairman and director of Mitsubishi Electric Research

Laboratories Inc.). Other members of the steering committee
PREFACEvKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.were Samuel Fuller, vice president of research at Digital Equipment Corporation;

Robert Lucky, executive director of research, Communications Sciences

Division, AT&T Bell Laboratories; and Irving Wladawsky-Berger, assistant

general manager of development and quality for IBM's Enterprise Systems.

Among CSTB staff, Damian Saccocio and Catherine Sparks had principal

responsibility for the colloquium; they were aided by CSTB meeting consultant

Pamela Rodgers and free-lance science writer Mark Bello.
Joseph F. Traub, 
ChairmanComputer Science and Telecommunications Board
PREFACEviKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 11 OVERVIEW 42 APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION
IN CONCEPT AND PRACTICE
 163 ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND
SOFTWARE 414 THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS
 625 PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS
 74  APPENDIXES  A Colloquium Program
 93B Colloquium Participants
 96CONTENTSviiKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSviiiKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive SummarySystems integration offers an enormous opportunity for U.S. firms to
capitalize on their strengths in such areas as complex software, networking, and

management. Although no single definition of systems integration is complete, it

can be broadly considered as the "wiring" together, via hardware and frequently

very complex software, of the often already existing islands of computer

applications into a coordinated enterprise-wide distributed network system. As

this formulation suggests, the fundamental challenges raised by systems

integration are those associated with building large systems from heterogeneous

components. There is a growing demand for such systems, and a growing need to

overcome the vexing challenges inherent in their design and development. At a

January 1991 colloquium organized by the Computer Science and

Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council, industry leaders,

university researchers, and government policymakers discussed how systems

integration is taking shape today and why it is expected to define the

characteristics of computerization for decades to come.
Systems integration can be viewed as a culmination of computing and
communications research done to date. To fulfill the promise of systems

integration, a wide range of component technologies
Šincluding databases,operating systems, architectures, networks, security mechanisms, human

interfaces, artificial intelligence, and communications
Šmust work together.
Expertise about the many domains in which systems integration is applied

(finance, retail, transportation, and so on) must also be invoked. Thus an

interdisciplinary approach is essential to successful systems integration, as are

complementary and coordinated research and development efforts in
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.industry, academia, and government. Toward both ends, colloquium participants

urged that universities pay more attention to systems integration in devising

educational and research programs in computing and communications.
The technological challenges encompassed in systems integration are
formidable, but for the moment they play to U.S. strengths. For example, much

of systems integration depends on the development of sophisticated and often

highly specialized software
Ša difficult process but one in which the United
States is preeminent. Other key abilities essential to successful systems

integration, also abilities in which the United States excels, include creative

problem solving and management of complex, often one-of-a-kind processes.
One area in which the U.S. record is mixed is that of standards setting. The
continued development of systems integration as an industry depends

fundamentally on the compatibility of component technologies. Therefore

standards of interoperability are indispensable. Colloquium participants were

uniform in urging that more attention be paid to the standards-making process
Šby government as well as by industry.
Systems integration involves more than technology: its highest-order task is
integrating peopleŠhelping them assimilate information, create, collaborate,
and, in sum, work more productively. While networks of machines and devices

are the ostensible manifestations of the trend toward distributed computing and

communications, the most significant connections, according to colloquium

participants, are those between people and organizational units using linked

devices. For this reason, systems integration technology, and in particular the

successful building and operation of networked computer applications, is

considered key to the emergence of an information infrastructure for the nation

(and the world).Colloquium participants expressed both hope and concern for the anticipated
information infrastructure. The quality of that infrastructure, as well as its timely

development, hinges on leadership and vision; this was a principal area of

agreement among participants. It also hinges on constructive collaboration among

industry, government, and academia. The federal High Performance Computing

and Communications (HPCC) program was recognized by participants as a key

step toward developing this infrastructure and as a valuable mechanism for

fostering interactions among government, industry, and academia. Other federal

projects, including systems modernization at government agencies, could also

serve to demonstrate applications of systems integration and options for cross-

sectoral collaboration.The United States faces a peculiar challenge in the evolution of its
computing, telecommunications, and broadcast media infrastructure. The quality

and availability of U.S. telephone service, entertainment, and business computing

are unparalleled. But because it was the first country to embrace
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.many of these new technologies, the United States must now build on a rapidly

aging (by the standards of information technology development today)

foundation. The huge installed technology base is both an engine for current

activities and a constraint on the development and implementation of new

technologies; obtaining the benefit of the new with minimal disruption to ongoing

activities that depend on the old is no small challenge.
One important factor in the evolution of information infrastructure is the
body of U.S. telecommunications regulations. Colloquium participants observed

that those regulations may not have kept pace with changing technologies and

industry boundaries. In particular, the proliferation of digital technology into

communications results in an effective convergence of computing,

communications, and entertainment (programming) industries that raises new

questions about fairness, competitive conduct, and other concerns long addressed

through telecommunications regulations.
As the predominantly digital technologies essential for systems integration
continue to mature, the focus of activity in systems integration may shift from

creating a solution to a problem to engineering that solution. This change in focus

may allow foreign competitors who excel in engineering and implementation but

not necessarily in devising innovative solutions an opportunity to enter the

systems integration market. U.S. systems integration firms thus should not be

content with being first to market, nor sanguine in their belief in the "American"

nature of the industry. U.S. high-technology industries are rife with instances in

which American leadership was supplanted by superior production from abroad.

Moreover, colloquium participants observed that foreign countries, most notably

Japan and countries in Western Europe, have been developing their information

infrastructures with greater levels of determination and comprehensiveness than

those exhibited thus far in the United States.
To date, systems integration has been a success story. It is time that
government, industry, and academia collectively acknowledge the value of

systems integration and act to assure the ongoing vitality and competitiveness of

U.S. technical and commercial activities in systems integration.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1OverviewNow into its fifth decade, the so-called computer age has wrought an
expectation of rapid technological progress. In fact, the sustained pace of rapid

advance in hardware has become formulaic. The storage capacity of dynamic

random access memory chips quadruples about every four years, processing

speeds increase at double-digit annual rates, and the cost of computing declines

between 20 and 30 percent each year. Add to these computing trends a growing

array of digital communication devices and related technologies, and the raw

capabilities of modern information technology can astound. Indeed, the

technologyŠfrom automatic teller machines to laser scanning at the checkout
stand to desktop publishing and to global distributed computing networks
Šhastransformed spheres of business and many other areas of human endeavor. To

many, today's applications are early manifestations of a seemingly endless stream

of possibilities flowing from the font of information technology.
Still, society's appreciation, mastery, and application of information
technology have grown more slowly and more fitfully than have the power and

potential of hardware. The learning curve associated with the technology has

proved to be steep. But organizations that have managed to move high up on the

curve are reaping substantial benefits. These organizations have advanced beyond

using computers to automate existing processes and have proceeded to

enterprise-wide systems integration. Capitalizing on the convergence of computer

and communications technology, they use hardware and very complex software to

connect islands of computer applications into coordinated distributed network

systems that often are global in reach. The integration entails far more than

systems engineeringŠthe physical linkage
OVERVIEW4Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of disparate and once-incompatible technologies. It involves melding application

domains, such as manufacturing, finance, retail, or transportation, with a

supporting infrastructure of information technology components, including

databases, operating systems, architectures, networks, communications devices,

and security measures. The result is a transformation of the business environment

and of business processes, a strategic change aimed at rapid capture and

assimilation of information for planning and decision making.
Today, executives and researchers speak of ''learning organizations'' and of
the need for businesses to "reinvent" themselves as competitive conditions

change. Both concepts reflect the critically important enabling role played by

information technology.Systems integration represents, in effect, the fruitful culmination of
computing and communications research and experience, and it is digital

technology's point of departure into the information age. "If there is any trend

that has been consistent over the last four decades of computation, it is

integration," explained Laszlo Belady, former vice president for software

technology and advanced computing technology at the Microelectronics and

Computer Technology Corp. (he is now chairman and director of Mitsubishi

Electric Research Laboratories Inc.). "Forty years ago," he continued, "everything

was isolated in terms of computer use
Šisolated in space and time. Now we see
that both dimensions are integrated. There is continuity in electronic information,

in time, and more and more applications have become interconnected. This leads

to distributed computing networks."
Some U.S. businesses and government organizations are investing heavily in
their information futures. Corporate spending for private networks now accounts

for more than half of all investment in U.S. communications networks.
1 This hasspawned an amalgam of uncoordinated networking initiatives, but many

organizations remain untethered to the electronic connections that have sprouted

over the last decade. Some small and midsize companies have formed

information partnerships and pooled their resources to overcome the large

financial and technical obstacles to exploiting the advantages of integrating and

linking their information technology.
2 Most have not.
Many observers believe that the United States must build a national
information infrastructure and that this information-age equivalent of the national

highway system will not materialize from the ad hoc networks that have emerged

in recent years. Advocates, including members of the Computer Science and

Telecommunications Board, believe that the potential benefits wrought by new

digital technologyŠas well as those to come, when information in all its diverse
textual, graphic, and audio forms can be transmitted electronically
Šwill multiply
if the economy and all of society are integrated into a cohesive nationwide

network with links to the rest of the world.
3OVERVIEW5Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In January 1991, the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
(CSTB) of the National Research Council sponsored a colloquium to contemplate

the future of systems integration on scales small and large. Participants included

representatives of manufacturers of information technology, systems integration

firms, and businesses that are heavy users of information technology;

government agencies; and universities.In particular, participants evaluated the implications of the trend toward
distributed computing networks for the U.S. computer and telecommunications

industries. More generally, they assessed the significance of this trend for the

U.S. economy and debated the roles of government, industry, and universities in

developing a nationwide information infrastructure, a computing and

communications network with universal access.
This report summarizes the proceedings of the day-long colloquium.
Supplementary materials, referenced in the text, were used to augment or amplify

the points made by participants. The remainder of this chapter provides a

historical overview of the systems integration industry and of the trends

underlying the growth of distributed computing networks. 
Chapter 2 describesapplications of integrated information systems in business, as well as the

challenges that information networking poses. Enabling technology, especially

software and communications technology, is the focus of 
Chapter 3. In 
Chapter 4
,views of the future and the evolution of today's information networks into

systems of systems are discussed. The final chapter summarizes the main issues

and themes that emerged during the colloquium.
EVOLUTION OF A U.S. BUSINESS CONCEPT
Like the computer and the telephone, systems integration is a product of
U.S. innovation. Its roots can be traced to the 1960s, when federal agencies first

contracted with firms to design large-scale systems for data processing,

communications, and aerospace and defense applications. Opportunities in the

commercial sector grew in step with advances in computing technology and with

the proliferation of proprietary hardware and software products. Some business

customers persisted with a single vendor, assuming, sometimes incorrectly,

compatibility across different families and generations of products. Requiring

features or applications not offered by the supplier of their original equipment or

responding to better price offerings, other customers picked and chose among

rival vendors and became the owners of collections of incompatible hardware and

software items. In addition, many organizations developed their own customized

software applications. With each passing year, it became increasingly difficult to

incorporate new technology into the existing base of hardware, software, and

databases.User demand for connectivity of hardware fueled the growth of systems
engineering businesses, as did the emergence of affordable desktop ma
OVERVIEW6Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.chines, which led to what has been described as the democratization of

computing. Subsequent demand for interoperability of software applications

created new business opportunities. From these beginnings and with the aid of the

computer industry's gradual and still-continuing migration to open architectures

and networking standards, systems engineering evolved into systems integration,

a more robust and more comprehensive undertaking that goes beyond making

incompatible machines "talk" to each other. Today, systems integration is

recognized as a 
problem-solving activity
 that entails harnessing and coordinating
the power and capabilities of information technology in ways tailored to meet a

customer's well-defined set of needs. The result is a complex one-of-a-kind system

that, for a business, is intended to increase productivity, flexibility,

responsiveness, and, ultimately, competitive advantage. Value is derived from the

ability to achieve systemwide synergy among the technological elements and

among the people linked by the network.
Typically, the end products are "large complex applications" built with a
"broad range of knowledge," explained Ivan Selin, then under secretary for

management in the U.S. Department of State (he is now chairman of the Nuclear

Regulatory Commission). ''Although hardware and software may be the bulk of

what is delivered, there is a lot of consulting, a lot of modification, interfacing,

coding, installingŠmaking this operation work in a large application," he said.
Such work requires an interdisciplinary approach that includes not only hardware

and software experts but also experts in the application domain for which the

system is being developed (e.g., in a steel foundry it is vital to include individuals

who understand steel manufacturing). According to Selin, founder of the systems

integration firm American Management Systems, ''know-how" is the primary

source of value added.
STATUS OF THE U.S. INDUSTRY
Unlike some other segments of the U.S. computer sector, the systems
integration industry is thriving and is positioned well ahead of still-embryonic

foreign competition. In 1990, the systems integration industry had estimated

revenues of $14.9 billion; revenues in 1991 were projected to grow 13 percent to

$16.8 billion.4 Enlarging foreign markets, especially Europe, are expected to
drive rapid revenue increases during the next five years.
5About 1,600 firms earn all or the bulk of their revenues from systems
integration. The largest of these include Electronic Data Systems, a subsidiary of

General Motors with annual revenues of almost $6 billion, and Andersen

Consulting, a division of the accounting firm Arthur Andersen & Co. Among the

newest competitors in the commercial market are defense firms that have

developed their systems integration expertise in designing
OVERVIEW7Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and developing complex computer-controlled weapons systems or parts of the

U.S. military's sophisticated command, control, communication, and intelligence

network.In an industry traditionally structured to sell hardware components and
supporting software products, systems integration is having profound effects on

business strategy. Companies are maneuvering to meet the demands and needs of

droves of customers who are linking their information technology into networks.

In 1990 alone, U.S. businesses connected nearly 4 million personal computers to

local networks, bringing the total number of networked PCs to more than 11

million.6Many companies already providing computing and communication products
and services have pegged systems integration and networked computing as key

growth areas. Examples include the International Business Machines Corp.,

American Telephone & Telegraph Co., Digital Equipment Corp., Xerox Corp.,

Hewlett-Packard Co., Unisys, Motorola Inc., Compaq, and the NCR Corp. (which

recently merged with AT&T). Major independent software publishers
Šamongthem Microsoft, the Lotus Development Corp., Computer Associates

International, and the Oracle Corp.
Šhave followed suit and have made
networking applications a priority. Also vying in the market are retailer Sears,

aircraft manufacturers McDonnell Douglas and Boeing, and accounting firms

Arthur Andersen & Co., Price Waterhouse, Ernst and Young, and KPMG Peat

Marwick. These and other firms with considerable experience in building and

managing complex systems of information technology to support their main lines

of business have created separate divisions to market their systems integration

expertise.Sometimes called flexible partnerships, alliances among firms are common.
On one project, companies with complementary expertise may combine their

resources and skills, but on another former partners may vie as competitors.

Moreover, large businesses with in-house personnel assigned to building and

managing information systems may call on outside firms for needed expertise in

particular areas.
The strategic importance of systems integration and prospects for continuing
high rates of systems integration are influencing both the behavior and structure

of the computer and communications industries. In increasing numbers, hardware

and software manufacturers are moving away from building proprietary

equipment and applications and committing themselves to "open systems"
Šmaking software and hardware that conform with industry-accepted standards

and, therefore, can work with the offerings of other vendors.
Recent acquisitions provide further evidence of the profound influence of
systems integration and information networking. The most notable, perhaps, is

AT&T's purchase of the NCR Corp., the nation's fifth-largest
OVERVIEW8Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.computer manufacturer. A prime motivation behind AT&T's prolonged but

eventually successful takeover, AT&T Chairman Robert E. Allen was quoted as

saying, was to create a company capable of providing "global networks as easy to

use and as accessible as the telephone network is today."
7 Also acting to
strengthen its competitive position in the market for networking applications and

services, the Lotus Development Corp., one of the country's largest independent

software publishers, purchased cc: Mail, a company with expertise in electronic

mail applications. Previously, Lotus and Novell Inc., the largest maker of

software for managing networks of personal computers, had explored the

possibility of a merger, another indication of how companies are maneuvering to

compete in the growing market for intra-and inter-networking products and

services.Global ProspectsSystems integration remains largely an American phenomenon, but one that
has captured the attention of foreign businesses
Šas customers and as
competitors. Although beginning from a small base, foreign sales represent the

fastest-growing market segment for some established U.S. systems integration

businesses. Opportunities in foreign markets are likely to stimulate local

competition, as well as draw new international competitors. Several colloquium

participants said that they anticipated greater interest from Japanese electronics

and telecommunication conglomerates, such as Toshiba, Fujitsu, NEC, Nippon

Telephone and Telegraph, and Hitachi, each with annual revenues in excess of

$10 billion. In Europe, cooperative government-sponsored research and

development projects focusing on future computing and telecommunications

technologies raise the specter of greater local competition in that lucrative

market.Despite the expectation that foreign firms will make a determined push in
global markets for systems integration services, Belady and other colloquium

participants suggested that at this stage in the evolution of information

technology, the emerging opportunities are there for U.S. firms to lose. Systems

integration, said Selin, is a "particularly strong example of [a] uniquely American

ability to solve one-of-a-kind problems or solve very complex, very difficult

problems in ways that are very hard to imagine. . . .[W]e're very effective when it

comes to providing technological solutions to difficult problems."
For now, Selin added, the U.S. systems integration industry benefits from
demonstrable successes that have made it the "recognized world leader." Because

of U.S. accomplishments in designing, developing, and implementing large

computer and communications systems, "being an American is a big advantage,

not a disadvantage [as it is in] a number of other parts of our industry," he said.
OVERVIEW9Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Charles S. Feld, vice president for management information systems at
Frito-Lay Inc., also noted a significant gap between the systems integration

capabilities of U.S. companies and those of foreign firms. Having built an

advanced information network that links all elements of its domestic operations,

Frito-Lay intends to build a counterpart for its expanding international business,

which has units in 22 countries. The task has proved to be very challenging. In

his visits to foreign operations acquired by Frito-Lay, Feld has found that, "even

though the hardware is exactly the same as what we would be using here, it is like

being back in the 1960s in terms of the way people do projects and the way they

think about things. I think we really do have a national asset here that is

tremendous."Nevertheless, there is concern that the flagging competitive status of U.S.
firms in "upstream" hardware manufacturing industries, particularly

semiconductor manufacturing equipment and certain segments of the semi-

conductor industry, could place the U.S. systems integration industry at a

disadvantage in international markets. Foreign firms with strengths in these

building-block industries, such as the Japanese firms mentioned above, could

leverage their technological advantages in the expanding market for computer and

communications networks, especially if U.S. systems integration firms do not

have timely access to new hardware products.
Sources of U.S. Advantage
U.S. leadership in systems integration is attributed to a variety of factors,
some more tangible than others. An acknowledged source of advantage is the

continuing strong performance of the U.S. software manufacturers, who account

for more than 60 percent of the global market. Software, particularly customized

programs, is the primary source of the "value-added or content of the systems we

build," explained Samuel H. Fuller, Digital Equipment Corporation's vice

president for research. Virtually all colloquium participants agreed that

maintaining the U.S. advantage in software design and development is critical to

future success in the emerging global market for systems integration services.
"Ultimately," said Alfred V. Aho, assistant vice president at Bell
Communications Research, "software is going to be the limiting factor" in

determining the value and utility of integrated systems, as well as the success of

firms vying to build these systems.
Also important but often unappreciated, according to several speakers, is the
advantage conferred by international acceptance of many computer and

communications standards that originated in the United States. This conformance

with U.S. standards reflects in large part the nation's pioneering role in

developing and applying information technology, resulting in a kind of after-the-

fact acceptance of proven technologies. International adoption
OVERVIEW10Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of technology developed in the United States opened world markets to U.S. firms

and obliged local competitors to follow the U.S. lead.
However, international standards organizations are becoming much more
proactive and are attempting to anticipate technological progress. Their aim is to

integrate important innovations into standards as new technology nears

commercial application, avoiding the ferment of de facto standardization and

providing information-technology users with an efficient means of linking

existing and new hardware and software. In practice, international standards

bodies have far to go to achieve this model of efficiency, but proactive

approaches significantly enhance the strategic importance of standards making.

Firms that are the most adept in the standards arena may be able to leapfrog the

current competition when new generations of computing and communication

technology are ready for the marketplace. In the opinion of some colloquium

participants, U.S. firms and the federal government have been far more passive

than their European and Japanese counterparts in international standards-setting

activities that are likely to shape the future of information networks.
The success of U.S. systems integration firms may also stem from what a
number of colloquium speakers described as an American capacity for flexible

thinking and managing complexity, a hallmark of integrated information

systems. Irving Wladawsky-Berger, assistant general manager of development

and quality for IBM's Enterprise Systems, emphasized that the nation's prowess in

design and innovation and its propensity for change helped stake the U.S.

industry to its leadership position. Selin expressed a similar view. "As long as our

computer industry concentrates on building applications and building problem-

solving systems and not just trying to produce chips or simple devices in larger

numbers and more cheaply than other people do, I think we'll do very well," he

said.But the complexity wrought by an ever-growing web of interconnected
technologies, people, and organizations has also led to efforts to create order and

simplicity. Standards are one manifestation of these efforts (see 
Chapter 3appendix, "Standards Making at a Glance"). For example, the evolving standard

for Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) service promises to provide an

interface for worldwide networking. Growing interest in object-oriented

programming and in reusable software elements is another illustration of efforts

to simplify systems integration and eliminate some of the complexity and

redundancy in building information networks.
Within these emerging areas, cautioned Wladawsky-Berger, may lie the
seeds of problems for U.S. systems integration firms. "Executing well is

absolutely paramount," he said. "It may be that the design part of systems

integration, which is where we excel, is becoming an ever-smaller part of the

total problem, and the execution part of it
Šthat is, 'get the damn thing built and
working'Šis where more and more of the problems are. Now,
OVERVIEW11Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.notice that, while we in the United States are superb in this ferment of design and

innovation, lots has been written about our weaknesses in the back end, in

executing. . . . That is something I think we need to watch out for."
Selin noted, however, that greater standardization and uniformity in
applications would likely create more opportunities, at both the low and high

ends of the market. With increasing standardization, he said, "the detailed

specification of the components becomes less important. . . . What happens is

that for problems that took a one-of-a-kind solution, where everything was

customized and therefore so expensive that very few companies could afford to

solve their problems, it now becomes feasible to do three-quarters of the software

with an applications-specific piece of software. Therefore," he continued, "you

make it economical for a much larger range of companies to come in. . . . [T]he

total size of the market will increase considerably because more and more

organizations will be able to afford what only a few could before. At the same

time, you go out and you do tougher things."
As technology and skills improve, Selin added, systems integrators will be
called on to solve "one-of-a-kind problems that are more complex than anything

we thought possible 10 years ago."
CONVERGING TECHNOLOGY: A DRIVING FORCE
A common base of digital technology is evolving rapidly. The computer now
exists in many forms
Šfrom supercomputers and massively parallel machines to
the ubiquitous desk-top and lap-top personal computers to the highly portable

pen-based and palm-top computers that are now emerging. Just as significant as

this diversity is the tremendous variety of complementing devices for

communicating, gathering, and presenting information. Besides the familiar

printer, the "peripheral" devices of computers now include copiers, facsimile

machines, telephones, answering machines, pagers, scanners, electronic cameras,

data-storage devices, optical and electronic sensors, and a vast and growing array

of computer-controlled machinery.
Although the decade-old prediction of a personal computer in every home is
not even close to being realized, digitally controlled devices with embedded

software and hardware are pervasive in the home: video cassette recorders and

cameras, compact disc players, telephones, microwaves, and other appliances. In

prospect is an all-digital high-definition television system, a development that

could transform that most ubiquitous and passive of household appliances into a

machine capable of storing, retrieving, and manipulating video images.
The convergence of technologies is also evident in the area of wireless
communications, now principally the domain of cellular telephones. Several
OVERVIEW12Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.firms have developed wireless methods for linking computers in networks. Such

over-the-air connections between computers will make network configurations as

flexible as those for cellular telephones.
As the communication capabilities of computers grow and as communication
devices become more computerlike, opportunities for information services and

products multiply. The hybridization of information technology blurs distinctions

between industries, giving rise to rivalries among firms that once competed in

separate markets. For consumers, the ubiquity of digital technology creates

exciting new opportunities
Šnew ways to gather and manipulate information, new
ways to work and recreate, and new ways to collaborate. For businesses, the

technology creates new opportunities that extend throughout and across

organizations. Many firms are now seeking to achieve the synergies afforded by

information networking through systems integration.
Today, however, systems integration is an option largely restricted to large
firms, some of which have invested over $1 billion to revamp their corporate

information systems and create an infrastructure for distributed computing
networks. Such high costs attest to the complexity and the magnitude of the task.

The expense and complexity also reflect the difficulties posed by the lack of

standards and communication protocols essential for networks linking a

heterogeneous collection of equipment. As a result, many of today's networks do

not achieve the ideal of a seamless computing and communications environment.

Each brand of equipment may have its own control computer, and even the most

vigilant network management teams can have trouble isolating and responding to

problems that can disrupt the entire information system. The potential for

problems is magnified, and new ones, such as the threat of security breaches,

arise when organizations link their private networks to those of other

organizations or when network access can be achieved through public telephone

lines.A NETWORKED SOCIETY: ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
As ambitious as they are, today's systems integration projects are
microcosms of the nation-and globe-spanning information networks that are

expected to evolve. In effect, said Robert L. Martin, vice president for software

technology and systems at Bell Communications Research, the benefits now

being reaped by firms that have invested in their own information networks

would be extended to small businesses and individuals. "You could bring

intelligence further down the economic hierarchy," he added.
Visions of the computer age's more revolutionary successor, the information
age, cast the computer as a gateway that provides access to information in

virtually all parts of the world. Proponents of the information-age
OVERVIEW13Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.equivalent to universal telephone access contend that a national information

infrastructure is vital to the nation's economic competitiveness.
"I believe the broader issue is to change the concept of a system to a highly
networked distributed base," Martin said. "You would then have an education

network that could bring the appropriate educational talent to the disabled, the

gifted, or the average student. You would have a very different form of health

system."Such thinking is not confined to the United States. In Europe and Japan,
government and industry are funding collaborative research and development

projects to address the technological hurdles that must be overcome to develop an

infrastructure and the services it would support. The Japanese and European

governments are also fostering development of key standards for achieving

compatibility and interoperability. Several European nations have implemented

accelerated schedules for installing the digital networks and common channel

signaling necessary for ISDN service. In Japan, the Nippon Telephone and

Telegraph Co. has announced its intention to develop the most advanced

telecommunications system in the world. By 1995, it intends to offer ISDN

service in all 56 Japanese cities, and by the year 2015, it will link all homes by

optical fiber.8 At the same time, Japan's Ministry of International Trade and
Industry (MITI) has initiated a series of programs designed to integrate its

computer, telecommunications, and other information-related industries and to

network its society. Recently announced initiatives include research and

development projects on interoperable database systems and improved graphical

user interfaces, modeling studies of "information age cities," and several

cooperative research programs aimed at helping developing countries build their

own information networks.
9Colloquium participants did not see U.S. government and industry as
attending to the nation's information infrastructure with the same levels of

determination and comprehensiveness as those exhibited in Japan and Europe.

Virtually all endorsed administration and legislative proposals calling for the

creation of a National Research and Education Network (NREN), an information

"superhighway" that eventually would transmit data at rates of several billion bits

per second, or more than 1,000 times faster than today's standard data networks.

As proposed, NREN would connect the nation's universities and collaborating

companies. The administration's initiative, called the High Performance

Computing and Communications (HPCC) program, would provide a focal point

for developing the hardware, software, and systems that a truly national

information infrastructure will require. (See Chapter 4 for a discussion of the
HPCC program.)Indeed, whether practiced on the scale of a single company or on the scale
of an entire nation, systems integration poses a variety of technical, social,

economic, and regulatory issues, which are examined in the next chapters.
OVERVIEW14Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTES1. Durros, Irwin. 1990. "Calling for Cooperation," 
Bellcore Exchange, November
ŒDecember, p. 7.2. For example, 18 midsize paper companies with collective annual revenues of $4 billion pooled
their resources to create a $50 million global information network that links the companies,

offices of major customers, and international sales offices. This system permits same-day

responses to inquiries from customers, as compared with the industry average of 12 days.

(Konsynski, Benn R., and F. Warren McFarlan. 1990. "Information Partnerships
ŠSharedData, Shared Scale," 
Harvard Business Review
, September
ŒOctober, pp. 115
Œ118.) Also, a
number of Wall Street security firms
Šwhere information technology expenditures can
account for 15 percent to 20 percent of expenses
Šare engaged in several types of
cooperative activities, including sharing disaster-recovery sites, combining and distributing

their analytical libraries, and developing a shared Electronic Data Interchange network.

(Ambrosio, Johanna. 1991. "Wall Street Firms Try Shared Technology," 
ComputerWorld,June 24.)3. Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research Council. 1988. 
The NationalChallenge in Computer Science and Technology
, National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C. See also the September 1991 issue of 
Scientific American, which has several articles
relating to information infrastructure.
4. Department of Commerce. 1991. 
U.S. Industrial Outlook 1991
, Information Services, Government
Printing Office, Washington D.C., p. 27-5.
5. As reported in Gartner Group Inc. 1990. "Systems Integration Scenario," Gartner Group Inc.,
Greenwich, Conn., p. 7.
6. Rothfeder, Jeffrey, Peter Coy, and Gary McWilliams. 1990. "Taming the Wild Network," 
BusinessWeek, October 8, p. 143.
7. Shapiro, Eben. 1991. "AT&T Buying Computer Maker in Stock Deal Worth $7.4 Billion," 
NewYork Times, May 7, p. A1.
8. Bellcore Technical Liaison Office. 1990. "Japanese Telecommunications," unpublished paper,
Bellcore, Morristown, N.J., July, p. 2-1.
9. For a compelling discussion of the enormous potential for an information infrastructure to transform
society as seen by Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), the reader is

referred to the so-called "Sixth Generation" or New Information Processing Technology

(NIPT) project currently proposed by MITI and discussed in its 
Report of the Research
Committee on New Information Processing Technology
, Industrial Electronics Division,
Machinery and Information Industries Bureau, Ministry of International Trade and Industry,

March 1991.OVERVIEW15Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Applications of Integrated Systems:
Evolution in Concept and PracticeAsk a dozen practitioners what systems integration is, and you will probably
get as many different definitions (see 
Box 2.1). Ask that same group what
systems integration is intended to accomplish, and the answers are likely to be

more uniform. The standard response is "solutions" or "application solutions."

For people who are not steeped in the field, however, that answer prompts a

fundamental question: What's the problem in the first place?
Typically, the set of needs and problems that an integrated computing and
communications system addresses is unique to an organization. At snack food

maker Frito-Lay, for example, the challenge was to develop an information

system that helped the company leverage the advantages and efficiencies that

accrue to its large size and yet enabled the national firm to maneuver flexibly in

local markets, where it sells the 5 billion packages of snack food that generate

annual revenue of $4.5 billion. The company's integrated system, widely used as

an example of an effective corporate information system, links all parts of its

operations. The system has allowed Frito-Lay "to be decentralized in its

marketplace activities," explained Charles S. Feld, vice president for

management information systems, "and at the same time, leverage our whole

manufacturing and logistics system. We have been able to do that through the use

of information and technology, primarily by providing information to the people

that have to make decisions lower in the organization." (See 
Box 2.2.)MOTIVATIONS FOR SYSTEMS INTEGRATION
Despite the great variability in the issues and needs organizations seek to
resolve with applications of information technology, there are at least five

general categories of motivations for investing in systems integration.
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE16Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 2.1. DEFINITIONS OF SYSTEMS INTEGRATION
''Fulfilling a practical objective through the assemblage of
diverse component technologies and disciplines that are critical to

each other's success. It is a teaming of technology components that

results in high synergy.''
ŠJeffrey M. Heller, 
Senior Vice President, Electronic Data Systems
Systems integration is "process innovationŠto simplify basic
business operations, to compress the time they require, and to narrow

the gap between the product or service and the customer."
ŠW. James Fischer, 
Managing Partner, Andersen Consulting
"People building upon existing components to satisfy a
customer's need."
ŠRobert L. Martin, 
Vice President for Software Technology and
Systems, Bell Communications Research
"Effective integration implies a system-level architecture that
permits the integration, or connection, of system components and

permits later integration of unplanned components. Effective

integration also implies an integrating mechanism that permits

components to share data. It implies an overall model that permits the

user to understand what the system is doing. It implies a constant

user interface. It also requires integration of the functions of the

applications that the system supports."
ŠLarry E. Druffel, 
Director, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie 
Mellon University
"It started with technologyŠputting bits and pieces togetherŠ
and grew into managing information. It has grown into understanding

processes and now, I believe, it is getting into understanding the

human element of what we are trying to accomplish."
ŠMichael Taylor, 
Central Systems Engineering Manager, Digital
Equipment Corporation
"Solving a problem efficiently, recursively; giving disparate
components a single-system look and feel. . . We should keep

[integrated information systems] simple so that we can maintain them

and use them, and we should keep them affordable so they will deliver

the greatest value to the largest number of people."
ŠAlfred V. Aho, 
Assistant Vice President, Bell Communications
ResearchAPPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE17Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 2.2. THE FRITO-LAY INFORMATION SYSTEM
If an executive at Frito-Lay headquarters near Dallas wants to know
how his company's products are faring on supermarket shelves in Boston,

or the price of a corn futures contract at the Chicago Board of Trade, or the

fuel efficiency of the company's delivery fleet, that information is instantly

available. In fact, current information on virtually every aspect of the snack

food maker's operations
Šmanufacturing, purchasing, warehousing,
distribution, marketing, sales, management, and research
Šis easily
retrieved with the company's information system and presented in the level

of detail desired.
Widely cited as a model of an effective corporate information system,
Frito-Lay's computer network has established itself as the company's most

important strategic and competitive tool. Executives say it is a requirement

for business survival in the 1990s.
A national company competing against local and regional snack food
manufacturers for shelf and display space in more than 400,000 stores, the

subsidiary of Pepsico Inc. has used its comprehensive intelligence to

transform itself into a "micromarketer" that enjoys the economies of scale

that accrue to a multibillion-dollar enterprise.
"We learned how to handle the volume, we learned how to handle the
speed over the years," explained Charles S. Feld, Frito-Lay's vice president

for management information systems. ''But what has happened to us is, our

marketplace has gotten very complex. Boston is now very different from

Chicago, very different from California; supermarkets are different from

convenience stores; and products are differentiated by flavors and bag

sizes. The world is no longer one size or one color of jeans. Everybody

wants diversity. So we have had to figure out a way to leverage our size and

prowess in the marketplace and still be able to compete on a very targeted

basis."The company's 10,000-person sales force provides the information
that is key to Frito-Lay's nimble performance in local markets. Equipped

with handheld computers, a sales person keys in orders during sales calls

and furnishes customers with a printout, an on-the-spot sales receipt with

tax, discounts, and promotions included. At the end of each day, the sales

force electronically transmits sales, orders, and other information to the

headquarter's mainframe computer. The next morning, the sales people link

up again with the mainframe to receive the day's routing and scheduling

information.With the daily-updated information from the field, the company can
track performance in precise detail, down to the sales movement of an

individual product in a single store. As a result, managers say they know

more about local marketing conditions than their competitors do, and they

can devise sales strategies accordingly.
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE18Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Before the networked information system was introduced, the
company's marketing strategy consisted of two or three national initiatives,

formulated at the top of the organization. Now, with the benefit of detailed

knowledge of local markets, middle managers generate and execute some

300 sales-building ideas each year. While top management oversees these

local and regional marketing initiatives, the shift in tactical responsibilities

permits executives to focus more on the company's strategic direction.
Executives at the 60-year-old company, which employs 26,000 people,
cite effective teamwork across the organization as the primary advantage

of the information system. Benefits have been realized in many forms.

Electronic data entry by the sales force eliminated time-consuming

paperwork, saving between 30,000 and 50,000 hours each week. The

company was able to consolidate 400 sales routes even as its annual sales

volume increased to $4.5 billion, from $3.7 billion. Improved tracking of

product movement reduced the number of "stales" (products that have

exceeded their shelf lives) from 2 percent of sales volume to less than 1

percent, resulting in annual savings of $39 million.
Designed to accommodate changing needs and new applications, the
information system continues to evolve and increase its strategic and

operational value to the company.
Feld attributes the success of the system to three enabling factors: "a
business proposition worthy of the investment" in information technology,

systems integration skill, and "the will to see the job through during tough

times."1. 
For many organizations, experiences with information technology 
have not lived up to expectations
. American business invested
billions in computing and communications technology during the

1980s.1 At the start of the decade, the nation's inventory of computer
terminals totaled about 4 million; as of today, some 75 million

IBM-compatible personal computers alone have been sold, and half

of all U.S. office workers have a computer on their desks.
2 Manyfirms realized significant benefits. But a large number did not, or at

least returns to their investments were not commensurate with initial

expectations. One major disappointment was the negligible

improvement in the productivity of the service sector (although gains

were made in the quality and diversity of service output), which has

been estimated to account for about 85 percent of the nation's total

stock of information technology items.
3Hindsight offers some valuable lessons. The most obvious, of
course, is that merely possessing technology, regardless of its

capabilities, does not
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE19Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.translate automatically into an organizational asset. As simple as it

may seem now, this lesson is actually the product of evolutionary

changes in technology and, most important, in understanding the role

of that technology.
2. 
The proliferation of information technology products and vendors 
has produced the need for connectivity and interoperability
. Manyorganizations own heterogeneous collections of computing and

communication equipment, purchasing, for example, one vendor's

machines for engineers, another's for administrative support staff,

and yet another's for managing large databases and on-line

transaction-processing activities. Because of incompatibilities in

operating systems and other vendor-specific peculiarities, dissimilar

machines, and the people who used them, functioned in isolation.

Exchanging information between these computing islands entailed

laborious translation procedures or, worse yet, manual reentry of

information.This state of affairs led to user demand for connectivity, a means
to let unlike systems perform at least rudimentary tasks such as

exchanging files. But connectivity was not enough. Users also

wanted their hardware and software to be interoperable, that is, to

make applications, information, and peripheral devices easily

accessible to any computer, regardless of who made it and what

operating system it used.
3. 
An installed base of information technology has to accommodate new
technology and new capabilities
. The need to combine the old with
the new is a perennial source of headaches for managers of

information systems. Firms that have invested vast sums in

information technology cannot simply jettison that investment and

start anew with each successive wave of commercial innovation. Nor

would they want to even if they could afford it. The databases and

applications embedded within existing information systems are often

described as the "corporate jewels," strategically important assets

that are integrally related to the firms' operations. Moreover, the

value of existing information and programs can be increased greatly

when integrated with the capabilities of new hardware and software.
4. 
Advances in technology, combined with growing appreciation of 
what can he accomplished with that technology, have prompted

firms to search for new applications and sources of competitive

advantage . Although the computer
Šor, more appropriately, the
ever-growing family of digital technologies
Šmay not yet merit the
title of universal machine, growing appreciation of its potential is

inspiring organizations to apply the technology in new ways and, in

so doing, pursue new business opportunities. Just as important, new

capabilities in computing and communications are motivating

individual firms and groups of firms
Šsuppliers and customers and
even industries
Što reevaluate their entire way of doing business.
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE20Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5. 
In an increasingly global economy, firms must rely on
telecommunications and information technology to manage and

coordinate their operations and to stay abreast of international

competitors. The ability to communicate and transmit large volumes
of data nearly instantaneously facilitates closer linkages with foreign

subsidiaries, suppliers, and customers, but it also telescopes the time

organizations have to respond to changes in international markets and

to the actions of competitors. If, for example, a manufacturing firm's

competitors can place electronic orders with foreign suppliers or

change the specifications for a part and transmit the new design

immediately to a collaborator located half the world away, then that

firm must also have the same capabilities just to keep pace with the

competition.None of these motivations stands entirely apart from the others.
Collectively, they are driving businesses and other organizations to use their

information technology innovatively and effectively. Moreover, information

networking technology is so intricately related to the broader phenomenon of the

growing interdependency among regional, national, and global economies that the

importance of its role can only be expected to increase.
DISTRIBUTED NETWORKED COMPUTING: EVOLUTION IN
UNDERSTANDINGThe steady stream of complementing innovations in computer and
communications technology provides the building blocks of systems integration

projects. Components of hardware and software are integrated into distributed

computing networks, which many firms view as their "central nervous systems,"

the means to coordinate all elements of their operations into a synergistic whole.

The result is a sprouting of electronic and optical-fiber connections that link the

information age's equivalents to the pools of neurons of varying size and function

that make up the central nervous system and work in concert with the brain.

Centers of activity range from individual computers on a network to local area

networks (LANs), which connect computers at single sites, to wide area networks

(WANs) that link LANs or individual machines across a region, a nation, or the

world.While networks of machines and devices are the ostensible manifestations
of the trend toward distributed computing and communications, the most

significant connections, according to colloquium participants, are those between

people and organizational units using linked devices. It is at the level of the

worker that systems integration and distributed computing should have its

greatest impact, many asserted.
This expectation is markedly different from the notions of automation that
have heavily influenced computer applications since the 1960s. In the
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE21Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.early days of commercial computing, companies used the technology to automate

"simple stand-alone processes," explained Gerard R. Weis, senior vice president

at Sears Technology Services Inc. "We would do things like capture data,

keypunch it, and report on it simply to compress the time from the time we got

the data until we produced a report and to obtain operational cost savings by

reducing the number of people who manually produced those reports."
In the following decade, according to the recounting of Weis and other
participants, firms began to link automated processes within some units of their

business. The result was what has been described as archipelagos of automation

created from islands of automation.
"The 1980s," said Weis, drawing on his own company's experiences, "saw
us take two divergent paths. . . . On the business side, we focused on data

integration and data-based management so that we began to tie together

information in the various lines of businesses. On the technology side, we focused

on pushing down the cost of running those systems and on making sure that the

infrastructure would support the data integration that was going on at the

applications level."What many firms have learned during this 30-year evolution is that
automating business as usual did not tap the most significant competitive

advantages that can be achieved with information technology, explained W.

James Fischer, managing partner for technology services at Andersen

Consulting. Whatever the gains inherent in this approach of assigning computing

technology to its most obvious uses
Špreparing payrolls, budgets, and inventories
and performing other number-crunching tasksŠthey were likely to be short-lived
advantages because such applications are readily available to all competitors, he

said.In contrast to the past pattern of responding incrementally and, often, in
piecemeal fashion to the growing capabilities of information technology, firms in

the current decade may use the technology to redefine themselves. That is what

Weis foresees happening at Sears. "[W]e have to reassess our business processes

and our culture," he said, "and figure out then how to make the business run

differently and to exploit technology in fostering that change."
SYSTEMS INTEGRATION AS "PROCESS INNOVATION"
Structural and cultural change is a formidable challenge for any firm, public
agency, or other type of organization. Yet for most organizations, maintaining the

status quo will likely mean that they will not realize the most significant

advantages afforded by the technology, contended Fischer, whose responsibilities

at Andersen Consulting include devising a comprehensive firm-wide view for

applying information technology.
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE22Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved."[S]ystems integration," he said, "really ought to be about the business of
process innovation," which, by definition, necessitates change. Process innovation

entails changing the ways companies "perform their standard business functions,

changing the way they manufacture, changing the way they distribute, changing

the way their orders are taken, and changing the way they sell their product," he

explained.Ultimately, Fischer said, the aim is to "simplify the business": to reduce the
time it takes to perform key activities and to narrow the gaps between the

personnel and the functions that support those activities. Within manufacturing

firms, this requires erasing barriers between design, engineering, production,

marketing, and distribution. Fischer also maintained that the new cooperative

links forged by systems integration should extend outside the organization and

tighten relationships with suppliers and customers.
Mark Teflian, vice president and chief information officer at Covia, which
operates the world's second-largest computerized airline reservation system,

offered a different yet complementary conceptual framework for appraising the

transformational role of networked information technology. Global competition

and the rapid diffusion of technology across international borders, he said, have

shortened the competitive life of most products and, consequently, collapsed the

time a firm has to recover costs and generate profits that support succeeding

cycles of innovation and product introductions. Increasingly, Teflian predicted,

firms will regard their products as perishable products with limited shelf lives.

Seizing short-lived marketing opportunities and optimizing pricing strategies will

require timely capture of information at the point of sale and rapid response to

changing market conditions.
The growing value of timely information, Teflian asserted, will spur wide
adoption of on-line transaction-processing (OLTP) systems. Pioneered by airlines

that developed computerized reservation systems, OLTP systems provide

computer users on a network with simultaneous real-time access to shared

databases. Whenever necessary, users can retrieve information, change it, and

enter new information, thereby updating the databases and providing others on

the network with the most current information available. According to Teflian,

such on-line systems offer firms the means to broaden and deepen their

intelligence, a fundamental requirement for rapid and informed decision making.
ASSIMILATING INFORMATION AND ENABLING PEOPLE
As customers, software and hardware manufacturers, and system integrators
reassess the roles and uses of information technology, people emerge as the most

critical element and as the element most resistant to the organizational changes

that systems integration fosters. Integrating people
Šhelping them assimilate
information, create, collaborate, and, in sum, work
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE23Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.more productivelyŠis the highest-order task of systems integration. Ultimately,
the success or failure of systems integration is determined not by "groups of

technology," Teflian contended, but by how effectively networks help people

"process and assimilate information." Overcoming incompatibilities between

computer operating systems and other systems-engineering hurdles are "minor

problems," he said, compared with the challenge of adapting the technology to

ensure that it is truly an enabling tool for the people who use it.
Systems integrators and their customers have devoted most of their attention
to technical issues, which, obviously, if not resolved will impede effective use of

information technology. But such issues should not obscure the fact that the true

measure of information technology's value is its impact on human and

organizational performance, advised Max Hopper, American Airlines senior vice

president for information systems. To illustrate his point, Hopper offered as an

example his company's collaboration with the French national railroad to develop

a computer reservation system, called Reserv-rail. Through the systems

integration project, the railroad is taking a 20-year "leap" in technology, he said,

but the physical deployment of the enabling computer and communications

equipment represents only a secondary part of the process. "I do not think it is a

piece of hardware," he explained. "I mean, it did not make a damn bit of

difference whether the computer that is used is a PC [personal computer or a

supercomputer. It . . . really relates to changing the way the company does

business. That is where, I think, there is skill [needed]."
That skill, however, is at a nascent stage of development. "I think we are
just starting to understand the fact that the computing system has to be driven by

the human system," said Michael Taylor, central systems engineering manager at

the Digital Equipment Corp. "We are starting to think in terms of a new paradigm

that says you start with the people, the way those people need to do work. Forget

all this technology. That will come later. But look at the people, look at what

those people have to do, and see what you can do to make them more

productive."With this perspective on using information technology to make workers
more effective, the purview of systems integration expands greatly. Into a domain

largely devoted to solving detailed technical problems enter issues intricately

related to cultural notions of work. For example, networking is expected to enable

greater cooperation and interaction among workers, but it is not at all clear how to

foster a truly collaborative, computer-supported work style and to capture the

anticipated productivity benefits.
ACHIEVING EFFECTIVE SYSTEMS INTEGRATION
Faced with a task of such breadth and complexity, systems integrators and
their customers may be tempted to dissect the economic, technological,
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE24Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.organizational, and cultural problems and issues they confront into ever-smaller

parts. But Feld of Frito-Lay warned against this tendency. "We need to think

about [information systems]," he said, "in much longer time frames and from a

much higher mountain. . . . Breaking down the problem to smaller elements is

going in the wrong direction because you cannot see what is happening. You

have got to be able to step above it" and view the system as a whole.
Yet, the whole is a composite creation
Ša one-of-a-kind assembly of many
people and many individual pieces of hardware and software
Šbuilt by
interdisciplinary and often geographically separated teams. Coordination is

essential and difficult. In such a complex undertaking, the system-wide

perspective that Feld advocated can easily be lost. Moreover, methodological

tools to guide systems integration projects and help ensure congruence and

complementarity among supporting tasks and products are at a rudimentary

stage. In fact, colloquium participants generally agreed that building large

integrated systems from heterogeneous collections of hardware and software

remains more an imperfect art than a structured scientific or engineering

discipline.Numerous pitfalls are inherent in the process and, consequently, it is notuncommon for an information system to fall short of expectations held at the

beginning of a systems integration project. For example, more than a few

anecdotal accounts describe projects that greatly exceeded their budget or, worse

yet, were abandoned after considerable investments of money and time. Consider

the experiences of the federal government, the largest user of systems integration

services. In 1990 the General Accounting Office reported that the government

spends $20 billion annually to improve its 53,000 computer systems. But the

watchdog agency found that "attempts to modernize the government's information

systems have produced few successes and many costly failures." 
4In addition, problems arise after information systems are up and running.
Equipment problems, programming errors, and other disruptive events cause

network failures, resulting in annual losses estimated to range from $600,000 to

$3 million for firms with large systems. 
5,6 Moreover, unauthorized use of
networks and other security abuses have resulted in large, but untabulated, losses

of money and information. 
7Acknowledging the difficulties and complexities that can undermine the
aims of system integration, colloquium participants identified some of the key

attributes of efforts to build effective information systems, as well as the essential

features of those systems.
Understanding the Organization and the Application Area
From the various definitions of systems integration offered by participants,
one might deduce that effectiveness is variously perceived by the
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE25Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.beholdersŠthe organizations and people who will use the information system.
For example, Jeffrey M. Heller, senior vice president at Electronic Data Systems,

described an effective systems integration project as one that fulfills a "practical

objective through the assemblage of diverse component technologies and

disciplines that are critical to each others' success." At a general level, this

definition seems straightforward enough, but it can become exceedingly complex

at the operational level of an individual organization. "The formulation of

customer requirements," Heller said, may be the most important and least

appreciated aspect of systems integration. Added Feld of Frito-Lay, "You have to

have a business proposition that is worthy of the investment" in an integrated

system of information technology.
Translating a business plan into an integrated set of hardware, databases, and
applications, according to Fischer of Andersen Consulting, requires an approach

that encompasses each of the main elements common to every company: the

overriding business strategy, the technology and the operations supporting that

strategy, and the skill levels of the work force. "These four elements must be

synchronized, or important synergies will be lost," Fischer said. "If any of you

had the opportunity to review systems that were designed in the past 20 years,

you would find that none of them reflects an understanding of all four elements."
An essential element of this understanding, according to several
participants, is comprehensive knowledge of the particular attributes of the

industry in which a client company is competing and of the unique characteristics

of that customer's business. Customized applications developed without this

knowledge are not likely to satisfy a customer's information needs, nor to provide

the competitive advantages that the firm was seeking from its investment in

technology. For U.S. systems integration firms aiming to compete in foreign

markets, advised Ivan Selin, thorough familiarity with the application area as

practiced in target countries may be the most important determinant of exporting

success. (See Box 2.3.)Increasingly, integrators are recognizing the need to be intimately familiar
with application areas, a recognition that has motivated strategic partnerships with

consulting organizations expert in the strategic issues of a particular industry. In

addition, there is growing appreciation of the multidisciplinary nature of systems

integration and the concomitant need for collaborative teamwork throughout the

development process. The need for expertise in computers, software,

communications, and the application domain remains critical. But some

integrators are choosing to broaden their perspective and are now augmenting

their teams with anthropologists, social scientists, and other specialists who can,

for example, address issues related to the design of user interfaces and to how

people adjust to collaborative work environments.
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE26Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 2.3 THOUGHTS ON EXPORTING
Systems integration has the ''makings of a great export industry," Ivan
Selin, then under secretary for management in the U.S. State Department

(he is now chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission), told the

colloquium. For U.S. firms to preserve and build on their commanding

position in the emerging international market, Selin emphasized, they must

execute a lesson already learned in the domestic market: To build effective

integrated information systems, firms must be intimately familiar with the

characteristics of the foreign industries and companies they are working

with. He expanded on this point:
First, of course, are the obstacles to any kind of high-technology
export. You have to know the language, you need entree to the customers,

you may need local partners, [and so on]. . . . Then there are some

additional obstacles specific to integrated systems. First of all, by definition,

we're talking about major applications. We're talking about a lot of time, a

lot of effort, a lot of customized software, a lot of industry-specific standard

software, and a lot of hardware. Before you can sell one of these major

applications you really need to know the industry as practiced in the target

country, not just as practiced in the United States. Depending on the

industry, there are major differences from country to country.
But you also need to know the company, because, again, these are
not products off the shelf; they're specific to a particular company's

applications, and these are hard to know. Even if you devote a lot of time

and effort to understand international banking or, say, trade documentation,

when you go to Japan you find out that documents are done differently from

the way they are done in the United States. The companies are different,

the culture is different, what they are willing to share from one company to

another is different. . . .
On top of that, . . . you are talking about doing applications that are
deeply involved in the "innards" of how the company operates, and so

companies tend to be very reluctant to bring in outside firms to do really

mainline systems. It's one thing to buy something off the shelf or out of a

catalogue; it's another to trust an outsider to come in and develop a system

that will be central to the operation of that company for a long time to come.

On the one hand, the company is terribly dependent on the outsider to

provide the system successfully; on the other hand, that outsider is going to

walk away with a lot of inside information, and in many societies and many

companies that is something that is given up very reluctantly. Finally, you

need to have experts in the country to which you are exporting. It's not

enough to have very good sales representatives and very good

maintenance people
Šyou need to have the people who have a fair share
of the information that was necessary to develop the system in the first

place.APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE27Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.''To be successful," said Albert B. Crawford, executive vice president for
strategic business systems at American Express Travel Related Services, "a

systems integration contractor must demonstrate relevant experience in multiple

disciplines and in successfully managing extremely large, complex projects."

However, finding people with the requisite mix of skills to achieve that level of

performance is becoming increasingly difficult for the systems integration

industry.Recognizing Essential Features of Information Systems
System ArchitectureThe rapid advance of computer and communications technology underlies an
ever-changing set of user needs. New capabilities create new business

opportunities and, at the same time, open the door to new competition,

necessitating a change in business strategies and operations and, consequently, in

the information systems on which firms depend. As a result, businesses want to

be able to capitalize on new technology offerings, but without having to start from

scratch with each new round of innovation or each newly identified information

need.Thus a key attribute of an integrated information system is flexibility, the
ability to evolve to accommodate unforeseen technologies and information needs

and to be adapted with relative ease to address new competitive challenges. Such

flexibility, however, has not been a hallmark of information systems.
In the past, said Taylor of the Digital Equipment Corp., integrators "created
some very innovative, very creative, very unique solutions to the business

problems of the era. The bad news was that with this very creativeness and

uniqueness, we caused difficulties. . . . Companies [now] looking at these

integrated solutions of a few years ago find that, because they are unique, they are

difficult to migrate forward, they are difficult to evolve as the underlying

technology changes, and what, at the time, was a competitive advantage for the

firm could well become a competitive disadvantage if indeed that solution is rigid

and inflexible and geared to a way of doing business that is no longer in tune with

the way that corporation now wants to do business."
These experiences point to the need for a consistent systems architecture
assembled with modular building blocks
Šhardware, software, database, and
communications platforms with flexible linkages, or interfaces. Standardization

and the move toward open systems are yielding modular products that, in effect,

can be bolted on or plugged into existing systems and yet are malleable enough to

link to tomorrow's technology.
"From a technology perspective," Taylor explained, "we are taking a
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE28Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.much more architectural approach. That says you need building blocks, you need

to innovate within those building blocks but you need to retain that architectural

framework so that the whole evolution is not impeded by the fact that everything

is interconnected to everything else."
The growth of information networking, however, has outpaced standards
development and the computer industry's migration to open systems. Many

organizations that are pioneering applications of information technology still bear

the risk of being locked into proprietary systems that may restrict future options

for connectivity and interoperability. 
8 For now, these organizations must choose
from among competing platforms, hoping that their selections will become the

nationally and internationally accepted and implemented standards.
If a firm is large enough, it can try to dictate its architectural requirements to
prospective suppliers, as American Express Travel Related Services has done in

the area of communication components. According to Crawford, who oversees

development of the subsidiary's global information system, American Express

has stipulated a set of standard interfaces that equipment suppliers must provide.
American Express, like many other firms, is now endeavoring to build an
underlying architecture for its global information system, a framework on which

to combine old and new technology and build coherent solutions rather than a

patchwork of partial solutions. Like a well-conceived plan that includes

contingencies for uncertainty, a good systems architecture is expansive and

adaptable. But, Crawford explained, it also exerts controls to ensure that new

equipment, databases, and applications achieve the desired levels of connectivity

and interoperability.Frito-Lay's new corporate information system provides an example of the
benefits that accrue to an architecture that can evolve with changing needs. "One

of the fundamental design criteria" in Frito-Lay's layered architecture, explained

Feld, who directed the development of the company's system, is the ability to

accommodate change. For example, only minor database adjustments are required

if the firm revamps its employee pay structures or even if it restructures the

organization. "We have 32 areas of the country now," Feld said. ''If we wanted to

drop down to 28, it is a weekend database reorganization." Because of the

disaggregated nature of the information system, major alterations in one area do

not generate unwanted and unforeseen changes in others, he explained.

Data Communication Capabilities
Because of heavy network and internetwork traffic or because of their need
for specialized computing and communication capabilities, such as the

transmission of large graphics files, firms are paying as much attention to
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE29Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.their data-transmission capabilities and information-retrieval times as they are to

such perennial issues as processing power and memory and storage capacity.

Some have invested in building private information infrastructures, often at

considerable expense. For example, when General Motors (GM) initiated its

massive program to automate its manufacturing operations, about half of its

outlays for computer systems went for communications-related equipment and

software.9 Today, corporate spending for private networks accounts for more than
half of all spending for communications networks in the United States.
10But in building their high-speed networks, firms are entering into murky
waters. The unsettled state of high-level communications protocols necessary for

exchanging information and applications within and between networks means

today's choices could complicate efforts to satisfy tomorrow's networking needs

if alternative conventions emerge as the industry standards. Moreover, even the

largest firms are discovering that, as the trend to internetworking and

interenterprise cooperation proceeds, they can no longer entirely bypass public

telecommunications carriers, an amalgam of international, national, regional, and

local utilities, or the growing number of third-party suppliers of enhanced

telecommunications and information services. This increases the number of

interfaces and, therefore, potential bottlenecks that must be negotiated for

internetworking applications, while increasing the vulnerability of a firm's

communications and information system to security violations and technical

failures.
SecurityAs internetworking grows, the potential for theft of data, other security
abuses, and accidents also increases. For example, technical problems in one

network can cause deterioration of service in connected networks. Internal

safeguards developed by managers of private networks will no longer suffice, but

effective responses to new risks have yet to be developed.
"Five years ago," explained Weis of Sears, "we were less concerned about
the outside world, and we had pretty good security means that we could

implement privately within the company." But today, as Sears makes greater use

of public voice and data communication networks, its information system has

become more vulnerable, he said
Š"There are some policy issues that need to be
resolved." For example, automatic number identification, which provides the

telephone number of a person who gains access to an information system by

means of a modem, would permit managers to audit usage. The technology,

however, has raised privacy issues that have resulted in lawsuits.
Better security, said Fischer of Andersen Consulting, is "an extremely severe
challenge for the future." With more and more companies billing,
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE30Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ordering, and handling other tasks through electronic data interchange (EDI) and

as electronic links to consumers increase, he added, "You can see how the

possibilities for security violations go up exponentially. So it is a problem that we

see as very, very key for the future of the industry."

Network Management and Reliability
"Nobody has yet given us the capable tools for network management of the
scale, type, and variety that we need," complained Crawford of American

Express. As a result, American Express, in collaboration with IBM, is developing

its own system for network management and control. As part of the development

effort, American Express has determined what data it needs for effective network
administration, and it now requires prospective suppliers of network management

products to satisfy those data needs.
The shortcomings of network management tools are widely acknowledged,
the subject of numerous articles in the field. Suppliers of those tools are

struggling to meet the need and, in the process, capture a share of a rapidly

growing market (variously estimated to be a few hundred million dollars in

revenues per year). What users hope these products will provide are a simple,

unified means for monitoring the performance of an entire network and alerting

managers to failures or deterioration in performance; straightforward methods for

analyzing and pinpointing the causes of problems; and a comprehensive set of

tools for responding to problems and rerouting traffic around trouble spots.

Management issues extend beyond the need to keep networks up and running,

however. Also important, for example, are tools for controlling software

distribution, preventing the introduction of unlicensed programs (which may

contain viruses and other problems), and maintaining data integrity.

Ease of Use and Effective Presentation of Information
Simplicity, according to colloquium participants, is the ultimate determinant
of an information network's effectiveness. If information technology is not easy to

use, if information is not easy to access, select, and share, and if applications are

not easily mastered, then an information and communication system fails to

accomplish its primary function of enabling people.
For the average user, first impressions
Šthat is, interactions with the user
interfaceŠcan be lasting ones. Rather than breeding the familiarity that fosters
greater use and exploration of network applications, several participants noted,

differences in user interfaces can cause considerable frustration and confusion,

dissuading employees, for example, from using electronic mail features or

entering information into a database on potential custom
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE31Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ers. A networked information system, maintained Robert L. Martin, vice

president for software technology and systems at Bell Communications

Research, should have a "common look and feel." An underlying consistency in

the appearance and functionality of applications and databases not only hastens

learning and, perhaps, lowers expenditures for training employees who are

expected to use the network, but it also makes it easier to tap the functionality of

suites of applications.
With the emergence of multimedia applications that combine information in
all its textual, graphical, and audio forms, new types of interfaces
Šthose that, for
example, respond to voice commands or eye and hand movements
Šwill also be
introduced. These offerings will greatly enhance the utility of information

systems. But, said Larry E. Druffel, director of the Software Engineering Institute

at Carnegie Mellon University, integrating new interface technology should not

require revamping the information system and its underlying applications and

databases.Of course, the utility and diversity of applications and complementing tools
determine what users can actually do with an information system. Today, most

organizations have a backlog of ideas for new customized applications awaiting

development. Ideally, workers or groups of workers should be able to build their

own applications to help them accomplish their tasks. New organizational

software that allows groups to work together is a step in this direction. It strives to

create what, in essence, is a flexible programming environment that enables users

to create their own applications. Such software often includes programming tools

and prepackaged bits of programming code, or objects, that help users create new

applications and databases by combining the components of existing ones. With

significant advances over the next 10 to 15 years, suggested Weis of Sears, these

programming aids may enable business professionals to "specify, in a

nonprocedural way, the business functions that they want to perform and then

turn those rules or nonprocedural statements into a system" that performs the

desired applications. Today, however, the gap between promise and reality is

large. Even for the most experienced systems integrators and software designers

and programmers, it remains exceedingly difficult to develop an application or

suite of applications that, at the implementation stage, works according to plans

and expectations.A major unsolved problem in this area is in the statement of requirements in a
format understandable to the end users and also to the developers. These two

groups usually come from very different job backgrounds and frequently share

very little common terminology. Methods such as "rapid prototyping," which

allow end users to observe the "look and feel" of the final systems before

committing to full-scale development, have been very successful in defining

expectations.APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE32Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ISSUES AND RESEARCH NEEDS
Like the process of systems integration itself, the issues and challenges that
will shape the evolution of distributed, networked computing must be assessed

from several interrelated perspectives. A rapidly growing industry with a

potentially large international market, the systems integration industry must

attend to matters that will affect its competitive status. The businesses and other

organizations that are now the primary users of systems integration services face

challenges in making the most advantageous use of their information technology.

Finally, as the web of interconnected computing and communication devices

grows, the entire economy and all of U.S. society become affected, introducing a

more encompassing set of needs and issues.
Today's experiences with networked information systems are testimony to
the advantages to be reaped on scales small and large. But they are also testimony

to the tremendous challenges positioned between the reality and the promise of

information networking. One assessment of the current reality is this: "We have

now reached a stage of uncontrolled chaos in the marketplace of data processing

and data communications. Multivendor systems are almost universal, and the

inability of the elements in this heterogeneous environment to interwork is

legion." 11Many organizations have mastered these difficulties and are realizing
significant benefits, but many are still struggling to take full advantage of their

integrated systems of information technology. More important, most

organizations, daunted, perhaps, by the prospect of sizable investments and the

mire of technical issues, are not even pursuing many of the advantages afforded

by information networking. At the colloquium, representatives of system

integration firms and organizations that are major users of information technology

offered their perspectives on the issues and research questions that stand in the

way of effective use and wide-scale adoption of an information network by U.S.

businesses. In subsequent chapters, many of these same issues are discussed in

societal and global contexts.
Adapting the Installed Base of Information Technology
Information technology is a large and growing portion of the capital stock of
U.S. businesses. A major challenge, therefore, is what many in the systems

integration industry call migration, a "forward-engineering" process that enables

owners of information technology to preserve and build on their installed bases

of hardware, software, and information. Given the additional complexity this

imposes on the already complex process of systems integration, it sometimes may

seem that razing the existing system and
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE33Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.starting anew is preferable to the often massive restructuring that moving to

distributed, networked computing entails.
"Is our historical investment [in information technology] a plus or a minus?"
asked Heller of Electronic Data Systems. The answer, according to other

colloquium participants, is probably both, with the relative balance between asset

or hindrance hinging on progress in developing methodologies for forward

engineering and the reuse of software and databases (see section immediately

below).Unlike firms in Asia and, to a lesser but still significant degree, those in
Europe, said Fischer of Andersen Consulting, U.S. organizations "have an

enormous installed base of packaged knowledge, of business logic, of systems

across the country. We cannot come in with a clean sheet of paper and say, 'Point B

is where I want to be; A is where we are. Let's just do it.' We have got to have a

way to recover design, to recover the logic out of the existing systems we have. . . .

We need to be able to accumulate what has been done over the past 30 years with

the automation projects, be able to collect that knowledge and that information in a

repository, and be able to forward-engineer it to new solutions."
The issues involved transcend systems engineering, the act of connecting
isolated devices and applications into networks. Improved systems engineering

techniques are needed to strengthen the competitive status of the U.S. systems

integration industry, according to Fischer and others. But far more challenging,

they stressed, are the difficulties involved in restructuring existing technology and

knowledge in ways so that this base both enhances and is enhanced by computing

and communication capabilities.
Research on forward engineering and migration strategies is under way,
much of it under the sponsorship of the U.S. Department of Defense. Thus far,

however, the returns to these efforts have been limited. "Current reengineering

technology," said Barry Boehm, director of the Defense Advanced Research

Projects Agency (DARPA), "tends to take unstructured, outmoded ADP

[automated data processing] systems and turn them into structured, outmoded

ADP systems."Software Design, Development, and Reuse
Every digital device is programmable. Software, therefore, is the glue that
links the vast array of digital devices into a network, and through applications, it

is the primary determinant of the network's value to an organization. It also

represents the major expense of an integrated information system, much of it

stemming from the customized programming involved and from the cost of

maintaining and upgrading applications. In addition, poor software design and

programming errors are not infrequent causes of network failures.
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE34Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A recurring theme throughout the colloquium was the need to improve
methods for software design and development to make the process more efficient

and to make information systems more reliable. This is a long-recognized need,

but, participants pointed out, its importance grows with the complexity of

networked systems and with the size of the potential losses incurred when these

systems fail.Part of the answer rests with tools and techniques for reusing and
interchanging components of existing software, which are also essential for

efforts to forward-engineer the installed base of information technology. "Often,

the need to upgrade or change hardware, software, or communications

[technology]," explained Heller of EDS, "requires companies to consider the

necessity of reprogramming their existing applications to take advantage of the

new advances in computer technology. To reduce this necessity, new tools
Šmodeling, CASE [computer-aided software engineering], object-oriented

techniques, and so on
Šneed to be analyzed for their viability." Thus the ability to
carry forward such things as the design rationale inherent in the software is an

example of a subtle but important consideration in building large systems that

must accommodate future developments.
"Today," Heller added, "application building is far too expensive."

Boehm of DARPA concurred: [I]t is time to start building software
component by component rather than construction by construction."
Methods for adapting and reusing existing programs in new applications and
for restructuring old data are improving, some participants noted, citing progress

in object-oriented programming as an example. Nonetheless, significant problems

remain. Positive steps in this direction are continuing enhancement of CASE

tools for computer-aided program development, object-oriented techniques for

using preprogrammed bits of software, formal techniques for verifying whether

programming code performs according to specifications, and nonprocedural

languages that permit users to write their own programs without using a formal

programming language. For now, it is uncertain whether one method or a

combination of these methods will yield improvements on the scale that is

needed.Several panelists suggested that object-oriented techniques hold considerable
promise in achieving interoperability among the functions within separate

applications and in salvaging past programming work. CASE tools, in contrast,

they observed, have yet to yield the promised productivity benefits. Indeed, in a

recent survey of users of CASE tools, more than a third reported that

programming productivity had not increased.
12In the meantime Japanese software firms and, recently, European companies
are concentrating on manufacturing-style approaches to software development.

Approaches vary, but quality-assurance methods and automation are common

denominators.APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE35Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Methodologies to Guide Organizational Change
Full assimilation of an integrated information system often implies a
corresponding integration of the business organization and its processes.

Typically, this may entail flattening the organizational hierarchy, revamping the

scope of business, and linking units that were once functionally isolated. Such

sweeping change is not accomplished easily. But experiences of the last two

decades demonstrate that the competitive advantages gained by automating the

status quo evaporate quickly.
Many systems integration firms use formal methods for analyzing how firms
use and communicate information internally and externally. On the basis of such

analyses and close consultation with their clients, integrators develop an

architectural plan for "defining technology requirements," said Heller of EDS,

and for "blending . . . investments in computing and communication [equipment

and software] and in structuring data into information that is meaningful in

business terms." Nonetheless, he added, the process is a "little bit fuzzy."
"There are a lot of disciplines required," he said. "Not all of these disciplines
are strictly technical or technology-based. But it takes a multidisciplinary team

approach, in our experience, to deliver to a customer, to meet his requirements in

even small areas that are well bounded, to say nothing of a full business."
Because each organization is unique, it would be unreasonable to assume
that systems integration and the implementation of changes in business

operations and worker relationships can be reduced entirely to a formal

methodology. Still, better tools are needed, according to Fischer of Andersen

Consulting. "We need some packaged or agreed-to methods and tools to help us

figure out how to go about redesigning the business process," he said.
It can be helpful to view the systems integration process in a total life-cycle
perspective, one that includes "change" as a built-in attribute. One model

suggested had five steps: first, identifying the need for change from the current

operation; second, defining and documenting the requirements for the "new"

system; third, implementing and integrating the components of the new system;

fourth, making the transition from the current system to the new system with

acceptable risk to the business; and fifth, maintaining the new system, including

providing for quality improvements and upgrades (which takes us back to the

first step).StandardizationWhen the topic of standards arises in a group of hardware manufacturers and
software publishers, a heated debate can be expected to ensue. In
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE36Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.general terms, one group will argue that standards can prematurely freeze

technology and dampen innovation, while the other group extols the merits of

easy connectivity and interoperability for users and, consequently, the market-

enlarging effects of standards. No such debate occurred at the colloquium.

Suppliers of systems integration services and users of information technology

appeared united in their support for standardization of hardware and software

interfaces and for communication protocols.
"Standardization does not imply a static situation," said Heller of EDS.
"Standards must be continually reviewed and modified as requirements change

and technology advances."
Added Crawford of American Express, "International standardization and
so-called open systems will add further impetus to systems integration."
While espousing the need for standardization, several speakers were critical
of how U.S. industry, the federal government, and users of information

technology have participated in the standards-setting process. U.S. computer and

communications firms are active in national and international standards

organizations, but too rarely do they act from an industrywide perspective.

Although increasing numbers of users are becoming more active in standards

issues, sometimes crafting their own standards, most remain passive observers.
Crawford advised users to "be proactive" in standards issues. Two staff
members in his division work full-time to advance American Express's positions

on international telecommunications standards, and another small group of

workers concentrate on regulatory and standards activities in the United States.
Several colloquium participants suggested that the federal government could
play an instrumental role in coordinating U.S. industry's participation in

international standards activities and monitoring developments in foreign

countries. They pointed out that Japan and the European Community have taken a

more comprehensive and forward-looking view of standards than have U.S.

government and industry.Careful monitoring of international activities, said Hopper of American
Airlines, is necessary because of the impact of standards on the globalization of

information technology and because of the potential for nations to devise

standards that serve to protect domestic industries and restrict international

competition. "I am a believer that standards can only help us," he said. "We

should embrace them and not resist their inevitability, but with the caveat that we

have to guard against standards" that are designed to be barriers to international

competition.Other facets of standardization are discussed in following chapters (see
Chapter 3 appendix on standards making).
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE37Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Data Communication Capabilities
As already noted, large U.S. businesses have invested enormous sums to
build their own high-speed communication links to connect networks. Many have

chosen to bypass, as much as they can, the public telecommunications carriers

because of insufficient data-carrying capacity,
13 discontinuities in the service
offerings of local and regional carriers, and cost savings they can achieve with

their own networks. These firms have, in effect, built their own information

infrastructure, an unaffordable option for most organizations that could benefit

from high-speed internetworking capabilities. Thus most of the approximately

700,000 private networks in the United States are information outposts linked by

the data-transmission equivalent of one-lane highways.
14As discussed in the next chapter, the prospect of broadband Integrated
Services Digital Network service, which initially would offer transmission rates

of more than 150 million bits per second, is viewed as one potential remedy to

this infrastructural deficiency.
Personnel Needs
Many colloquium participants suggested that the growth of the U.S. systems
integration industry could be constrained by shortages of qualified personnel.

While the entire computer sector confronts scarcities of talent in key science and

engineering disciplines, the needs of systems integrators may be the most

difficult to satisfy, at least through the traditional channel of universities.
''Systems integration demands a special mix of expertise with emphasis on
organizational, consulting, and management skills
Šon top of demonstrated
technical expertise," Crawford explained. "There is no way that recent graduates

can acquire those skills through education alone."
Nonetheless, participants maintained that U.S. universities have an
important education and training role to play. Unfortunately, departments of

computer science and engineering and other units that concentrate on computer-

related topics have not included systems integration in their domains. "The best

way to get the academic community to address the introduction of systems

integration into the educational system is to entice the academics to engage in

appropriate research," said Druffel of the Software Engineering Institute at

Carnegie Mellon University. "We must develop within the research community

an appreciation for the importance of the problem and its validity as a research

topic. This also implies the availability of funding, and so the major research

funding agencies must be convinced [of the need]."
Currently, many systems integration firms invest heavily in the training of
their employees. EDS and Andersen Consulting, for example, spend the
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE38Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.equivalent of about 10 percent of their annual revenues on training programs. The

need for these programs will likely remain strong, according to Heller.
''Retraining will be one of the key strategies of systems integration firms for
meeting their technical personnel needs," Heller said. However, the challenge of

equipping people with the requisite skills and knowledge may become more

difficult, he said. "Technical positions in a systems integration firm require

technical aptitude, and many people undergoing training will not be successful,"

he explained. At the same time, the field is becoming more complex. "The

technical curricula a company uses for training entry-level science and

engineering graduates will likely require modification in pace and content,"

Heller said. Moreover, imparting technical skills to people with nontechnical
backgrounds "will require much patience and leadership attention."
NOTES1. For a broad range of historical statistical information see 
The Computer, Business Equipment,
Software and Services, and Telecommunications Industry:
 1960Œ1996, Industry Marketing
Statistics Committee, CBEMA, Washington, D.C., 1987.
2. Gantz, John. 1987. "Systems Integration: Living in a House of Our Own Making,"
Telecommunication Products + Technology
, May, p. 35. Gantz, John. 1991. "Double
Trouble," The Economist, January 12, p. 63. Depke, Deirdre A., and Richard Brandt. 1991.
"PCs: What the Future Holds," 
Business Week
, August 12, pp 58
Œ64.3. Wright, Karen. 1990. "The Road to the Global Village," 
Scientific American, March, p. 84.
4. General Accounting Office. 1990. 
Meeting the Government's Technology Challenge
, GAO/
IMTEC-90-23, February, p. 4.
5. Verity, John W. 1990. "Taming the Wild Network," 
Business Week, Oct. 8, p. 144. Dauber, Steven
M. 1991. "Finding Fault," 
Byte, March, p. 207.
6. For example, in July of 1991 what eventually turned out to be a "minor" software problem led to
massive failures of telephone networks in several large metropolitan areas, including

Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles (Andrews, Edmund L. 1991. "String of Phone Failures

Perplexes Companies and U.S. Investigators," 
New York Times
, July 3, p. A1).
7. Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1991. 
Computersat Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age
, National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C., p. 7.
8. For example, the major airline reservation networks and service providers are now going through
an expensive process of replacing their widely used but proprietary airline protocol, the

Airline Link Control (ALC) with its 6-bit-per-character structure, in favor of standard

packet-switching communication technology widely available on the open market (see

Crockett, Barton. 1990. "Airline Reservation Nets Finally See Fit to Dump Outdated

Protocols," 
Network World, September 24, p. 9).
9. In fact, GM defined a new standard (Manufacturing Automation Protocol, or MAP) for the specific
needs of this application. MAP is now used widely in plant-
APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE39Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.floor automation systems . See Kaminski, Michael A. 1990. "The Users' Viewpoint on

Standards-Based Communications," Crossroads of Information Technology Standards
,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 11.
10. Dorros, Irwin. 1990. "Calling for Cooperation," 
Bellcore Exchange , November
ŒDecember, p. 7.11. Kleinrock, Leonard. 1991. "ISDN
ŠThe Path to Broadband Networks," 
Proceedings of the IEEE
,Vol. 79, No. 2, February, p. 112.
12. Brandt, Richard. 1991. "Can the U.S. Stay Ahead in Software?" 
Business Week
, March 11, p.
104.13. Public telephone companies now offer two types of enhanced service for transmission of digital
data. T1 service transmits data at the rate of 1.5 million bits per second, sufficient for

simultaneous transmission of voice communication and textual and numerical data; T3

service offers a transmission rate of about 45 million bits per second, which accommodates

only rudimentary real-time graphics applications.
14. Gilder, George. 1991. "Into the Telecosm," 
Harvard Business Review
 , March
ŒApril, pp. 150
Œ161.APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATED SYSTEMS: EVOLUTION IN CONCEPT AND

PRACTICE40Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Enabling Technology: Communications and
SoftwareBefore our very eyes the now ubiquitious computer is undergoing a profound
metamorphosis from a largely stand-alone, all-in-one machine to a gateway to a

world of information technology and services. Indeed, for many people today, the

computer is as much a communications device as it is a machine that performs

high-speed mathematical and logical calculations. Not coincidentally, with each
new wave of technology, the now ubiquitous digital telephone becomes ever

more like the computer. As this convergence of computing and communications

technology proceeds, it is not entirely clear whether the distinction between the

two will have any meaning.
Driving this convergence is the as of yet unabating miniaturization of
electronic components that make up integrated circuits. As the density of the

components on integrated circuits has increased at exponential rates, the speed

and power of computers and other digital equipment have improved

tremendously, while their costs have moved steadily downward. For example,

workstations have been almost exclusively the tools of scientists and engineers.

Fast and able to run several applications simultaneously, the high-performance

machines have been too expensive for the average personal computer user. But

workstation prices are dropping rapidly, and, by the end of the decade, some

people predict, the equivalents of today's high-end machines may sell for well

below $1,000, making the technology affordable for large numbers of people.

Already, a well-equipped personal computer based on an Intel 80386 processor

running UNIX can be purchased for about $3,000, or about the cost (in current

dollars) of the much more primitive IBM PCs in the early 1980s.
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE41
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The predictable and high rate of progress in hardware has fueled rising
expectations for distributed information networks of immense capacity,

capability, flexibility, and reach. These expectations, however, are constrained by

technical, regulatory, and economic challenges on national and international

levels. The principal obstacles lie in the areas of telecommunications and

software technology, commonly referred to as the "bottlenecks" that impede

progress toward large-scale information networks offering widely available

services. Simply stated, the technical problems are these: First, the information

processing capabilities of computers greatly exceed the capabilities of public

telecommunication carriers to transmit data in its many forms between remote

computers; data arrive in trickles rather than in the torrents that are needed to

support real-time, multimedia interactive computing. Second, advances in

hardware have outraced the ability of software designers and computer

programmers to develop applications that exploit the full capabilities of new

devices. The gap between potential performance and the actual functionality

supplied by software applications remains large, and, at the same time, software

accounts for a large and growing expense in the development of information

technology. Third is a combined telecommunications and software problem.

Software of high reliability and quality is a critical component of efforts to

improve the transmission capacity and capabilities of telecommunications

carriers, as evidenced by the fact that software may account for as much as 80

percent of the cost of a telecommunications system. 
1,2 Building an infrastructure
and implementing the associated services necessary to achieve the seamless

connection of information networks on national and global scales pose large,

complex challenges for software development. Finally, it is not enough to develop

technological solutions to the impediments that prevent high-speed, high-

performance networking. There must also be agreement between the

telecommunications and computer industries on how those solutions should be

implemented into standards. Moreover, to promote global networking, standards

development within nations should complement the work of international

standards-setting bodies.Although telecommunications and software issues loom large, technical
challenges also face manufacturers of integrated circuits and the other hardware

components of information technology. For example, in addition to new

software, faster and more powerful microprocessors, perhaps using photonic

technology, will be needed to achieve the high switching speeds necessary for

rapid transmission between computers of large volumes of data in multimedia

forms. Moreover, as communications performance improves, computers and

other digital equipment, whose capabilities are now constrained by slow data

transmission, will eventually be hard pressed to assimilate data arriving at rates

exceeding a billion bits per second, as envisioned for the National Research and

Education Network (NREN), a
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE42
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.component of the recently begun federal High Performance Computing and

Communications (HPCC) program.
"Multi-gigabit networks represent a change in kind, not just degree, from
today's networks," a committee of the Federal Coordinating Council for Science,

Engineering, and Technology has explained. "For example, consider that in a

coast-to-coast communication at three gigabits [3 billion bits] per second there

are at any instant 'in flight' nearly nine megabytes [million bytes, or groups of

eight bits of data, which is more than the memory of most personal computers and

workstations."3At the colloquium, most of the discussion focused on issues related to
software and communications. Participants also addressed some of the challenges

confronting the HPCC program and, in particular, the NREN.
COMMUNICATIONS SURVEY
A rule of thumb, based on today's networking experiences with traditional
technology, is that the speed and ease of communication decrease as a function of

distance. The fastest data flows occur within a computer, via the data bus, or the

set of wires that shuttle signals between the microprocessor and circuit boards

containing memory and controlling input and output devices. In local area

networks (LANs) linked by coaxial cable, the typical rate for transmitting data

between computers is 10 million bits per second. Data communication between

LANs linked by a wide area network slows to a figurative snail's pace. The

maximum data-carrying capacity of a typical copper wire telephone line is 64,000

bits per second, but modems generally do not even make full use of this limited

capacity, with most transmitting and receiving data at rates between 2,400 and

19,200 bits per second. Specialized data transmission services
Šcalled T1 and
T3Šoffered by telephone companies can greatly improve this rate, to 1.5 million
bits per second for T1 and 45 million bits per second for T3.
But even at a rate of 45 million bits per second, correspondence between
remote computers is too slow to support interactive, data-intensive tasks,

especially sophisticated graphics applications. Consider, for example, that one

still image contains between 20 million and 200 million bits of information; in

digital form, a typical pair of chest X-rays contains the information equivalent of

four volumes (text) of the 
Encyclopedia Britannica.4 Also consider the data-
carrying capacities necessary for the following uses of information technology:

real-time graphics applications run on remote supercomputers require rates of 50

million to more than 700 million bits per second per user; real-time, cooperative

computer-aided-design systems require 1.5 million bits per user; and television-

quality video and audio require 45 million bits per channel, or less than half the

rate for digital high-definition television (without data compression techniques).
5, 6, 7ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE43
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Introducing the need to integrate textual, graphical, and audio information
for multimedia presentations magnifies the need for high-speed transmission, as

does increasing the number of users on the network.
Fiber-optic technology figures prominently in proposed measures to enhance
transmission capacities and to integrate multimedia forms of data. Indeed, the

fiber-optical lines that handle about 95 percent of long-distance telephone calls in

the United States transmit information at a rate of about 2 billion bits per second.

With the information-carrying capacity, or bandwidth, of fiber-optic cable

increasing a hundredfold over the past decade, bandwidths of a trillion bits per

second may be not only achievable but also commercially practical in the next

decade.Moreover, the declining cost of optical fiber has made it competitive with
copper wire for even short-distance communication links. In terms of

maintenance and upkeep, fiber offers economic advantages over copper wire.

Some local telephone companies are running fiber from their central switching

offices to remote distribution terminals that handle up to 1,000 lines and, from

there, to streetside pedestals that link to individual homes and most businesses.

The cost of completing the final stretch, from curbside to home, remains

prohibitive.8 Thus it is not clear when fiber will be extended to residences and
businesses; nor is it certain whether local telephone companies will be the

primary actors. Cable television companies, which have strung coaxial cable to 60

percent of U.S. homes and could easily connect nearly 30 percent more,
9 appeareager to exploit fiber-optic technology, and some have announced their intentions

to run fiber to the home.
10 Incentives for completing this important last step,
whether done by telephone companies, cable companies, or others, are dependent

not only on perceptions of the market for services made possible by fiber-optic

connections, but also on regulations governing the behavior of segments of the

communication industry. (Regulatory issues are discussed in the next chapter.)
Integrated Services Digital Network Service
What is clear, however, is that many of the basic tools exist for sending and
receiving multimedia information. Moreover, a world vision of high-speed

communication networks already exists in the form of integrated services digital

network (ISDN) service.
11 A slowly evolving concept consuming the attention of
industry, national, and international standards-making bodies since the

mid-1970s, ISDN is essentially a telecommunications view of a public

information infrastructure. It will allow users and carriers to aggregate, or

multiplex, transmissions of data in graphical, textual, and audio forms, permitting

multimedia communication between users on a network.
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE44
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In its first and current manifestation, however, ISDN offers data
transmission at a rate far less than 1 percent of the 150 million bits per second

needed for real-time interactive multimedia applications. So-called narrowband

ISDN (NISDN) service can carry 144,000 bits per second via two 64,000-bit-

per-second channels and one 16,000-bit-per-second channel. Communications are

delivered through a standard telephone socket and are parceled out to telephone

and computer, which are linked by wire. With this setup, remote computer users

can converse by telephone and simultaneously exchange alphanumeric

information, which appears on the screens of their terminals. In the United

States, about 0.5 percent of equipped access lines supported NISDN as of 1990;

many of these were installed to serve the private networks of large companies,

partially reducing their need for separate transmission lines for voice and data

communications.12Although the simultaneous linkage of telephone and computer afforded by
the initial ISDN offering is significant, data transmission speeds do not

accommodate many types of applications of information technology, and they are

greatly exceeded by service offerings already available, such as T3. Moreover,

users of ISDN service may have to invest in new equipment interfaces. (For

example, an ISDN adapter for a personal computer, with accompanying

software, costs about $2,200). In essence, early offerings of ISDN service

enhance the capabilities of the telephone but leave untapped the potential of the

computer as a tool for sharing, processing, and presenting information in

multimedia forms.Successive upgrades in ISDN service are in the offing, however. From
144,000 bits per second, rates would improve first to 1.54 million bits (24

channels, each carrying 64,000 bits per second), a service already used by some

businesses. From there, rates would move progressively higher, to the 150-

million-bit-per-second threshold for multimedia applications and upward to

gigabit-per-second speeds.The migration to the threshold rate (i.e., 150 million bits per second), which
marks the transition to broadband ISDN (BISDN), has been frustratingly slow for

users awaiting high-speed distributed computing networks that are interoperable,

accommodate a broad range of interactive applications, and are easy to negotiate.

These users want BISDN to be available now rather than at the turn of the century

or beyond. As a result, many are forging their own solutions to their needs for

high-speed communication and incurring the expense of building private

networks.One argument for proceeding with NISDN contends that the initial service is
a necessary stepping-stone to broadband public networks. For example, while

large corporations appear to have an insatiable appetite for communications

bandwidth, many smaller businesses and most households may see little need for

digital information services, much less a single access point to those services,

which ISDN would provide. If a reasonable
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE45
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.level of demand is established for NISDN applications, then telecommunications

carriers and manufacturers of telecommunications equipment would be

encouraged to invest in the technologies required to progress to BISDN.
Perhaps an even more compelling argument is the growing status of ISDN
as an international standard interface for global networking. Government-owned

communications monopolies in Japan and Europe seem to be more convinced of

this argument than are U.S. telecommunications carriers and information-service

providers. As a result, implementation of supporting ISDN standards has been

proceeding more rapidly in Japan, Singapore, and Europe than in the United

States. However, in early 1991, major U.S. computer and communications firms

endorsed a set of standard specifications for ISDN service.
13 The agreement could
lead to conversion of about half of subscriber lines to NISDN service by the end

of 1994.
14Toward Broadband NetworksISDN's modest beginnings might be likened to a narrow river that over time
broadens into a major waterway supporting cargo-carrying vessels of every size

and function and, by means of its tributaries, offering access to any port desired.

Rather than on geological time scales, however, the transformation from today's
constricted narrowband communication networks into broadband arteries with

immense data-carrying capacity is expected take place over the span of a few

decades.Fiber-optic technology offers the means for achieving this transformation,
but the evolution requires more than glass cables serving as conduits for

multigigabit streams of data. In its early stages, the evolution may largely entail

pushing the limits of current technology, but moving to gigabit-per-second rates

and beyond will require revolutionary changes in computing and communication

networks. "As we move into gigabit networks, however, we must take a 'clean

sheet' approach to many of the systems issues," writes Leonard Kleinrock,

professor of computer science at the University of California, Los Angeles. "The

critical areas to be considered include switching technology, processor interfaces,

protocols, connection-oriented communications, routing, layered architectures,

and coexistence with carrier environments." 
15Whither OSI?
Some of the challenges that Kleinrock has identified could require a major
revamping of the International Standards Organization's Open Systems

Interconnection (OSI) architecture. Essentially a composite reference model for

building information systems, OSI was devised to promote the development of

industrywide standard protocols to create a common communications

environment for distributed systems. 
16 (See Box 3.1
, "A SimpleENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE46
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 3.1 A SIMPLE PROTOCOL ANALOG
"The diplomatic use of the term 'protocol,' as a code of etiquette and
precedence derived from the Greek roots 'to glue together,' comes close to

its meaning in computer networks. The messages that flow between

computers follow an established set of rules (etiquette) in proper sequence

to glue the network into a cooperating community. The following human

analog tries to capture the concept of a protocol hierarchy or stack.
"An American chief executive officer (CEO) wishes to complete a
business transaction with his or her counterpart (peer) in Japan. The

American CEO, representing the 'application layer/ composes thoughts in a

manner that a Japanese peer will understand (peer protocol), and dictates a

letter to a secretary (presentation layer). The secretary converts the

communication from one format (voice) to another format (written),

representing the service the secretary (lower layer) provides to the boss

(higher layer). The secretary then puts the letter in an envelope and puts the

Japanese CEO's address on the envelope, thus making a session on

behalf of a higher-layer entity. The letter is mailed (passed down to a

lower-layer entity) to the U.S. Postal Service, a reliable 'datagram' transport

mechanism. The post office passes the letter to regional collection centers

(switching centers of the network layer) and then on to the destination post

office via the routing information in the letter's address, usually the ZIP code

(control information). The passing is handled by bundling many different

letters with similar ZIP codes in bags carried by truck, plane, or ship to the

destination (the physical media, lowest layer). The process now repeats in

reverseŠpost office to secretary to Japanese CEO
Šphysical to network to
transport to presentation to application layer. The Japanese secretary sees

to it that the English letter is translated into Japanese, the destination's

presentation layer.
"At each layer of the protocol hierarchy, there is a peer protocol that
understands the rules (etiquette) of its peers; the letters are formatted the

same, the envelopes are addressed the same, the mailbags are labeled in

an agreed-upon format, and so on throughout the process. Furthermore,

each layer provides a service to its higher layer, and interface protocols

express the service requests. Figure 13.1] shows this hierarchy of layers:

the popular Open System Interconnect (OSI) model of a seven-layer

hierarchy."SOURCE: Computer Science and Technology Board, National
Research Council. 1988. 
Global Trends in Computer Technology and Their
Impact on Export Control
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., pp.
110Œ11.ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE47
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 3.1 Open System Interconnect (OSI) and DOD models

withrepresentative protocols. SOURCE: Computer Science andTechnology

Board, National Research Council. 1988. 
GlobalTrends in Computer Technology
and Their Impact on Export Control
, National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C., p. 112.ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE48
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.protocol Analog.'') OSI divides the workings of a network into seven layers,
each composed of one or more protocols. The bottom two layers
Š''physical" and
"data link"Šspecify transmission rates, signaling conventions, and other
protocols for managing communications media. At the top, or "applications"

layer, are the protocols for electronic mail and other applications that can be

conducted on the network. OSI embodied more than 100 international standards

as of 1989,
17 and the number continues to grow. Most of the protocols, however,
attend to the transfer of data; very few pertain to high-level collaborative

applications that can be performed over a network.
Robert Martin of Bellcore was one of several colloquium participants who
suggested that rather than fostering information networking, standards are

becoming so unwieldy that they may eventually deter its evolution. "The thing I

worry most about is the number and the inherent complexity," he said. "We are

not smart enough to manage within this environment."
Alfred Aho, also of Bellcore, had a similar lament. "By the time you look at
the total amount of software required to develop the system according to the OSI

world," he said, "you are talking about millions of lines of code. If we move

forward into the future, we are going to have components of the systems we are

building today for years into the future. Who is going to maintain that old

software? Who is going to understand it? What kind of return on investment are

we going to get for people who look after this old software and make fixes to it

when the systems malfunction?"
One of the penalties paid for the "openness" that OSI is intended to foster
may be exacted in the form of reduced speed, a problem explained by Hisashi

Kobayashi, dean of engineering and applied science at Princeton University.

Gigabit transmission rates could overwhelm current and emerging

communication protocols designed to support the OSI reference model, which

has guided standards development for more than a decade. "It is still too early to

say," he explained, "but people are beginning to realize that the OSI layered

architecture will be inefficient for a network based on optical technology.

Communication links will no longer he a bottleneck, but most likely processing

power [of switches] will be." Processing power at network switches could be

especially taxed when data flows approach gigabit-per-second speeds.
In a typical packet-switched network, the switch must process three layers
of OSI protocols before sending data en route on to its intended destination. The

intelligence required to process these "heavyweight" protocols causes switching

delays of 50 to 100 milliseconds, which are tolerable when data is traveling at a

rate of 64 thousand bits per second. As rates improve to hundreds of millions of

bits and higher, the delays could create the equivalent of rush-hour traffic jams. In

Kobayashi's view, protocols for broadband networks will have to be simpler to

enable fast response times and to avoid overtaxing the processing capabilities of

switches, as well as
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE49
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of computers communicating on the network. "Lightweight" protocols, which

may trade some of the functionality of OSI standards for greater speed, should be a

focus of research, be suggested, adding that some of the tasks now performed by

software may be more efficiently carried out by hardware.
In fact, switching hardware itself may have to change. Processing and
transmission demands may eventually exceed the speed and capabilities of

silicon-based integrated circuit electronic devices. Faster gallium-arsenide

semiconductors would yield substantial improvements in switching performance,

but in the long term, photoelectronic, photonic, and perhaps even superconducting

devices may be the sources of the revolutionary advances in switching technology

that many think will be needed to meet future networking demands.
18Moreover, current protocols assume that errors and data losses are most
likely to originate in the network, and procedures have been devised to guard

against such problems. But with a high-speed optical-fiber network, Kobayashi

explained, "the traditional notion of error due to noise in the channel is less

relevant than the possible loss of packaged information due to the finite memory

space in the buffer," where data awaiting transmission is temporarily stored.
Also problematic, he said, are network control and management. Today,
feedback mechanisms are used to ease network congestion: A message is sent to

the sending terminal, which then slows its transmission or waits until the

bottleneck is cleared. But with gigabit transmission rates, streams of data packets

already will be in transit by the time the network can alert the sending terminal to

its traffic problems. This means that, instead of reactive or feedback control,

methods of "predictive or proactive control" are likely to be needed. "In other

words, you have to predict the congestion a few milliseconds or nanoseconds

ahead of time and then take some corrective action to limit the transmission of

your information," Kobayashi explained.
Integrating Communications Media
In recent years, wireless communication services have proliferated, placing
heavy demands on the already crowded frequency bands of the radio spectrum

used for, among other things, radio, television, satellite-to-ground telephone

services, cellular and mobile telephones, and pagers. Pending uses for the over-

the-air communication channels include computer-to-computer radio connections

and personal communications networks. With some exceptions, these services

stand apart from those offered over copper wire and fiber-optic cable
Špublictelephone service and data communications. For example, the fast-growing

cellular telephone industry, which has
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE50
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.seen its subscribership increase dramatically to 5.3 million in 1990 
19 and thepublic switched network are evolving as separate islands rather than as

complementary components within a larger communications environment.
Observers have called for a reexamination of communication options, with
the ultimate aim of integrating now-fragmented wireless and wire-line services

into a coherent framework for internetworking. Some would go even further. For

example, there have been suggestions for transmitting television signals by means

of fiber-optic cable, rather than over the air. This possibility is created by

proposals for an all-digital high-definition television (HDTV) standard for the

United States. (The U.S. Federal Communications Commission is evaluating six

proposals for an HDTV transmission standard, four of which are all-digital

systems. The commission is expected to make its selection in 1993.) The large

segment of the spectrum now consumed by private and public television stations

would be freed for other uses, and at the same time, the new means of delivering

video entertainment might create levels of consumer demand sufficient to justify

extending fiber-optic cable to U.S. households, completing all the connections

necessary for a nationwide broadband communications infrastructure.
SOFTWAREPart and parcel of many issues and obstacles confronting
telecommunications carriers and service providers are those related to the design,

development, and maintenance of software. As Aho of Bellcore suggested with

his predictions of problems associated with OSI protocols, complex standards are

underlain by complex software. Even in a single self-contained network, general

management and housekeeping tasks, such as routing, addressing, error

checking, and protocol implementation, may account for more than 90 percent of

the data traffic.
20The concerns raised by Aho are part of a set of issues collectively referred to
as the "software problem." The manifestations of the problem are several.

Advances in hardware have outraced the ability of software designers and

computer programmers to develop applications that exploit the capabilities of new

devices. New applications are often beset with errors, and, in the opinion of many

observers, they are difficult to use. Modifying old programs and databases to

work with new hardware or new software is time consuming and expensive,

exacerbating a backlog in new applications awaiting development. Applications

developed to work with one operating system do not easily transfer to another.

Consequently, one frequently cited testimonial to technological progress
Šthattoday's personal computers are equivalent to the mainframes of less than a decade

agoŠis diminished by the fact that available software takes far less than full
advantage of the
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE51
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.raw processing power of the modestly priced machines now sitting on millions of

desks.The trend toward open systems, improvements in tools to aid designers and
programmers, and other developments have paid dividends. Nonetheless,

software design and development have proven especially resistant to efforts to

transform these activities into a structured engineering discipline, a

transformation that, many believe, would contribute directly to progress in

distributed network computing. To many, the process is a curious combination,

of art and craft, particularly during the early stages of conceptualization and

design, and of laborious writing of programming code.
21"Software may be the limiting factor," said Larry Druffel of Carnegie Mellon
University's Software Engineering Institute. "But remember the other side of

that: it is the enabling factor as well. . . . Obviously, if we are going to do systems

integration [on a national scale], we really have to deal with the software issues

because that is, after all, what allows us to change things after they are built. That

is what it is all about."
Colloquium participants examined some of the hurdles that must be
overcome to improve software design and development and to manage the

increasing complexity inherent in integrating information systems.
Measures of Complexity and Performance
Even in small-scale projects, according to Aho, systems integration poses
the challenge of transforming abstractions, such as improved customer service or

product quality, into concrete functions, usually embodied in software

applications. Consider one of today's popular user interfaces, a graphical model

of the desktop: It is an abstraction that transforms a computer screen into the

most common of work environments.
In the process of creating systems of systems, each successive layer of
integration introduces new abstractions underlain by higher levels of complexity,

Aho explained. It becomes increasingly difficult, he added, to assess the

performance and effectiveness of systems. Consequently, integration strategies

that work well in the context of a single system may be undermined by

unanticipated interactions and problems that arise as the scale of internetworking

grows."I am a great fan of looking at problems in a systems context," Aho said.
"So, the one thing I would advocate to my fellow researchers is that when you do

your work, do the work in a systems context. Ask, does this scale up to medium-

sized systems and to large-sized systems'? We are making substantial investments

in [integrating systems], and we would like to be able to design systems that are

not the [equivalents] of Three Mile Island."
The design of integrated systems, he suggested, would benefit greatly
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE52
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.from measures that could help integrators and researchers define the complexity

and scale of their undertakings. Similarly, Aho advocated developing measures

for gauging the performance of systems, such as their cost-effectiveness, how

easily they can incorporate new technology and accommodate new applications,

and how they respond to accidents and failures. Implicit in Aho's remarks is the

importance of an interdisciplinary perspective.
"My theory is that, if you do not look at the sum of the performance
measures and the underlying architecture, then there will be untoward events in

the future, which will cause the systems to behave adversely land very badly],"

Aho explained. "We would like to have some kind of performance guarantees in

the running of systems that they will respond gracefully to adverse inputs. We

have lots of examples of systems that have behaved badly under certain

conditions."One method being used with increasing effectiveness in the marketplace to
measure the quality of systems integration, software, and hardware is the use of

Service-Level Agreements (SLAs) as a contract between the providers of services

and the users. The SLA specifically lists measurable attributes such as "up-time,"

response time for user transactions, cost per user hour, and other quantitative

items that can be used by both the provider and the consumer to evaluate the

quality of service. Definition of an SLA also helps in setting expectations for the

system at the beginning of the development and integration process.
Software Architecture
The traditional definition of architecture
Šthe art and science of designing
and erecting buildings
Šcontinues to dominate thinking in systems integration,
according to Druffel of Carnegie Mellon University. That is, systems designers

tend to think in terms of configurations of hardware, just as building architects

translate their concepts into specifications for components made of iron and steel.
"That is kind of what we have been dealing with over the years," Druffel
said. "First, we have a hardware architecture and then the software guys have to

figure out some way to make all that work. As we think about systems

architectural issues, we really need to think about the complementary software

architectures. From a software perspective, I would like to know, for example, the

functional view, the control structures, the expected behavior, how [system]

states are stored and communicated, and what the dependencies are."
Druffel and others underscored the need for standards (see below, "Software
Standards") and other mechanisms that foster a shared perspective on software

architecture and better communication among dispersed groups
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE53
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.involved in developing systems software. At their current stage of development,

object-oriented programming techniques, CASE tools, and "layered abstractions,"

such as the OSI model, represent only a partial response to the need, Druffel said,

and, in some cases, they interject additional confusion. "Each of these approaches

reflects a different notion about what services it provides," he explained. ''If you

are going to write software that tries to interconnect them, it gets rather messy."
"A good example of the problems you run into when people are building
tools or building components that are later going to be integrated," he added, "are

those that arise from different views of data ownership." Often, it is not clear

which group within a distributed computing environment has responsibility for

database control and management, or several groups may assume authority. In

either case, Druffel said, configuration management
Šessentially, organizing the
construction of complex software from separate pieces
Šand control of software
versions can be problematic. Moreover, system components may be designed by

people who differ in their views of data ownership, resulting in different models

of how the overall system and its pieces should function. When the time comes to

integrate these differently conceived components, difficulties often arise.
The need for a shared architectural view is magnified by the goal of
developing systems that can evolve with technology, a recurring colloquium

theme. However, this goal can confound software development. "When we are

talking about software," Druffel said, "we are talking about components that are

going to be developed probably without complete knowledge of how they are

going to be used, and we are talking about systems that have to evolve. That is,

they are going to be composed of units without a complete understanding of what

that end system may eventually be, which adds a little bit of complication to the

issue."The added criterion of evolvability presents software developers with the
task of planning for all technological possibilities. At best, developers can only

approximate future developments. So rather than being a rigid scaffolding that

greatly restricts future options for expansion, software architecture must have a

high degree of flexibility. Adoption of new technology and new applications

should not require razing the previous system and starting anew.
"We know that over the next 10 years," Aho said, "progress in
microelectronics is going to make computer chips faster, memories bigger, and

bandwidths greater, and we should not forget about algorithms and other

procedures that will be making our software faster. Are systems designers going

to be able to accommodate these improvements?"
Aho suggested that Japanese methods of incremental quality improvement
may be applicable to systems design. "Proof of progress over time," he said,

should be a hallmark, but operationalizing a model of quality
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE54
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.improvement poses a "very difficult challenge for the systems design

community."Software Standards
Standards are an essential element of a coherent software architecture.
Unfortunately, promulgation of common conventions and widely accepted

platforms for linking applications and other software elements is as prone to

delays and other complications as is standards making in the telecommunications

area. In fact, development of software-related standards to achieve true

interoperability of applications may be a more formidable task, beset by more

interdependencies and greater levels of detail. To convey this complexity,

Druffel provided a small list of topics awaiting internetworking standards: data

bindings, language bindings, and bindings between standards, network

management, and security. Performing an application on a distributed computing

network may invoke standards in all these areas, as well as additional ones.
Moreover, each area presents its own peculiar set of issues. For example, a
standard that is intended to bridge the incompatibilities between different

programming languages must not only serve as a translator but also resolve other

disparities. "It is not just a matter of syntactically communicating between two

languages," Druffel explained. "They really do have different run-time

expectations. Under one language, a default may mean something entirely

different from what it means in the other language. These kinds of issues have to

be dealt with as well."
Consider also all the eventualities and interdependencies that must be
addressed to enable group collaboration on multimedia documents that combine,

for example, voice input, graphics, digitized photographs, hand-written notes,

spreadsheet tabulations, and keyboard input. The capability to exchange

heterogeneous types of information between points anywhere along a network

and to combine the elements of this diverse compilation according to the whims

of users will require an array of standards and common conventions. But if these

standards require users to perform laborious routines and entail time-consuming

steps, the benefits of collaboration will be diluted.
Converging Software Interests
Since networking, in general, and interoperability, in particular, are the
major motivations for standards making in these and many other technical areas,

distinctions between what is a computing standard and what is a communication

standard have become almost artificial. However, the landscape of national and

international standards making is divided between the
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE55
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.two realms and then subdivided among industry domains within each. (See

appendix below for a brief description of major standards-making bodies.)

Although some consolidation of activities and interests has occurred in recent

years, it has not matched rates of consolidation occurring between the

communications and computer industries and between the information services

and applications supported by those industries.
"Over the last 20 years," Kleinrock of UCLA has maintained, "the
innovations in data networking have come from the data-processing industry, and

not from the carriers. This is in spite of the fact that the data-processing solutions

have used the underlying carrier plant to establish their data networks. As we

move into the broadband era, it is essential that these two merged industries

cooperate in providing service to the user community."
22Many of the obstacles that stand in the way of advanced networking will
require software solutions. For example, it has been estimated that the scale of

software supporting the next generation of switching systems in the evolution of

ISDN will be 10 times greater than that supporting the current generation.
23Given the magnitude of the need for reliable, high-quality software to accomplish

complex networking tasks, collaborative development of software by

representatives of the computer and communications industries, it has been

suggested, may be the most efficient way to address the need.
24No matter what the label assigned to a networking issue
Šcommunicationsor computing
Šthe ultimate aim is to meet the needs of the same large set of
users. The overriding goal of standards makers and of software developers who

build on those standards, Druffel reminded, should be simplicity and ease of use

Š"to simplify rather than to increase the complication."
APPENDIX: STANDARDS MAKING AT A GLANCE
The most wonderful thing about standards is that there are so many from
which to choose.
ŠOriginal author unknown
Worldwide, more than 7,000 professionals working in some 250
subcommittees of standards-setting bodies are involved in promulgating, testing,

and formalizing standards for information technology.
25 These numbers attest to
both the enormous size of the task and to the welter of detail that must be

addressed in enabling electronic access to information. Within this domain of

national and international standards making, much of the activity focuses on

protocols for communicating within and across networks.
The following discussion provides an overview of the organizations in
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE56
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.volved in setting standards for information networking.
26 Because the complexity
and the scale of the effort are often not appreciated, it might be instructive at the

outset to give some indication of the extensive body of information-and

communication-related standards that already exists. At its last quadrennial

meeting in 1988, the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), one of three

major international bodies that accredit standards for telecommunications and

information technology, affirmed or adopted nearly 1,600 standards that were

documented in nearly 20,000 pages of text.
27 The ITU is an organization of the
United Nations.The standards-making arena is actually a composite of many different
playing fields. Individual firms
Štypically, hardware and software manufacturers
and communications carriers and other major service providers
Šrepresent the
smallest domain of activity, followed by trade associations, user groups, and

other groups that may form to back a single standard, developed collectively or

selected, perhaps, from several offered by member organizations. In the formal,

or de jure, standardization process, these organizations propose standards that are

submitted for national accreditation. Such proposals are usually assigned to

subcommittees of the private, nonprofit American National Standards Institute

(ANSI), the principal promulgator of U.S. standards. ANSI may form a special

subcommittee to develop a standard for formal approval, or it may assign the task

to a so-called secretariat. ANSI secretariats, usually professional or trade

associations with expertise in the area (e.g., the Institute of Electrical and

Electronics Engineers, the Electronic Industries Association), may provide

administrative support to subcommittees. For example, a number of

communications-related standards, including several concerning ISDN, have been

developed by the T1 committee sponsored by the Exchange Carrier Standards

Association.At the international level, ANSI serves as the U.S. arm of the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical

Commission (IEC), which accredit international standards for information

technology and its applications. For example, the OSI reference model and many

of its supporting standards, such as those for transferring files over a network or

for computer-integrated manufacturing, were developed under the auspices of the

ISO. Along with those submitted by other nations, ANSI-accredited standards are

reviewed by the ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee, which develops standards

for formal approval by its parent bodies.
International telecommunications standards, such as those pertaining to
electronic mail and directory services, as well as more traditional standards like

radio-spectrum allocation, are the product of a separate process, dictated by the

international treaty that formed the International Telecommunications Union

(ITU). Technical specifications supporting the implementa
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE57
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tion of the ISDN standards are being developed by ITU's Consultative Committee

for International Telephony and Telegraphy (CCITT). U.S. telecommunications

standards are introduced to ITU for international approval by the State

Department, which serves as the representative of U.S. industry and is advised by

ANSI.The federal government also wields considerable influence in the
promulgation and adoption of standards. One source of this influence is the

government's huge purchasing power. For example, the federal government has

stipulated that it will only purchase information technology products that adhere

to standards supporting the OSI architecture, specifically those defined by the

Government Open Systems Interconnection Profile (GOSIP), published as

Federal Information Processing Standard 146.
Another source of influence is the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (or NIST, part of the Department of Commerce). Its Computer

Systems Laboratory (CSL) participates in over 85 national and international

voluntary standards activities (e.g., the North American ISDN Users' Forum, the

U.S. National Committee for CCITT, and the IEEE Standards Board and

committees). A recent independent review of the CSL's activities observed the

following:For many long years, the CSL and its predecessor, the Institute for Computer
Sciences and Technology (ICST), have waged a long and lonely, but effective,

battle on behalf of federal government agencies whenever agency interests were

opposed to private market segmentation interests of a variety of vendors in the

computer and communication industry.
Suddenly, CSL finds itself in a world where both users and 
vendors arediscovering that good standards are in their interest, at least for those areas

where innovation is not too lively. This shift represents a 
major environmentalchange for CSL and it requires a rethinking of the successful approaches of the

past decade or so.
28However, in light of these profound environmental changes that open-
systems standards portend, the review panel concluded that the CSL's budget is

"much too small to address effectively even a small fraction of the topics relevant

to CSL's mission."
29 Despite the realities of this budget situation, NIST is
extensively involved in promoting information technology standards.
Straddling the formal standardization process are de facto and ad hoc
initiatives that seek to establish a particular product or implementation as a

standard on the basis of its strong position in the market. The IBM PC computer,

Microsoft's MS-DOS operating system, and Adobe's Postscript page-description

language for laser printers are examples of products that have become de facto

standards.Users are increasingly trying to leverage their purchasing power to hasten
the adoption of standards without waiting for cumbersome formal
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE58
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.standardization processes to reach agreement on particular specifications or for

the market to cull the array of competing alternatives. Examples include the

federal government, as in the case of its GOSIP OSI standards, and the group of

manufacturers that organized the Information Technology Requirements Council.
This latter organization, together with its highly visible Manufacturing
Automation Protocol/Technical and Office Protocols (MAP/TOP) Users Group,

has recently merged with the Corporation for Open Systems (COS), a trade

association whose goal is to bring users and vendors together to promote the

utilization of open-systems technology. The British-based X/Open Company Ltd.

is another organization that combines vendors and users to advance

standardization and interoperability, using, like COS, product testing and

certification.30 In January of 1991, the User Alliance for Open Systems (which
includes representation from over 30 major system users, including such well-

known organizations as Eastman Kodak, DuPont, General Electric, and NASA)

also joined COS to leverage their mutual interests in the implementation of

common requirements for open systems.
31 Overall, there are at least 20 user
alliances devoted to accelerating the standards-setting process.
Growing appreciation of the importance of standards and the increasing
number of initiatives it has generated are welcome developments, expected to

free users from the pitfalls of proprietary solutions to their information

technology and communications needs. But the proliferation of standards-making

activities by ad hoc groups that have grown impatient with formal mechanisms

introduces a new wrinkle, according to Michael Taylor of the Digital Equipment

Corp. ''A complication, of course, is that it is no longer absolutely clear what

standards body is responsible for what," he said. "So, in some sense, we have both

an opportunity to do things faster and a new problem, which is mediating among

this more complex and disparate group of standards bodies."
NOTES1. The major consequences of even "minor" software errors in such systems were dramatically
illustrated in the July 1991 outages of telephone networks in several large metropolitan

areas, including Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles (Andrews, Edmund L. 1991. "String of

Phone Failures Perplexes Companies and U.S. Investigators," 
New York Times
, July 3, p.
A1). See also, National Research Council. 1989. 
Growing Vulnerability of the Nation's
Public Switched Networks 
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
2. Hargrave, Andrew. 1987. "Communications: Towards the 21st Century," supplement to 
ScientificAmerican, October, p. T14.
3. Committee on Physical, Mathematical, and Engineering Sciences, Federal Coordinating Council
for Science, Engineering, and Technology, Office of Science and
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE59
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Technology Policy. 1991. Grand Challenges: High Performance Computing and
Communications, Supplement to the President's Fiscal Year 1992 Budget, p. 54.
4. Kleinrock, Leonard. 1991. "ISDN
ŠThe Path to Broadband Networks," 
Proceedings of the IEEE
,Vol. 79, No. 2, February.
5. Ferguson, Charles H. 1989. "HDTV, Digital Communications, and Competitiveness: Implications
for U.S. High Technology Policy," VLSI Memo No. 89-506, Massachusetts Institute of

Technology, Cambridge, Mass., February.6. Wright, Karen. 1990. "The Road to the Global Village," 
Scientific American, March, pp. 83
Œ94.7. Herbst, Kris. 1989. "Getting Graphic," 
Network World
, July 31, pp. 30, 32, and 45.
8. Feder, Barnaby J. 1991. "Optical Fiber (Almost) at Home," 
New York Times
, March 24, p. F-6.
9. Slutsker, Gary. 1981. "Divestiture Revisited," 
Forbes, March 18, p. 124. Coy, Peter, and Mark
Lewyn. 1991. "The Baby Bells Learn a Nasty New Word: Competition," 
Business Week
,March 25, p. 100.10. For example, Time-Warner Inc. has announced that it will run optical fiber to between 5,000 and
10,000 homes in a section of New York City. Initially, the company will offer customers 150

channels and two-way communication features, but the system could be expanded to 600

channels. With additional hardware, the fiber-optic system could also provide telephone

service. (Kneale, Dennis. 1991. "Time Warner Plans Cable-TV System with 150 Channels,"

Wall Street Journal
 , March 8, p. B-10.)
11. Much of the discussion in this section is based on Kleinrock, Leonard. 1991. "ISDN
ŠThe Path to
Broadband Networks," Proceedings of the IEEE
, Vol. 79, No. 2, February, pp. 112
Œ117.12. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information Administration.
1991. The NTIA Infrastructure Report: Telecommunications in the Age Information
, NTIA
Special Publication 91-26, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., October.
13. Keller, John J. 1991. "Standards Set for Data-Voice Phone Service," 
Wall Street Journal
, February
26, p. B-7.14. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information Administration,
1991, The NTIA Infrastructure Report: Telecommunications in the Age of Information
.15. Kleinrock, 1991, "ISDNŠThe Path to Broadband Networks."
16. Kahn, Robert E. 1987. "Networks for Advanced Computing," 
Scientific American , October, pp.
141Œ142.17. Gantz, John. 1989. "Standards: What They Are. What They Aren't," 
Networking Management,May, p. 33.
18. Kleinrock, 1991, "ISDN
ŠThe Path to Broadband Networks," p. 116; and Optoelectronics
Technology Research Corporation. (no date). 
Key Technology for the 21st Century
, Tokyo,
p. 1.19. Northern Business Information
. 1990. "U.S. Cellular Markets," December, p. 55.
20. Gantz, 1989, "Standards: What They Are. What They Aren't," p. 32.

21. Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Coun

ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE60
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.cil. 1991. Intellectual Property Issues in Software
, National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.22. Kleinrock, 1991, "ISDNŠThe Path to Broadband Networks," p. 115.
23. Kobayashi, T., former president and chief executive officer of the NEC Corp., as quoted at World
Telecommunications Forum, Singapore, May 1985. (Cited in Hargrave, 1987,

"Communications: Towards the 21st Century," p. T14.)
24. Ibid.
25. Gantz, 1989, "Standards: What They Are. What They Aren't," p. 27.

26. For a detailed discussion of relevant standards-related issues, readers may wish to consult
Crossroads of Information Technology Standards
, National Research Council (National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1990).
27. Dorros, Irwin. 1990. "Can Standards Help Industry in the United States to Remain Competitive in
the Market Place?" P. 35 in 
Crossroads of Information Technology Standards
, National
Research Council. Gantz, 1989, "Standards: What They Are. What They Aren't," p. 28.
28. National Research Council. 1991. 
An Assessment of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology Programs: Fiscal Year 1990
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., pp.
303Œ304.29. National Research Council, 1991, 
An Assessment of the National Institute of Standards and
Technology Programs: Fiscal Year 1990
, p. 304.
30. Verity, John W., et al. 1991. "Computer Confusion: A Jumble of Competing, Conflicting
Standards Is Chilling the Market," 
Business Week
, June 10, pp. 72
Œ77.31. User Alliance for Open Systems. 1991. Overcoming Barriers to Open Systems InformationTechnology, Corporation for Open Systems, McLean, Va., January 27.
ENABLING TECHNOLOGY: COMMUNICATIONS AND SOFTWARE61
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4The Next Tier: Building Systems of Systems
BROADENING PERSPECTIVE
In discussions of systems integration, even the most intent listeners can
develop a kind of information-age vertigo. One must adjust not only to the

dizzying pace of technological advance, but also to the political, social,

regulatory, economic, interindustry, and international issues that swirl around

emerging applications of information networking technology. Disorientation is

almost inevitable when, for example, one tries to determine the roles of

communication carriers and service providers, an amalgam of local telephone

monopolies and emerging competitors, long-distance carriers, equipment makers,

and suppliers of information services that operates in a complex, multi-

jurisdictional regulatory environment. In short, the technological complexity

inherent in systems integration is subsumed by other types of complexity that

arise as the scope of networking grows from small
Ša single firm
ŠtointermediateŠa group of firms
Što largeŠan entire nation and beyond.
Perhaps the most salient question at this stage in the evolution of distributed
networked computing is, Where do we want to go from here? Building on the

previous one, this chapter addresses the question by describing the necessary

attributes of information networks as they evolve into "systems of systems" and,

as has been predicted, as virtually all types of business and organizational activity

go "on line." It also outlines some of the issues arising from the convergence of

industries wrought by the digitalization of information.
THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS62
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYSTEMS AS COMPONENTS
"What people thought of as a system just a few years ago is a small
component in what people are thinking of as systems today," said Michael

Taylor, central systems engineering manager at the Digital Equipment Corp. "We

all recognize that one person's system is another person's component."
This evolution in the concept and actual embodiment of information systems
implies an ever expanding sphere of users and applications. It also implies that no

information system will ever be a finished product. Whether hardware, software

applications, sources of information, or services, new components can always be

added. Consequently, there may never be a definable end point in the evolution.

And if there is, it is not discernible from today's vantage point.
For comparison, consider the continuing development of the nation's
telephone system. In 1876, Alexander Graham Bell devised the method by which

human speech and other sounds can be converted directly into electrical current

and back again. In the succeeding 125 years, the United States, pursuing the

social goal of "universal access," built the world's best telephone network, an

accomplishment made possible by waves of innovation set in motion by Bell's

invention. However, the telephone network is hardly complete. Today it is looked

upon as a component of emerging nationwide and global information systems

composed of subsystems as vast as the U.S. telephone network and as small as an

individual computer, telephone, or other personal computing or communication

device."Network-based systems integration is only emerging," said Mark Teflian,
vice president and chief information officer at Covia, the nation's second-largest

travel reservation system. Truly integrated networks not only shuttle data from

one location to another, he said, but also enable assimilation of information, or

learning.According to Teflian and other colloquium participants, most of today's
networked systems do not achieve the levels of integration necessary to help the

user transform data into information and information into knowledge. In a sense,

organizations that have effectively linked information technologies and people

have scaled a plateau that becomes a staging area for an ascent to a higher

mountain. These organizations, said Robert Martin, Bellcore vice president for

software technology and systems, have managed to create network-based systems

and, collectively, they face the formidable task of integrating those systems. In

Martin's view, at the peak of the mountain they and others must climb is a

"national information networking infrastructure."
The challenge for today, Martin, Teflian, and others said, is to build a
foundation that supports successively higher levels of integration within and

among information systems and, in so doing, increases the accessibility,
THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS63
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.utility, and organizational or personal value of information. Participants identified

some of the transcending features that all emerging systems should possess in

order to achieve systems integration on a national scale.
Integratable Components
The fundamental building blocks of an integrated system of systems, said
Martin, are communications and computing devices and software components

that ''can be plugged together" to meet a customer's needs today and still

accommodate the incorporation of new technology. A major issue, he said, is the

"design of integratable components for yet-to-be-defined projects."
"I think the challenge for the future," Martin explained, "is to spread
[today's] networks across the country so that we can do an inter-enterprise

automation and fundamentally change the nature of the system to where we build

systems on the fly based on components that already exist across a distributed

network."Connectivity and interoperability would not eliminate the need for
customized system integration services. The need for specialized applications to

solve complex problems and to address unique organizational needs would

remain, even with a "highly networked distributed base," Martin said.
Simplicity, Transparency, and Functionality"Heterogeneity is going to be the byword of systems integration for the
foreseeable future," Alfred Aho said. According to the Bellcore assistant vice

president, the biggest sources of this heterogeneity are not the peculiarities of

different types of hardware and software, but rather the people who use, build,

and maintain systems of information technology. More important than the

physical connectivity of components and networks, Aho said, are the connections

and processes that integrate people so that they can easily use and manipulate

information and network-based services. The underlying hardware, software, and

networks that constitute a system should be "transparent" to people, he

maintained. An element crucial to achieving simplicity and transparency, he

added, is a "single-system look and feel," a consistent user interface that would

eliminate the frustration that people experience today as they move from

application to application.
"I would also advocate," Aho continued, "that we want to be able to develop
functionality with which the end user can construct new services and be able to

solve problems with the systems. We would like this functionality to be delivered

in such a way that a person who is in a particular business can understand it. He

[should] not have to be a computer scientist or an electrical engineer to be able to

invoke this kind of functionality."
THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS64
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Selectable Speed, Reliability, and Security
Some users of information technology will require the most advanced
networking capabilities available, but most will not need noise-free, gigabit

transmission rates. Flexible transport of information
Šwhether in the form of
data, sound or voice, or graphics
Šand, therefore, flexible pricing schemes for use
of transmission services are so important that Martin and others
1 consider them to
be defining attributes of information networking.
Consistent Architecture and Efficient Methods for Distributed
Development of Systems
The goal of facilitating collaboration among geographically dispersed
groups and among people with different skills and expertise is a major impetus

for information networking. Not fully appreciated, however, is the high level of

collaboration among dispersed parties required to integrate groups of systems

and, ultimately, to create a cooperative environment. The "recursive" nature of

the integration process, said Aho, presents special difficulties that undermine

efforts to get systems to work together.
These difficulties arise from the fact that parts of the whole
Šthe systemsthat will eventually be the components of some larger system
Šare developed by
groups that have different perceptions of what the entire assemblage should be

like and what it should do. "If you look at some of the major integrated systems

we build today," said Larry Druffel, director of the Software Engineering Institute

at Carnegie Mellon University, "you see that there are companies distributed

across the country, if not across the world. If people [at different sites] do not

have the same view of the overall architecture, we can be pretty sure that we are

going to see major disasters when they come together."
Eventually incompatibilities can be overcome, Druffel added, and sub-
systems "can be glued together," but often at the cost of system efficiency.
Druffel and Aho described a consistent underlying architecture as a
cornerstone of efforts to achieve higher levels of integration among today's

information systems and tomorrow's. Unfortunately, said Aho, "Architecture, I

think, is something that we all talk about but understand very little."
Network IntelligenceIn addition to collaboration, the perceived benefits of timely capture and
effective presentation of information also drive efforts to achieve higher levels of

integration. From the perspective of a business, information reduces uncertainty,

and the quicker a firm can gather and process information, the quicker it can

identify and respond to market opportunities. Teflian
THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS65
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of Covia made the point this way: "Information equals money, and timely

information equals more money." Therefore, he added, the point of sale should be

the point of information capture. To exploit the advantages that rapid capture and

analysis of information create, Teflian predicted, an increasing number of

businesses in all sectors of the economy will develop information systems that

enable on-line transaction processing (OLTP). Eventually, he further predicted,

real-time information retrieval and interactive computing will become the

dominant mode of computer usage, inside and outside of business. Because of

stiffening global competition and the resultant shortening of product life cycles,

most firms will view their products and services as "perishable goods," he said,

and OLTP systems will be critical to seizing marketing opportunities in

narrowing time frames.
The American Express information network provides an example. There is
"an absolute real-time requirement," explained Albert B. Crawford, the

company's executive vice president for strategic business systems. "As you use

your credit card, whether you are in Bangkok or Boston, we have to get that

transaction to Phoenix and do some computations to see if you are an authorized

credit risk or not or a suitable credit risk and back out to that point of sale in less

than 20 seconds, and [transmission over] the network consumes eight to ten

seconds of that."
The anticipated transition to OLTP systems creates the need for more
intelligent networks, those that are capable of responding to a request without

requiring the user to attend to confusing and time-consuming procedural details.

Today, for example, there are no complete dictionaries or directories that describe

and locate information resources accessible by computer. An intelligent network

equipped with a comprehensive set of these aids, according to Teflian, would be

able to respond to requests automatically or with only minimal human

interaction. Users need not concern themselves with the specifics of where a

desired piece of information or an application resides on a network. Nor should

differences in computer languages and protocols within a system interfere with

communication. In Teflian's view, the network should be able to do all the

necessary translations.Effective Presentation of Information
Making information easily and instantaneously accessible creates the need
for tools that manage flows of information and help users digest responses to

their requests. While the human senses can take in billions of bits of data per

second, the brain processes information at the much slower rate of about 50 bits

per second. Therefore, information must be organized in a form and on a scale

that permit people to assimilate and manipulate information as they receive it,

Teflian said. One simplifying attribute already mentioned is
THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS66
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.a consistent user interface, which eliminates the problem of adapting to

appearances or other sensory cues that are unique to each application.
Artificial intelligence tools that relegate routine tasks to computers,
information-filtering and information-prioritizing methods, and so-called

"knowbots" that essentially act as information-gathering assistants are in various

stages of research and development, and some are already commercially

available.2 The primary aims of these and other efforts, said Druffel, should be to
foster human understanding, rather than to overload with information. Moreover,

he advised, user interfaces should be designed to accommodate new

functionality. Introduction of speech recognition and other capabilities that are in

store should not necessitate a major revamping of the interface and existing

applications.AN INDUSTRY OF INDUSTRIES
The convergence of computing and communications and the expanding web
of information networks are mirrored by a corresponding convergence of several

major industries
Šprincipally, computers, communications, publishing, and
broadcasting. All are involved in handling information, which in the past existed

in distinct forms. But once information is reduced to binary bits, text, graphics,

and audio become complementary parts of a multimedia whole, and the

boundaries separating once-distinct industries fade.
Equip a personal computer with the hardware for reading a compact disc and
providing sound, and it becomes a means of audio and visual entertainment. With

two-way communication capabilities, a television encroaches on the domains of

the telephone and the computer. Get a "smart phone," and you have a

communications device that takes over the tasks of the computer
Šfor example,
home banking or conducting other on-line transactions. These present-day

examples are only early manifestations of technological forces driving the

creation of a large, hybridized information industry. The actions of this industry

in formation will steer U.S. society into the information age.
3At this stage, it is not entirely clear how this convergence of industries and
the anticipated networking of society will proceed. A few colloquium participants

suggested that the infrastructural melding of networks and systems is proceeding

as fast as it can. Most were dissatisfied with the pace, with some proffering that

the more strategic, government-coordinated efforts under way in Europe and

Japan will prove more productive than the piecemeal market-driven efforts

undertaken in the United States. Whether the comparatively slow response of the

United States to infrastructural issues marks a period of watchful waiting or one

of indecision is an important question.
THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS67
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOULD THE MARKET DECIDE?
Several participants suggested that building a nationwide information
infrastructure was too important a matter to be delegated entirely to a large and

varied collection of firms responding to market cues and pursuing their own

economic self-interest. "If we are strictly market driven, short-term driven, that is a

problem," maintained Mischa Schwartz, Charles Batchelor Professor of

Electrical Engineering at Columbia University. The tendency to focus on the

short-term results in quick responses to immediate market needs, he said, but it

diverts attention and resources from building the capabilities and services that

may be in demand at the start of the next decade.
Robert W. Lucky, executive director of the Communications Sciences
Research Division at AT&T Bell Laboratories, offered a similar perspective.

"There is nobody worrying about putting the nation together" on an integrated

national network, he said. "I do not understand, for example, why there is no

national data network. Why is there no telephone book for computer users?. . .

There is nobody responsible for this. There is nobody who cares to do it. There is

nobody who is delegated to do it. There is no motivation for anybody to do it, and

yet we would all like it." Economic incentives do not exist for services that fall in

the category of the public good, Lucky maintained.
But if people are not willing to pay for the kinds of services that Lucky
described, the counter argument goes, then perhaps the nation doesn't really need

them or other types of services that a national network could provide. "Making

general public knowledge available to the masses would be nice," said Teflian,

"but who pays for that?" Moreover, sidestepping the market could introduce new

problems, he said. ''Integrating systems within a company to improve its

productivity so that it can compete in the world marketplace is one thing," Teflian

explained. "Integrating systems on a national basis, thus affecting intercompany

markets, is quite another.''
COMMUNICATIONS: A "HALF-REGULATED" INDUSTRY
Perhaps most controversial among the issues surrounding the proper roles of
government and the market in the evolution of information networks are those

concerning the regulation of communications utilities. Especially contentious are

federal, state, and local rules pertaining to the seven Regional Bell Holding

Companies and the some 1,300 smaller companies that provide local exchange

service. By virtue of their monopoly in local markets, these telephone companies

must obtain the approval of state and local utility commissions to raise rates, and

the fees they charge for connecting calls to the long-distance network are set by

the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). In addition, the federal court

rulings that de
THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS68
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tailed AT&T's divestiture of local telephone service forbade local telephone

companies from directly engaging in manufacturing, owning local information

services, and providing long-distance service.
The current situation is very fluid and, often, very confusing, given that
actions taken at several levels
Šthe courts, the FCC, the U.S. Congress, and state
legislatures and utility communications
Šcan alter competitive conditions within
markets for communication and information services. Bills and rule changes are

pending at all levels.
4 Major changes, in turn, are often subject to appeals.
Within the current regulatory environment and with the proliferation of
alternative communications technology, many companies have found that they

can save money by bypassing the local telephone network, and they have built

their own links to long-distance haulers. Alternative service providers have also

emerged within local markets. Some offer fiber-optic connections to long-

distance carriers and to other sites within the same city. With a recent FCC

ruling, third-party service providers can now connect to the switches of local

telephone companies, spawning competition for customers in the same exchange

area. The result of this state of affairs, according to Teflian, is a "partially

regulated industry." "Half regulation," he said, has created disincentives to private

initiatives that would contribute to the building of a national information

network.Using local implementation of integrated services digital network (ISDN)
service as an example, Teflian noted that the dispersal of regulatory authority

will likely result in decisions that create "discontinuities" among service areas.

Large organizations that require nationwide ISDN service, he explained, may be

forced to find methods to accommodate these local differences. The challenge,

Teflian added, is either to develop a regulatory approach that assures uniformity

at the local level or to pursue "higher levels of integration" that bridge local

discontinuities.Martin of Bellcore suggested that these problems stem from uncertainties
arising in the aftermath of the breakup of AT&T in 1984. "The United States, I

think, is still suffering in post-divestiture confusion," he said, "and I believe

something must be done. The best way to characterize that postdivestiture

confusion is that, since divestiture was announced, there have been no new

national services introduced in the United States, not a one."
Numerous private information services, most serving specialized business
and legal markets (through their own or third-party packet-switched networks),

have been established, however. Many have not been successful. The largest
Šand among the newest
Šof existing services is Prodigy, targeted at household
computer owners. Created by a partnership between Sears and IBM with an

investment of more than $500 million, Prodigy offers more than 400 data

services, including home banking and shopping and information retrieval, and

has about I million subscribers.
5THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS69
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Colloquium participants did not dwell on specific issues arising from the
complex and highly fragmented regulatory environment in which the information

industry finds itself. Many of these issues pit industry against industry, each

trying to preserve or carve out a domain of business activity. Rather, several

participants pointed out that such issues prove that government policies directly

influence the competitive behavior of firms.
"We do have a telecommunications policy in the United States," Martin
said. "It is enacted every day by many agencies distributed within the U.S.

government and across the states, and so there is a policy. The only question is

what that policy should be."
THE HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING AND
COMMUNICATIONS PROGRAM: A STEP TOWARD AN
ADVANCED NATIONWIDE INFORMATION NETWORK
Although many colloquium participants suggested that the path of the
nation's migration into the information age is still unmarked, virtually all were

encouraged by the federal government's newly begun High Performance

Computing and Communications (HPCC) program, an initiative jointly conceived

by representatives of government, industry, and universities.
"It is a good way to get lots of people excited about the [potential of
advanced networking], to test a lot of techniques and technologies, and to show

the way as to what needs to get done," explained Irving Wladawsky-Berger,

IBM's assistant general manager of development and quality. If the approaches

and technologies demonstrated in the HPCC program show promise, he added,

the risk of moving on to the next tier of innovation and information technology

applications will be reduced. Businesses will have the incentive and some of the

know-how to go on to "build the next version and the version after that."
As planned, the program has four major components: (1) research and
development work on high-performance scalable parallel computing systems

capable of sustaining trillions of operations per second on large problems

(accounting for 25% of total funding); (2) developing software technology and

algorithms for advanced applications and networking (41%); (3) developing a

National Research and Education Network (NREN) with, ultimately, a data

transmission rate of several billion bits per second (14%); and (4) investing in

basic research and human resources to address long-term national needs for more

skilled personnel, enhancement of education and training, and development of

materials and curriculum (24%).
6Most discussion at the colloquium focused on the NREN, a three-phase
project to be jointly funded by the federal government and industry. During the

first phase, existing networks linking government, university, and industry

researchers would be upgraded and interconnected. The second phase,
THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS70
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.much of which has already been installed, would develop a 45-million-bits-per-

second backbone
Šthe "long-distance" lines of the network
Špermitting user-to-
user transmission rates of 1.5 million bits per second for the 200 to 300 U.S.

research institutions expected to be linked by the network. The third phase,

involving research followed by deployment beginning later in the decade, would

support an aggregate transmission rate of perhaps 3 billion bits per second. The

goals of the first two phases are achievable with commercially available

technology (indeed, much progress has already been made); the biggest

challenges lie in the development of software and supporting standards for

managing a large multi-organization network.
The final phase, however, will entail a major technological transition. As a
committee of the CSTB has noted,
7 the high-performance, high-traffic network
envisioned will require a "clean-sheet approach," an appraisal also used to

describe the challenges posed by the less ambitious broadband ISDN, or BISDN.

In this high-speed distributed computing environment, even the speed of light

becomes a constraint, posing the problem of propagation delays. Technical

issues, the committee pointed out, arise in many areas, including network

control, layered architectures, communication protocols, switching, routing,

multiplexing, and processor interfaces. In addressing these and other issues,

colloquium participants pointed out, the NREN project can clear the technical

obstacles that stand in the way of building an advanced information infrastructure

for the United States.
David Farber, professor in the Department of Computer and Information
Sciences at the University of Pennsylvania, elaborated on some of the challenges.
When you are operating at a gigabit [rate] across country, there are a
remarkable amount of bits stuck in the line being transmitted. So the normal

approach to protocols that we have developed over the years may or may not

work. That is a research question. If they work at a gigabit, will they work at the 2

gigabits that we will probably have in another few years? Will they work at 10

gigabits?Can we understand what will happen in the future? Big, open question. If you
proceed to come up with a protocol that works, . . . then can any operating system

we have tolerate data rates of that speed? Will Unix survive when you put a

gigabit down its throat, even if you can get in'? Most likely not. This litany goes

on and on and on, and most everything you look at gets affected by trying to

stuff that much data at that speed down the throat of modern technology.
Farber suggested that when computers can exchange data at gigabit speeds, a
network takes on the characteristics of a massively parallel, or multiprocessor,

computer. The network becomes a "pile of computers that all think they are on a

common, multi-processor environment and communicate via shared memory."

The optical fiber linking the network functions like a
THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS71
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.high-speed bus within an individual computer
Šthe set of wires, or bidirectional
data highway, that carries signals throughout the machine. Implicit in Farber's
model is the need for network intelligence. "There is no way that massively

networked computers can operate without a communications system that

understands what, in fact, it is communicating across," he said.
"This gigabit technology," he told the colloquium, "is the beginning, I
believe, of a take-off point in communications. I think there is a gap now between

the 'traditional' slow-speed communications of below 100 megabits, and the

future communications of multiple gigabits that people are talking about. I

believe the [forthcoming technology] will have a substantial and profound impact

on the computer field and offer opportunities that I do not think we are very good

at understanding right now."
Farber noted that the NREN's benefits will take time to unfold. "In about
three years," he said, "we will understand better what the issues are, exactly what

the implications are, and, maybe, whether it is in fact justified as an investment

for science. All of us believe it is or we would not be spending our time working

toward it and we would not have the funding to do it. While the government is

putting in a substantial amount of money, a large part of the burden is shared by

industry, which is contributing a phenomenal amount of resources, lines,

engineering talent, and research talent. So it is a very interesting vehicle, and it

may tell us how we want to do cooperative work in the future in this country."
To the extent that the NREN project and the entire HPCC program succeeds
in exposing and developing these opportunities, the United States will have a

clearer technical route into the information age. The NREN will serve, in part, as

an important test bed for new technologies, applications, and network operation

and management policies. Perhaps even more importantly, it is likely to set

precedents for many key economic, regulatory, and political issues surrounding

the future development of our national communication and information needs.
8Careful analysis of such "initial conditions," then, is to be encouraged as their

influence can extend for many years into the future.
NOTES1. Dertouzos, Michael L. 1991. "Building the Information Marketplace," 
Technology Review,January, pp. 29Œ40.2. The term "knowbots" was originally coined by the Corporation for National Research Initiatives of
Reston, Virginia; see Anthes, Gary H. 1991. "Let Your 'Knowbots' Do the Walking,"

ComputerWorld, May 13, p. 17.
3. Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research Council. 1990. 
Keeping the U.S.
Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the Agenda
, National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C., pp. 26
Œ27.THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS72
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4. See, for example, Bradsher, Keith. 1991. "Judge Allows Phone Companies to Provide Information
Services," 
New York Times
, July 26, p. A1.
5. Shapiro, Eben. 1991. "A Service Is Dropped by Prodigy," 
New York Times
, May 17, p. C3; and
"Can Prodigy Be All Things to 15 Million PC Owners?" 
New York Times
, June 2, p. F4.
Konsynski, Benn R., and F. Warren McFarlan. 1990. "Information Partnerships
ŠSharedData, Shared Scale," 
Harvard Business Review
, September
ŒOctober, p. 116.
6. Committee on Physical, Mathematical, and Engineering Sciences, Federal Coordinating Council
for Science, Engineering, and Technology, Office of Science and Technology Policy. 1991.

Grand Challenges: High Performance Computing and Communications
, Supplement to the
President's Fiscal Year 1992 Budget, p. 8.
7. Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research Council. 1988. 
Toward a National
Research Network, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 25
Œ35.8. See, for example, Dertouzos, 1991, "Building the Information Marketplace," pp. 29
Œ40; Gilder,George. 1991. "Into the Telecosm," 
Harvard Business Review
, March
ŒApril, pp. 150
Œ161;and Weingarten, Fred. 1991. "Five Steps to NREN Enlightenment," 
EDUCOM Review,Spring, pp. 26
Œ30.THE NEXT TIER: BUILDING SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS73
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Prerequisites for Progress
By the end of the 1990s, we will have had five decades of experience with
computers. But as with several other major commercial innovations (e.g.,

automobiles, aviation, telephony, and pharmaceuticals), nearly 50 years of

experience do not establish computers as a mature technology; nor do they

qualify even the most practiced users as consummate authorities. Many observers

believe that the true potential of digital technology in all its embodiments will not

be realized until well into the next century. This view was expressed by Alan

Perlis, the late Yale University computer scientist, in his remarks at the CSTB's

inaugural colloquium on the competitiveness of the U.S. computer industry:
We must never forget that we are at the beginning of the Computer Age, so
that exploration of its role must continue into the foreseeable future. Thus the

physical form of the computer may change, but our recognition of and

dependence on the abstract concept "computation" will continue to deepen. It is

inconceivable that we could function without the computer. Of course we must

not worship the machine as an idol but we must domesticate it so that it serves

both as a good and a performer. The computer must be expected to play a role in

almost every human activity.1Some might substitute information age for Perlis's computer age, but his
themes of exploration and continuing mastery of digital technology are no less

relevant. In many ways, systems integration marks a new phase of exploration

and, as Perlis put it, domestication of the technology. The hybridization of

computers and communication technology will yield a new progeny of

applications, perhaps revolutionary capabilities that are not discernible from

today's limited vantage point.
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS74
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.But these expectations are not shared by all. Some observers extrapolate from
today's experiences with computers and related technology, and they are more

circumspect in their outlook on the future. The current generation of technology,

they say, has yet to be domesticated, and, for now, the need for new types of

applications and information services may be greatly overestimated.
Colloquium participants offered their own assessments of the nation's
information future, with many generally endorsing measures to build a

nationwide information infrastructure. Some described an advanced infrastructure

as essential to the nation's economic development. James Fischer of Andersen

Consulting suggested, for example, that as the web of computing and

communication networks grows, the number and magnitude of the potential

benefits also grow. As an enabler of innovation, integration can confer

advantages to a single company, he said, "but it also is the basis to give a group

of companies some advantage, and then industries, and ultimately, I would

assert, the national economy." Other speakers predicted a similar cascading of

benefits in education, health care, government operations, entertainment, and

numerous other areas of social, organizational, and personal activity.
In Japan and Europe, government and industry appear to find the prospective
payoffs more compelling than do their U.S. counterparts, according to Robert

Martin of Bellcore and several other speakers. Indeed, Japan's Ministry of

International Trade and Industry has estimated that, by the year 2020, the

country's planned information network will undergird a full third of its economy.
2Current activities there and in Europe are creating a political and economic

environment that "encourages cross-industry cooperation" on planning and

building an infrastructure for the information age, Martin said. Japan and the

European Economic Community, he added, are "spending more than twice as

much per capita as the United States to upgrade their infrastructures. Each has

sponsored cooperative, precompetitive research to define the infrastructure."
3While overseas activities may eventually yield returns that could help
foreign competitors eclipse the U.S. leadership in systems integration, colloquium

participants were most troubled by the nation's complacency about the role of

information technology in its future. With the exception of the HPCC program,

neither U.S. government nor U.S. industry has contemplated an initiative to

harness the evolving technology to bolster the nation's economy, improve the

performance of its institutions, and better the lives of its citizens. A study by the

National Telecommunications and Information Administration released in

October 1991 offers some encouragement, because it both articulates the

importance of information infrastructure and considers a range of relevant issues

from a public policy perspective.
4 The issues involved are numerous and
complex, and many, such as concerns
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS75
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.about personal privacy, cannot be resolved solely in the realms of technology and

business.Because it was intended as a forum for discussion of varying perspectives,
the colloquium did not strive for consensus or sharply focused recommendations.

Nevertheless, it is possible to distill from participants' remarks several major

issues and concerns requiring the thoughtful attention of business, universities,

and government. Those include the need for making strategic investments,

including demonstration projects by the federal government; attending to

technical standards; enhancing the role of universities; pursuing enabling

technologies; attending to human elements; providing for system security and

privacy; and developing a shared vision of the information age. These themes are

recapitulated below.
MAKING STRATEGIC INVESTMENTSThe Need for Government Leadership
In 1934, the federal government made universal telephone access a national
goal and then built the regulatory framework and provided the incentives that led

to the creation of the world's best telecommunications system. Colloquium

participants suggested that it is now time to augment that goal in light of

technological changes profoundly altering the nature of communication and

information. Many also suggested that the federal government can play an

instrumental role in leading the United States into the information age.
"What we all want to see the government do," said Mischa Schwartz of
Columbia University, "is provide a seed or stimulus to progress in some way.

That is what is happening in Japan and in the European countries."
According to Schwartz and others, the short-term, market-driven
perspectives of most U.S. businesses will likely translate into a continuation of ad

hoc networking initiatives in the private sector, but the sum of these fragmented

efforts will not be a cohesive nationwide information infrastructure. Moreover,

colloquium participants questioned whether, on their own, U.S. companies will

make the long-term commitment necessary to resolve the many technical issues

that a nationwide information network poses. An infrastructure will not develop

spontaneously, they said, and the decision to build one should be made

prospectively, rather than in hindsight.
"Today, . . . I never hear anybody argue about what is best for the United
States," said Robert Lucky of AT&T. "It does not enter any equation

whatsoever." The nation's telecommunications system, he claimed, is evolving

haphazardly, as all activities are dictated by the need to make money. Profit

potential has become the "sole source of leadership," he said.
Money, however, is not an incidental item in building a national infor
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS76
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.mation network, one that links every home and business. Estimates of the cost of

installing optical fiber and associated equipment throughout the United States

range from $200 billion to about $1 trillion.
5 Many believe the investment will
pay for itself, yielding returns in a variety of ways. For example, one recent study

estimated that the ability to communicate, shop, and conduct business

electronically over a nationwide fiber-optic network would permit 6 million

people to work at home, replace 13 million business trips with teleconferences,

eliminate 3 billion shopping trips, and reduce truck and delivery miles by 600

million.6 The resultant annual savings, realized in the form of reduced fuel
consumption, pollution, and commuting time, were estimated to total about $23

billion. While the transportation-communication trade-off has been a subject of

discussion, speculation, and disappointment for decades, we appear to be at the

threshold of some real shifts in behavior as a result of changes in technology, the

economy, and shifting views on important topics like the environment,

education, and family.Because the cost of building an information infrastructure is large and
because many of the anticipated benefits might be considered public goods, there

have been calls for cost-sharing and risk-sharing between business and

government. In addition, the perceived costs and benefits and the magnitude and

complexity of the task of building an infrastructure were seen by colloquium

participants as impetus for measures to foster cooperation and coordination.
"This is a very long term issue that requires an unusual amount of
cooperation across academia, industry, and government," said Martin of

Bellcore. In the private sector, he noted, the broadcast, computer, and

telecommunications industries "must learn to cooperate if we wish to have an

information network." Thus an important role for government is to serve as an

intermediary and to create a forum for cross-industry participation.
Martin and other speakers questioned, however, whether a truly coordinated
and cooperative effort is possible within today's fragmented regulatory and policy

framework. Federal and state policymakers and regulators, he said, "are doing

superb jobs within their own domains but, I fear, are looking backwards towards

the old edict of universal telephone service . . . . [W]e need to carefully look at

how we are stimulating investment in this infrastructure in the United States."
7Applications, Demonstrations, and Incentives
The fact that U.S. companies spend several billion dollars on private
networks indicates a need for a communications infrastructure. But does this need

extend beyond business, especially large firms and organizations such as federal

agencies? Still a matter for debate is the extent to which U.S. consumers may

wish to partake of the smorgasbord of information-age
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS77
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.services that becomes possible when households are linked to a nationwide

network. Commercial ventures in videotext and other information services (e.g.,

CompuServe, Prodigy, GEnie) have served relatively small numbers of customers

to date. The development of narrowband ISDN and its anticipated growth into

broadband ISDN are largely the product of telecommunications carriers'

intentions, rather than burgeoning consumer demand and brimming societal

expectations. On the other hand, these services do not go as far as those

envisioned for the National Research and Education Network (NREN), which is

driven by advanced scientific and technological demands plus concern for the

needs of education.
Commitment to and momentum toward an advanced broadband network
must be generated by new applications that appeal to a broad number of people.

Uncertainty about future markets for information services and applications can

impede steps that would further the development of a national network.

According to several colloquium participants, national and regional

demonstration projects are required to evaluate prospective consumer-oriented

uses of an information network. Today, several local experiments
Šat least 50,
based on a 1990 estimate
8Šare evaluating household use of fiber optically
delivered information and entertainment services. But whether the results of these

trials will provide definitive evidence of the appeal and utility of such services on a

national scale is doubtful.
Lucky of AT&T noted that with AT&T's divestiture of the Bell Operating
Companies, the United States lost its only mechanism for conducting ''pioneering

experiments'' to try out new services. "We would give communities certain

advance services and see how they played out," he explained. "We cannot do this

any more. They [trials] do not make money. . . . In the days before divestiture, we

had a great mechanism for doing all this. We had this rate-base business where

we effectively taxed the telephone-paying public to pay for what we thought

would be good for them. We need a mechanism that [permits] . . . the nation to

devote some resources to doing pioneering experiments."
The authority and means to implement such a mechanism would seem to
rest with federal and state regulators, several speakers suggested. They

contended, however, that federal and state regulators are principally interested in

controlling the cost of telecommunication services to consumers. Longer-term

infrastructural issues and their implications for the general public tend to rank low

on the regulatory agenda. Without consumer-oriented trials of advanced

information services, said Martin of Bellcore, conjecture will continue to

dominate the debate over a nationwide information infrastructure. Whether

hooking up households and offices on a network will yield such benefits as

individualized education, better health care as a result of providing access to

remotely located medical expertise, and new economic opportunities for declining

rural communities can only
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS78
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.be determined from systematic testing, he said. Similarly, results of service trials

could either strengthen or weaken arguments that large businesses would be the

primary beneficiaries of an information infrastructure, he added. Evidence, either

way, would help guide regulators' and policymakers' decisions on financing

infrastructural development.Existing federal government programs hold varying degrees of value as
demonstration vehicles. Particularly promising is the NREN. Beginning efforts to

build a multigigabit network, David Farber of the University of Pennsylvania

suggested, are in themselves an "enabling technology." Added Samuel Fuller of

the Digital Equipment Corp., "Here is an ideal project that can only be done in

collaboration with industry, and, I believe, the universities can play an important

part. It seems to me [NREN] provides a wonderful, concrete example that will

stress a number of key areas that will have to be improved if we are really going

to be effective in systems integration. . . . It provides a rich area for us to develop

methods, do research, and make progress."
As an additional spur to progress, several colloquium participants
suggested, the federal government could sponsor development and demonstration

projects that would pioneer applications of advanced information technology to

the missions of information-intensive agencies, such as the Social Security

Administration (SSA), the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and the

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Expanding the demonstration potential

of federal systems would build on a large base: the federal government has been

the largest consumer of information technology in the world, federal needs for

systems have long nourished the systems integration business, and today many

agencies have significant needs to modernize their processes and supporting

systems. Historically, information technology projects for government agencies

such as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and Department of

Defense have broken new applications ground.
Beyond focusing research and development on civilian, or commercial,
applications of information technology, federal systems demonstration projects

are likely to yield tangible dividends in the form of increased effectiveness and

efficiency in government operations, as well as improved decision making.

Achieving this promise, however, would be challenging, as such major

information-intensive agencies as the SSA and the IRS process information on a

scale far exceeding that of single companies undertaking systems integration

projects (Tax Systems Modernization at the IRS, for example, is expected to

involve technology to handle 100 million individual tax returns plus

organizational tax filings, at an investment of $8 billion).
9 For a variety of
reasons, information systems at most civilian agencies have not tended to pioneer

innovations; they have in recent years lagged the best commercial practice.

Nevertheless, initiatives such as GOSIP, for imple
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS79
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.menting OSI networking standards; FTS-2000, for upgrading voice and data

communications (including ISDN implementation); and other federal

procurement activities point to the possibilities for a wide range of federal

systems to implement and demonstrate aspects of systems integration.
Another option for stimulating investment, suggested by Mark Teflian of
Covia, is to provide tax incentives to private organizations that invest in advanced

technology needed to modernize the nation's communications infrastructure. To

strengthen the "competitiveness of U.S. business here and abroad," Teflian said,

the United States must be able "to get past the point of having to deal with the

integration problems at the lower level
Šthe physical transport levels of
communications networks." Tax incentives might encourage firms to take the

next step and move on to higher levels of integration and internetworking, which,

he said, would improve business performance and ultimately benefit the

economy.ATTENDING TO STANDARDS
Efforts to develop communication and information technology standards,
one commentator has recently written, "are almost always slow, laborious,

political, petty, boring, ponderous, thankless, and of the utmost criticality."
10Such is the nature of standardization, a process that U.S. companies "tend to

flay," said Schwartz of Columbia University. "Sometimes we tend to go with it;

sometimes we go against it.''
In recent years, however, more and more U.S. companies have come to
appreciate the strategic importance of standards. Manufacturers and service

providers recognize the market-expanding effects of standards, and users of

information technology are wary of proprietary approaches that limit their future

options for connectivity and interoperability. Unfortunately, this appreciation is

compartmentalized according to industrial domains. Communications carriers

attend to their own sphere, manufacturers of computer hardware and software

attend to theirs, and user organizations that get involved in the process focus on

their specific needs. Even within an industry, interests may be specialized and

separate. For example, providers of wireless communication services and firms

that operate public switched networks have done little to bridge their two

operating domains and create a larger hybridized communications network.
11Thus standard-setting efforts do not fully reflect the convergence and

interdependence of technologies and industries wrought by the digitalization of

information.In Europe and Japan, several colloquium participants noted, standards have
been made a top priority by both government and industry. The European

Economic Community, for example, has created a standards institute to serve as a

focal point of standards-making activity. Collaborators there are placing greater

emphasis on developing "prenormative" standards that
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS80
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.anticipate technological advances and future networking needs, but yet

accommodate refinement and adjustment when technology and services are ready

for commercial introduction. In so doing, European companies are strengthening

their position in the international standards-making arena, participants suggested.
Participants made several recommendations regarding the development of
standards that foster the growth of a national communications and information

technology infrastructure and that can compete for international acceptance.

First, they said, U.S. government and industry must adopt an integrated, strategic

approach to standards making. An important ingredient of such an approach is

cooperative precompetitive research, perhaps jointly funded by the federal

government and industry. Although speakers did not propose a specific

mechanism for coordinating standards making activities, most called on the

federal government to play a formative role.
"The federal government," maintained Albert Crawford of American
Express, "should be far more proactive in influencing international information

standards. Government representatives should solicit input not only from

equipment vendors but also from systems integration firms and leading-edge

users.""Standards activity clearly needs to be expedited," Martin added, "but
finding the right model that assures ongoing open participation by industry and

yet accelerates the process is a very complex matter that requires careful study."
Many speakers expressed concern over the complexity of current and
emerging standards, which, in the long run, could undermine internetworking

efforts and perhaps slow the adoption of new technology. Citing one example,

Alfred Aho of Bellcore said the communications protocols designed to support

the Open System Interconnection reference model "are getting bigger, fatter,

more complex, and more numerous. Eventually this whole system is going to

collapse under its own weight." Aho described standards as "essential" to systems

integration and networking on national and global scales, but he stressed the need

to simplify standards and to increase the speed and efficiency of the standards-

setting process.An important challenge for researchers is the development of so-called
lightweight communications protocols, those that entail less processing and,

therefore, take less time to carry out their functions than do today's

"heavyweight" versions. However, current analytical models and other

methodological tools now used to design communications protocols, explained
Hisashi Kobayashi of Princeton University, may not be applicable to efforts

addressing this challenge. "There are a whole range of protocol issues that cannot

be addressed by the existing methodology," he said.
Moreover, internetworking efforts would benefit significantly from wider
adoption of programs for certifying the conformance of products with
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS81
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.industry-accepted standards and from the development of better mathematical

tools to improve the reliability of product testing. However, the former, system

certification, is the subject of some controversy within industry centered on how

best to demonstrate conformance, while the latter, including verification and

validation of software, is the subject of vigorous activity and debate in the

technical community.ENHANCING THE ROLE OF UNIVERSITIES
Given the technical challenges that advanced information networking poses
and the systems integration industry's need for a highly skilled interdisciplinary

work force, one might expect the nation's universities to be playing key roles as

performers of research and as trainers of science and engineering personnel.

Unfortunately, this expectation does not mesh with reality. Excluding the

involvement of some in the young NREN project and a few other isolated

examples, universities have not embraced systems integration as an area of

formal inquiry.Because the field encompasses many disciplines, Kobayashi explained, it
"does not really fit in the traditional academic disciplines like computer science

or electrical engineering. It is not so easy for faculty members and graduate

students to focus on systems integration in the broader sense of the term." That an

interdisciplinary approach is required, however, was clear from the remarks of

industry representatives such as Jeffrey Heller of Electronic Data Systems,

Charles Feld of Frito-Lay, and Fischer.
"Much like the difficulties in making software engineering a legitimate
academic topic," added Larry E. Druffel of Carnegie Mellon University, "systems

integration faces the issues of definition, codification, and theory." Thus despite

the perceived need on behalf of industry, few universities have thus far set up

graduate-level programs to address systems-integration issues. Irving

Wladawsky-Berger of IBM challenged university researchers and their

institutions to begin addressing the field's complex problems or "risk falling far

behind the state of the art."
While acknowledging that systems integration is struggling for recognition
as a legitimate academic topic, university representatives pointed to some

practical impediments.12 One is the lack of private and public funding for the
interdisciplinary research programs that are required to address many of the

issues in the field. A related obstacle is the high cost of advanced technology. In

the communications area, for example, most universities do not have the

resources to make the transition from the old model of point-to-point

telecommunications to the rapidly evolving model of networking, said Schwartz.

The modernization, he said, "takes a lot of know-how, and it takes a lot of

equipment. Nobody is providing that know
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS82
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.how, and nobody is providing that equipment, and so [universities] are falling

further and further behind."
Druffel concurred: "Universities seldom have the funds to support complete
integration, and most do not have the engineering expertise to build and maintain

an operational system."
Heller suggested several prescriptive actions to foster greater university
involvement. Consortia with members from government, industry, and academia,

he said, offer one means for assembling the "critical mass of resources and talent"

needed to address complex systems integration problems. Heller also advised

universities to act on their own
Š"to concentrate on understanding systems
integration, providing input to industry, and teaching" the interdisciplinary and

technical skills that the field requires. For its part, he added, "business should

assist universities in upgrading equipment, share its expertise, and provide input

into curriculum development."
PURSUING ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
Technological innovation yields the raw materials of the information age,
while systems integration offers perhaps the best means for making the most

productive and widest use of those materials. The competitive advantages reaped

by firms such as Frito-Lay and others that have effectively linked information

technology, people, business operations, and long-term strategic planning provide

compelling evidence for this assertion.
Occasional examples of delays, cost-overruns, and failed integration projects
notwithstanding, U.S. firms have pioneered and demonstrated the substantial

benefits that can be gained by networking today's computing and

communications technology, and they have given a hint of what the future may

bring. In growing numbers, foreign firms and governments will seek to capture

the competitive economic advantages that systems integration affords. This will

mean an expansion of global markets for systems integration services and the

underlying base of hardware and software on which information systems are

built. In turn, a rapidly growing market will also attract new competitors to the

systems integration business.
These developments, already unfolding, could eventually lead to the
repetition of a lesson that is all too familiar in the nation's computer and

electronics industries. Being first in the development and application of new

technology does not guarantee future commercial success. Yet having given birth

to information networking, U.S. firms are at least in a position to capitalize on the

second generation of networking, during which entire industries and entire

economies and societies will go "on line." That these firms will be able to do so,

however, is not inevitable. Almost certainly,
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS83
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.foreign firms will attempt to leapfrog their U.S. competitors and cash in on

growing opportunities to sell devices, software, and services. The governments of

Japan and European nations are collaborating with industry on a wide range of

information technology research and development projects, ranging from the

manufacture of advanced semiconductor memory chips to demonstrations of new

information services to devising security counter-measures and privacy

safeguards.Colloquium participants identified several key areas of technology and
research where continuing progress is essential if the U.S. systems integration

industry is to maintain its world-leading position.
Systems Integration as a Science and Engineering Discipline
"We [must] do for systems integration what computer science and computer
engineering have done for computing," asserted Aho. "If we do not do this, then I

think the kinds of advantages that we currently enjoy will be eroded, and eroded

rapidly."Behind Aho's assertion lies the widely held perception that systems
integration is largely an art or advanced craft, rather than a full-fledged discipline

built on fundamental scientific, engineering, and design principles. However, the

interdisciplinary nature of the field makes meeting this challenge all the more

important and all the more difficult. The transformation from art to science

requires contributions from a diverse collection of fields, such as mathematics,

ergonomics, and business and management science, as well as software

engineering and computer science and engineering. Although many problems can

be addressed in distinct research domains, the results of investigations will

generally be partial solutions to larger and more encompassing issues. As the

field's name makes implicit, integration and coordination of research

contributions will be critical to building the scientific underpinnings of systems

integration.What is more, there are intrinsic problems in working on large systems.
First among these is the inherent difficulty in designing large systems that will

incorporate both automated and non-automated (human, business, or physical)

elements. No less a challenge is the innate propensity for large systems to change

or evolve over time. For example, 40 to 60 percent of the effort in the

development of complex software systems typically goes into maintaining
Ši.e.,changingŠsuch systems. 13Computing Hardware and Software Capabilities
As suggested in the earlier discussions of the NREN project, the expected
emergence of communications and computer networks that permit
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS84
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.users to exchange data at a rate of several billions of bits per second (or greater)

spawns an array of technical issues. There is need for both incremental

improvements in existing technology and "clean sheet" approaches to networked

computing and communications. In hardware, critically important areas include

advanced integrated circuits, computer architectures, photonics and

photoelectronics, flat panel displays, switching technology, digital signal

compression, and many others. Colloquium participants did not dwell on

hardware-related issues, but many acknowledged that the future of the U.S.

systems integration industry is closely linked to the fortunes of domestic

hardware manufacturers. They underscored concerns about the competitiveness

of certain segments of the U.S. semiconductor industry and about the so-called

commoditization of computers, a trend that favors Japanese firms and other

foreign competitors noted for their manufacturing prowess.
Participants devoted more attention to software, which, as Fuller of the
Digital Equipment Corp. (DEC) explained, is the primary source of "value-

added" in systems integration. In contrast to the uneven fortunes of U.S. hardware

manufacturers, the nation's software makers account for over half of world sales

of computer programs and related services, having generated revenues of about

$63 billion in 1990. 
14 This world-leading position appears to bode well for U.S.
systems integrators as they venture into foreign markets. But again, Japan and

Europe are making determined efforts to close the software gap, focusing on

design and programming methods intended to make software development more

efficient and less prone to quality defects than are the processes used by U.S.

producers. Japanese designers and programmers have been highly successful in

creating reliable, high-quality software incorporated into consumer electronics

products, and they, as well as European software companies, have proven their

ability to write customized programs for business applications.
Fuller and other colloquium participants suggested that improved methods
for large software development projects would help both U.S. software firms and

systems integrators distance themselves from the competition. Especially needed,

according to Fuller, are better computer-aided software engineering (CASE) tools

for building "programming environments for system control, revision control, and
the integration testing and verification of large systems." By making these

methods a research priority, he added, "I think we can continue to differentiate

ourselves" in the world market for systems integration.
Two other critical areas, Fuller said, are the enhancement of multimedia
human interfaces and development of standardized techniques for managing

database systems. Both are essential elements of efforts to make computer-aided

collaboration and information networking easier and more productive.
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS85
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Re-engineering and Building on the Installed Base of
TechnologyCollectively, the nation's businesses, government agencies, and other
organizations have invested hundreds of billions of dollars in information

technology since the 1960s. This large installed base of devices and, in

particular, software and databases is alternatively described as boon and bane.

With each wave of advance in commercial technology, organizations are finding

it increasingly difficult to combine the old with the new, and yet the information

and applications embedded in yesterday's investments continue to be strategically

important assets. In fact, the value of these assets may actually increase with the

new functions and capabilities made possible by state-of-the-art technology, if the

two can be made interoperable.
In the same vein, many organizations have a long list of new software
applications awaiting development. Progress is slow because each new project

generally begins from scratch, even though routines and subroutines that will

eventually be incorporated into the final product already reside in existing

applications.Both problemsŠthe one of re-engineering the installed base and the other of
building on past software design and programming efforts to create entirely new

applicationsŠare widely recognized. Solutions would be especially beneficial to
private and public organizations that have invested heavily in information

technology, most of which are located in the United States. "By one mechanism

or another," Fuller said, "we have to stand on the shoulders of others rather than

re-implement from scratch."
ATTENDING TO HUMAN ELEMENTS
While computers are typically viewed as implements of automation, the
technology is most effective not as a substitute for workers, but as a complement

to the capabilities of humans. However, the computer's potential as a thinking

aid, as a tool that fosters creativity and problem solving, and as a means of

collaboration is not easily achieved.
Systems integration, said Laszlo Belady, then of the Microelectronics and
Computer Technology Corp., "is not purely a technology issue. It is, to a large

degree, a human resource issue." But people may be the most unpredictable and,

therefore, the most neglected variable in information networking and systems

design and implementation.
"I think we are just starting to understand the fact that, really, the computing
system has to be driven by the human system," said Michael Taylor of DEC. "So

we are starting to think in terms of a new paradigm that says you start with the

people, the way those people need to do work."
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS86
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Several colloquium participants described systems integration as an agent of
change. Yet change can be disruptive. The transition to, for example, a leaner

organizational structure and a more collaborative work environment may never

be realized, as may also be the case for many of the benefits the organization

envisioned when it chose to invest in information technology.
Today, however, there are few tools to help ensure that a distributed
computing system will enable increased organizational and personal productivity

and creativity. Experience provides ample evidence of the importance of training,

ease of use, and well-designed user interfaces. But fundamental knowledge of

how people think, work, collaborate, and use information technology could lead

to significant improvements in the utility and value of the technology.
PROVIDING FOR SECURITY AND PRIVACY
The global spread of computing and communications networks heightens
concerns about security and privacy. Once organizations begin to link up with

others outside their own private network, as many are now doing, said Fischer of

Andersen Consulting, "the possibilities for security violations go up

exponentially." If not addressed with effective countermeasures, colloquium

participants noted, increasing vulnerability to security breaches could constrain

applications of information systems. Yet, they said, the escalating risk has yet to

receive concentrated attention from industry and government.
The implications of this situation were addressed in a recent study by a
committee of the CSTB:
We are at risk. Increasingly, America depends on computers. They control
power delivery, communications, aviation, and financial services. They are used

to store vital information, from medical records to business plans to criminal

records. Although we trust them, they are vulnerable
Što the effects of poor
design and insufficient quality control, to accident, and perhaps most

alarmingly, to deliberate attack. The modern thief can steal more with a

computer than with a gun. Tomorrow's terrorist may be able to do more damage

with a keyboard than with a bomb.
15Moreover, the increasing ease with which information on individuals can be
assembled, correlated, analyzed, and distributed may undermine the right to

privacy, explained Mary Shaw, professor of computer science and software

engineering at Carnegie Mellon University. She pointed to two areas of concern.

First, Shaw said, information that was once difficult to gather is now easily

accessed with computers.
"The second factor that is operating," she added, "is that information that has
long been public and probably legitimately so, can now be synthesized," resulting

in a composite body of information that is qualitatively
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS87
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.different from the raw data from which it was assembled. ''This qualitative effect

is sort of denied by the people who claim they are only bringing together

information that is already public," she continued. But it creates "tension between

business interests that correlate this information . . . and individuals' personal

right not to have it correlated, publicized, and distributed."
DEVELOPING A SHARED VISION OF THE INFORMATION
AGEAlthough in itself an important economic activity and a potentially large
source of export earnings, systems integration may derive most of its importance

from its facilitating role, that of enabling organizations and individuals to use

information technology most productively in applications ranging from

manufacturing to government services to education to entertainment. Recognition

of this value is implicit in the coordinated actions by European countries, Japan,

and other nations to build regional and national communications and computing

networks.While not intended to garner unanimity of opinion, the colloquium did
generate a consensus view on the critical need for this nation to plan for its future

in the information age. Throughout the discussion, there were calls for vision,

leadership, and even imagination on the part of the federal government.
"Leadership is not a bad thing to expect from your government," said
Wladawsky-Berger. "That is very different from industrial policy or control or

regulation."If government can help U.S. industry stake a claim at the frontier of
technology and demonstrate the potential returns from exploring and developing

that claim, this line of reasoning goes, then the pioneering efforts will attract

many firms to settle and compete for a livelihood at the edge of the frontier. A

rich cycle of commercial innovation can be expected to follow, yielding benefits

for the rest of society.
But leadership without a committed following, one that is willing to
shoulder part of the risk of exploration, is a hollow exercise. Firms now calling on

the U.S. government to lead the nation into the information age must also share

that vision and commit to making it a reality. A recurring question at the

colloquium was whether many U.S. firms are willing to take a long-term view

and to invest in the future, perhaps at the expense of short-term profits.
A firm can be "market driven with the best of them," Wladawsky-Berger
explained, "but if you do not pay a lot of attention to innovation and technology

as one of the major forces that will drive you to the future, then you really do not

have a future. I do not know how you can talk about innova
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS88
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tion and technology, where the payoffs may be more than five years away, if you

are not convinced that that is very important
Šthat you either push at the leading
edge of technology or you go out of business."
NOTES1. Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research Council. 1990. 
Keeping the U.S.
Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the Agenda
, National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C., p. 66 .
2. Gilder, George. 1991. "Into the Telecosm," 
Harvard Business Review
 , March
ŒApril, p. 158 .
3. For example, within the European Community the Research and Development in Advanced
Communications technologies for Europe (RACE) program represents a collaborative effort

to develop the telecommunications infrastructure required to support future computer

networks. The program was initiated in 1988 as a five-year effort with eight nations

contributing over half a billion dollars to develop an integrated broadband communications

system for high-speed operation. (Blackburn, J. F. 1989. 
The RACE Program in 1988
,Office of Naval Research Europe Report (ONREUR), Washington, D.C., March; or RACE

DG XIII-F (Directorate General XIII). 1990. 
Research and Development in Advanced
Communications Technologies in Europe. RACE '90
, European Commission, Brussels,
March .) Japan, for its part, has committed more than $130 billion through the MITI New

Media Community and the NTT Information Network System project to building a national

ISDN network and achieving full digitization of Japanese telephone service before the turn

of the century (Bellcore Technical Liaison Office, "Japanese Telecommunications,"

unpublished paper, p. 2-1, July 1990 ).
4. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information Administration.
1991. The NTIA Infrastructure Report: Telecommunications in the Age of Information
, NTIA
Special Publication 91-26, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., October.
5. Gilder, 1991, "Into the Telecosm," p. 156.

6. Arthur D. Little, Inc., 1991, 
Can Telecommunications Help Solve America's Transportation
Problems?, Arthur D. Little, Inc., Cambridge, Mass., May , as reported on in: Passel, Peter,
1991. "The Faxes Are Coming," 
New York Times
, April 10, p. D2.
7. The NTIA infrastructure report referenced above (see note 4) argues for increased competition in
relevant markets as a stimulus to the development of infrastructure, and it also advances an

updated concept of universal service, which it calls Advanced Universal Service Access

(Advanced USA). The report recommends:
Thus, instead of seeking only to provide a specified package of
services, the FCC, the states, and the telecommunications industry

should seek to make advanced network capabilities and access to non-

network based services available to all users on an optional, low-cost

basis. Policymakers should generally define, in a technologically-

neutral way, the features or functionalities that are elements of

Advanced USA. (pp. xxiv
Œxxv)PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS89
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8. Lopez, Julie Amparano, and Mary Lu Carnevale. 1990. ''Glassed Houses: Fiber Optics Promises
Revolution of Sort If the Sharks Don't Bite," 
Wall Street Journal
, July 10, pp. A1 and A10.
The NTIA infrastructure report referenced in note 4 comments on the lower rate of ISDN

implementation in the United States as compared to several other countries (pp. 183
Œ187),and it also references efforts to deploy fiber to the home and fiber to the curb (pp. 100
Œ109)as part of the improvements to transmission systems under way.
9. Although the SSA implemented a comprehensive systems modernization plan during the 1980s
that brought its information systems back from the brink of failure, a recent assessment

concluded that the "SSA can do a great deal more to exploit the benefits of on-line

automation" (National Research Council, 1991, 
Elements of Systems Modernization for the
Social Security System
, and 1990, 
Systems Modernization and the Strategic Plans of the
Social Security Administration
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.). The IRS is
itself on the threshold of a major Tax Systems Modernization program that will significantly

enhance its ability to exploit the benefits of dealing with information in electronic, as

opposed to paper, form. That program is under evaluation by the Computer Science and

Telecommunications Board.10. Kleinrock, Leonard. 1991. "ISDN
ŠThe Path to Broadband Networks," 
Proceedings of the IEEE
,Vol. 79, No. 2, February, p. 112.
11. Dorros, Irwin. 1990. "Calling for Cooperation," 
Bellcore Exchange , November
ŒDecember, pp.7Œ8.12. The impediments and other issues are similar to those found impeding progress in systems
technology generally and notably in the area of software engineering. A discussion of these

issues in the context of software engineering can be found in the following report: Computer

Science and Technology Board, National Research Council. 1989. 
Scaling Up: A Research
Agenda for Software Engineering
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
13. Boehm, B. W. 1981. 
Software Engineering Economics
, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
14. Brandt, Richard. 1991. "Can the U.S. Stay Ahead in Software?" 
Business Week, March 11, p. 98.
15. Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1991. 
Computersat Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age
, National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C., p. 7.
PREREQUISITES FOR PROGRESS90
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesAPPENDIXES91Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXES92Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
Colloquium Program
January 22, 1991
5:30 p.m.Reception7:00 p.m.Dinner and Keynote Address
Ivan Selin, Under Secretary for Management, U.S. Department of State
January 23, 1991

8:30 a.m.Registration9:30 a.m.Welcome and Colloquium Introduction

Robert M. White
, President, National Academy of Engineering
Laszlo Belady
 (Colloquium Chairman) Vice President, Software
Technology and Advanced Computing Technology Program,

Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corp.
10:00 a.m.
APPLICATIONS PANEL
(chair)Jeffrey Heller
, Senior Vice President, Technology Services Group,
Electronic Data Systems
APPENDIX A
93Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Charles Feld
, Vice President for Management Information Systems,
Frito-Lay, Inc.James Fischer
, Managing Partner for Technology Services, Andersen
Consulting
Max Hopper
, Senior Vice President, Information Systems, American
Airlines
Gerald Weis, Senior Vice President, Sears Technology Services, Inc.
Audience Input
12:00 p.m.
Lunch in Refectory Alcove
1:00 p.m.SYSTEM AND DATA COMMUNICATIONS PANEL
(chair)Robert Martin
, Vice President, Software Technology and Systems,
Bell Communications Research

Albert Crawford, Executive Vice President, Strategic Business
Systems, American Express

Hisashi Kobayashi, Dean of Engineering and Applied Science,
Princeton University
Michael Taylor, Central Systems Engineering Manager, Digital
Equipment Corporation
Mark Teflian, Vice President and CEO, Technical Group, Covia
Audience Input
3:00 p.m.Break3:15 p.m.ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES PANEL
(chair)Robert Lucky
, Executive Director, Communications Sciences
Research Division, AT&T Bell Laboratories

Alfred Aho, Assistant Vice President, Bell Communications Research
Larry Druffel, Director, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie
Mellon University
David Farber
, Professor, Department of Computer and Information
Sciences, University of Pennsylvania
Mischa Schwartz, Charles Batchelor Professor of Electrical
Engineering, Columbia University
APPENDIX A
94Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Audience Input
5:00 p.m.Closing Remarks

Samuel Fuller
, Vice President, Research, Digital Equipment Corporation
Irving Wladawsky-Berger, Assistant General Manager of Development
and Quality, IBM Corporation

Laszlo Belady, Vice President, Software Technology and Advanced
Computing Technology Program, Microelectronics and Computer

Technology Corp.5:30 p.m.Reception in Members Room
APPENDIX A
95Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix BColloquium ParticipantsAlfred V. Aho, Bellcore

Edward B. Altman, IBM Corporation

Laszlo A. Belady, Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation

Herbert D. Benington, UNISYS Defense Systems

Kathleen C. Bernard, Cray Research, Inc.

Barry Boehm, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

John P. Boright, U.S. Department of State

Jane Bortnick, Congressional Research Service

Charles N. Brownstein, National Science Foundation

Kelly W. Bryant, II, U.S. Department of Labor

Thomas Buckholtz, General Services Administration

James H. Burrows, National Institute of Standards and Technology

Virginia L. Castor, Office of the Secretary of Defense

Al Crawford, American Express

James W. Curlin, Office of Technology Assessment

John G. Dardis, U.S. Department of State

Renato A. DiPentima, Social Security Administration

Larry E. Druffel, Carnegie Mellon University

Robert Elson, House Science, Space and Technology Committee

David Farber, University of Pennsylvania

Gilbert Fayl, Delegation of the Commission of the European Communities

Charles Feld, Frito-Lay, Inc.

Charles Ferguson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

W. James Fischer, Andersen Consulting

Kenneth Flamm, The Brookings Institution
APPENDIX B
96Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Samuel H. Fuller, Digital Equipment Corporation

Susan Gerhart, Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation

Norman S. Glick, National Security Agency

Gregory E. Gorman, Computer & Communications Industry Assoc.

Stephen Gould, Congressional Research Service

Bruce Guile, National Academy of Engineering

Joseph Heim, National Academy of Engineering

Jeffrey M. Heller, Electronic Data Systems

Merrill M. Hessel, National Institute of Standards and Technology

Max Hopper, American Airlines

Jose Iglesias, IBM Corporation

Luanne James, ADAPSO

Lionel F. Johns, Office of Technology Assessment

Robert E. Kahn, Corporation for National Research Initiatives

Thomas Kitchens, U.S. Department of Energy

Ronald J. Knecht, U.S. Department of Defense

Hisashi Kobayashi, Princeton University

Louisa Koch, Washington, D.C.

Alfred M. Lee, U.S. Department of Commerce

Robert W. Lucky, AT&T Bell Laboratories

Robert L. Martin, Bell Communications Research

Joseph J. Minarik, Joint Economic Committee

James M. Murphy, Jr., Office of the U.S. Trade Representative

David B. Nelson, U.S. Department of Energy

Thierry Noyelle, Columbia University

Don Page, General Services Administration

Raymond L. Pickholtz, George Washington University

Donald E. Pryor, Office of Science and Technology Policy

Theodore J. Ralston, Microelectronics and Computer Technology
CorporationCharla Rath, U.S. Department of Commerce

Michael M. Roberts, EDUCOM

Cesare F. Rosati, U.S. Department of State

William Scherlis, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

Craig M. Schiffries, Senate Committee on the Judiciary

Mischa Schwartz, Columbia University

Ivan Selin, U.S. Department of State

Mary Shaw, Carnegie Mellon University

Elizabeth Shelton, U.S. Department of State

Fred Sims, General Services Administration

Paul Smith, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Neil J. Stillman, Department of Health and Human Services

Rona B. Stillman, General Accounting Office
APPENDIX B
97Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems IntegrationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Michael G. Taylor, Digital Equipment Corporation

Steve Taylor, U.S. Department of State

Mark Teflian, Covia

Tony Trenkle, General Services Administration

Philip Webre, Natural Resources and Commerce Division

Gerard R. Weis, Sears Technology Services, Inc.

Robert M. White, National Academy of Engineering

Gerald Whitman, U.S. Department of State

William E. Whyman, Office of the U.S. Trade Representative

Randolph Williams, U.S. Department of Commerce

Irving Wladawsky-Berger, IBM Corporation

Helen Wood, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

Staff
Marjory S. Blumenthal, Staff Director

Damian M. Saccocio, Staff Officer

Mark Bello, CSTB Consultant

Pamela R. Rodgers, CSTB Consultant

Catherine A. Sparks, Project Assistant
APPENDIX B
98