DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/19414Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical Options124 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-32520-2 | DOI 10.17226/19414Committee on Responding to Section 5(d) of Presidential Policy Directive 28: TheFeasibility of Software to Provide Alternatives to Bulk Signals IntelligenceCollection; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division onEngineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilBulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Responding to Section 5(d) of 
 Presidential Policy Directive 28: 
 The Feasibility of Software to Provide Alternatives to 
 Bulk Signals Intelligence CollectionComputer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical SciencesTECHNICAL OPTIONSBULK COLLECTION OFSIGNALS INTELLIGENCEBulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the Of˜ce of the Director for National 
Intelligence, Contract Number 2014-14041100003-001. Any opinions, ˜ndings, 
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the 
author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies 
that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number 13:
 978-0-309-32520-2
International Standard Book Number 10:
 0-309-32520-X
Library of Congress Control Number: 2015933164
This report is available from
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
National Research Council
500 Fifth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 
334-3313; http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2015 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the char
-ter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstand
-ing engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its 
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for 
advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages 
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. 
Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Victor J. Dzau is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iv
COMMITTEE ON RESPONDING TO SECTION 5(D) OF 
 PRESIDENTIAL POLICY DIRECTIVE 28:
 THE FEASIBILITY OF SOFTWARE TO PROVIDE ALTERNATIVES 
TO BULK SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE COLLECTION 
ROBERT F. SPROULL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Chair
FREDERICK R. CHANG, Southern Methodist University 
WILLIAM H. DUMOUCHEL, Oracle Health Sciences 
MICHAEL KEARNS, University of Pennsylvania 
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Microsoft Corporation 
SUSAN LANDAU, Worcester Polytechnic Institute 
MICHAEL E. LEITER, Leidos 
ELIZABETH RINDSKOPF PARKER, University of the Paci˜c, 
McGeorge School of Law 
PETER J. WEINBERGER, Google, Inc. 
Staff
ALAN SHAW, Air Force Studies Board, 
Study Director
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist, CSTB 
JON EISENBERG, Director, CSTB
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant, CSTB
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Chair
LUIZ ANDRÉ BARROSO, Google, Inc.
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University
ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC
EDWARD FRANK, Brilliant Lime and Cloud Parity
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 
LAURA HAAS, IBM Corporation
MARK HOROWITZ, Stanford University
MICHAEL KEARNS, University of Pennsylvania
ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University 
SUSAN LANDAU, Worcester Polytechnic Institute 
PETER LEE, Microsoft Corporation
DAVID E. LIDDLE, US Venture Partners 
BARBARA LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia
JOHN A. SWAINSON, Dell, Inc.
ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California
KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director 
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
For more information on CSTB, see its Web site at http://www.cstb.org, 
write to CSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washing
-ton, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
In January 2014, the President addressed the nation and the broader 
global community to explain U.S. policy regarding the collection of for
-eign intelligence. Shortly thereafter, the White House released Presidential 
Policy Directive 28 (PPD-28), in which Section 5(d) requested the Director 
of National Intelligence (DNI) to ﬁassess the feasibility of creating soft
-ware that would allow the IC more easily to conduct targeted information 
acquisition [of signals intelligence] rather than bulk collection.ﬂ
1 The Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) then asked 
the National Academies to form a committee to study this question, and 
discussions led to the charge to the committee shown in Box P.1. Note that 
the charge does not request recommendations, and the analysis and con
-clusions of the Committee on Responding to Section 5(d) of Presidential 
Policy Directive 28: The Feasibility of Software to Provide Alternatives to 
Bulk Signals Intelligence Collection are made with this in mind.
The committee assembled for this study included individuals with 
expertise in national security law; counterterrorism operations; privacy 
and civil liberties as they relate to electronic communications; data min
-ing; large-scale systems development; software development; Intelligence 
Community (IC) needs as they relate to research and development; and net
-working and social media. See Appendix C for biographical information.
1 The White House, Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-28, ﬁSignals Intelligence Activities,ﬂ 
Of˜ce of the Press Secretary, January 17, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/
˜les/docs/2014sigint_mem_ppd_rel.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii PREFACE
With 5 months from study inception to delivery, the study commit
-tee was not blessed with a luxury of time. The committee sought to be 
responsive to the context in which the report was requested. In general 
terms, the committee saw its mission as exploring whether technological 
software-based alternatives to bulk collection might be identi˜ed in order 
to retain, to the extent possible, current intelligence capabilities while 
intruding less on parties that are not of known or potential interest to the 
IC. The legal protections provided by the Fourth Amendment and legisla
-tion such as the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act distinguish between 
foreign and U.S. persons; a factor that informed the committee™s thinking.
BOX P.1
 The Charge to the Committee
A committee appointed by the National Research Council will assess ﬁthe 
feasibility of creating software that would allow the U.S. intelligence community 
more easily to conduct targeted information acquisition rather than bulk collection,ﬂ 
as called for in section 5(d) of Presidential Policy Directive 28. To the extent pos
-sible, it will consider the ef˜cacy, practicality, and privacy implications of alternative 
software architectures and uses of information technology, and explore tradeoffs 
among these aspects in the context of representative ﬁuse cases.ﬂ The study will 
consider a broad array of communications modalities, e.g., phone, email, instant 
message, and so on. It will not address the legality or value of signals intelligence 
collection. The study will identify and assess options and alternatives but will not 
issue recommendations.
Speci˜cally, the committee will address the following:
1. What are a small set of representative use cases within which one can 
explore alternative software architectures and uses of information technology, and 
consider trade-offs?
2. What is the current state of the software technology to support targeted 
information acquisition? What are feasible and likely trajectories for future relevant 
software development; near, mid, and far term? What are possible technology 
alternatives to bulk collection in the context of the use cases?
3.
 What are relevant criteria or metrics for comparing bulk collection to 
targeted collection (e.g. effectiveness, response time, cost, ef˜cacy, practicality, 
privacy impacts)?
4.
 What tradeoffs arise with the technology alternatives analyzed in the 
context of the use cases and criteria/metrics?
5. How might requirements for information collection be altered in light of this 
analysis?6. What uncertainties are associated with the assumptions and analyses, 
and how might they affect the basis for decisions?
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 ixThe technological focus of this report is 
not
 limited to the metadata 
of domestic telephone communications, even though most public con
-troversy has been pointed in this direction. Nor is the legal environment 
presumed to be only that governed by Section 215 of the Foreign Intel
-ligence Surveillance ActŠthe legal authority under which the collection 
of telephone metadata has occurred. This report addresses the question of 
alternatives to bulk collection, without regard to the speci˜c authorities 
and restrictions that control the various types of bulk collection. The types 
of communications of potential interest include any type of electronic 
communication. In the committee™s view, signals intelligence has come to 
embrace almost any data stored on an electronic device. In a future that 
contains the Internet of Things, the scope will be even greater.
Furthermore, the committee chose to interpret its technological man
-date broadly by considering a variety of approaches to reducing the 
degree of intrusiveness into the affairs of parties that are not of interest for 
intelligence purposes. Broadly, these approaches include the following:















theft or compromise, and










information.
Following its charge, the committee tried to con˜ne its attention to 
technical aspects of signals intelligence and to avoid straying into legal and 
policy matters as much as possible. Despite this focus, there are areas of 
overlap and interdependence. For example, the more complex the rules 
and regulations established by policy and law, the more dif˜cult it is to 
use automation to enforce them. 
The situation with respect to bulk collection was a moving target dur
-ing the time the report was written. During the ˜nal several weeks when 
the committee was responding to reviewers™ comments, the 
 Senate con
-sidered the USA Freedom Act (S.2685); this bill would have changed the 
collection of bulk business records. Providing value in this report meant 
focusing on collection options and their implications, rather than more 
narrowly tailoring the discussion to what the law presently provides. 
Thus the committee did not attempt, for example, to discuss what the 
implications of the proposed legislation might be on collection.
ODNI requested an unclassi˜ed report, with a classi˜ed annex if 
necessary. Nothing learned in classi˜ed brie˜ngs changed the commit
-tee™s view or provided information essential to understanding the most 
important points of this report. The committee thus produced an entirely 
unclassi˜ed report, with no classi˜ed annex. The committee believes this 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE
unclassi˜ed report suf˜ces to answer its charge to the best of its ability. 
One consequence of this approach is that some details must be omitted to 
protect sources and methods that the IC rightly guards with care.
An unclassi˜ed report risks being overtaken by newly declassi˜ed 
material. As this report was being ˜nalized, documents were being declas
-si˜ed by the IC (see http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/) and released as a 
result of Freedom of Information Act requests. As a result, numerous omis
-sions are bound to appear in the report; these omissions are not expected to 
change the committee™s fundamental arguments, although new informa
-tion may change details along the way.
The committee met six times in person, with the ˜rst meeting in mid-
June 2014, and held numerous conference calls. Open sessions during 
its meetings were devoted to brie˜ngs from outside parties, and closed 
 
sessions were devoted to committee deliberations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The complexity and classi˜ed aspects of the issues explored in this 
report meant that the committee had much to learn from its briefers. The 
committee is grateful to many parties for presentations on:

June 30-July 2, 2014.
 Joel Brenner (Joel Brenner LLC, the Chertoff 
Group, and former Inspector General, National Security Agency [NSA]), 
Carmen Medina (Deloitte Consulting LLP and former Deputy Direc
-tor for Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency [CIA]), Mark 
 Maybury 
(The MITRE Corporation), General Keith B. Alexander (retired), Chris 
 
Inglis (former Deputy Director, National Security Agency), Wesley 
 Wilson 
(ODNI/National Counter terrorism Center), Robert Brose (ODNI), 
 William 
Crowell (Alsop-Louie Partners), Stephanie O™Sullivan (ODNI), David 
Honey (ODNI), and Marjory Blumenthal (Of˜ce of Science and Technol
-ogy Policy).

August 4-6, 2014.
 Jeff Jonas (IBM), Mark Lowenthal (Intelligence 
and Security Academy), and Philip Mudd (New America Foundation, 
Mudd Management, and former Deputy Director, CIA Counterterrorism 
Center).

August 27-29, 2014.
 David Grannis (Senate Select Committee on 
Intelligence) and Kate Martin (Center for National Security Studies). 

September 8-10, 2014. Alexander Joel (ODNI), J.C. Smart (
 Georgetown 
University), Peter Highnam (Intelligence Advanced Research Projects 
Activity), and members of the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight 
Board. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 xiThe committee requested but did not receive comments from the 
American Civil Liberties Union, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and 
the Electronic Privacy Information Center.
The committee appreciates the support of David Honey (Assistant 
Deputy Director of National Intelligence for Science and Technology 
[ADDNI/S&T]), Steven D. Thompson (Senior S&T Advisor), John C. 
Granger (Senior Advisor to the ADDNI/S&T), and their colleagues from 
ODNI who helped make this study possible and the many of˜cials 
of ODNI and NSA who briefed the committee or answered its questions. 
In addition, the committee acknowledges the intellectual contributions 
of its staff, Alan Shaw (Study Director, Air Force Studies Board), 
 
Herbert 
S. Lin (Chief Scientist, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 
[CSTB]), and Jon Eisenberg (Director, CSTB); consultants Alex 
 Gliksman 
(AGI Consulting, LLC), M. Anthony Fainberg (Institute for Defense 
Analyses), and Allan Friedman (George Washington University); and 
Eric Whitaker (Senior Program Assistant, CSTB), who provided admin
-istrative support. 
THE COMMITTEE™S PERSPECTIVE ON ITS CHARGE
This report is part of the national discussion about the balance between 
the powers of government and the rights of the governed, as the govern
-ment tries to carry out its constitutionally mandated responsibilities. As 
indicated above, the committee was asked a question about technology. 
Accordingly, this report emphasizes technology but also attends to the 
need for effective and trustworthy processes, even as more sophisticated 
technologies are developed. But neither technology nor processŠalone 
or togetherŠcan guarantee the proper balance between collective and 
individual security. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution
 in making its
 pub
-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish 
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Steven M. Bellovin, Columbia University, 
Joel F. Brenner, Joel Brenner LLC, 
Fred H. Cate, Indiana University,
George R. Cotter, Isologic, LLC, 
William P. Crowell, Alsop Louie Partners, 
Michael V. Hayden, Chertoff Group, 
Raymond Jeanloz, University of California, Berkeley,
Anita K. Jones, University of Virginia, 
Orin S. Kerr, George Washington University, 
Peter Lee, Microsoft Research, 
Kate Martin, Center for National Security Studies, and
Cynthia Storer, Coastal Carolina University.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the 
report™s conclusions, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before 
its release. The review of this report was overseen by Samuel H. Fuller, 
Analog Devices, Inc., and William H. Press, University of Texas, Austin. 
Appointed by the National Research Council, they were responsible for 
making certain that an independent examination of this report was car
-ried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review 
comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal con
-tent of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the 
institution.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xv
Contents
SUMMARY
   
11 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
 13
 1.1
 Roadmap to This Report, 13
  1.2
 Presidential Speech of January 2014 and PPD-28, 13
  1.3
 Context for This Report, 15
  1.4
 Legal and Policy Setting, 16
   
1.4.1
  
The U.S. Constitution and the Legal and Regulatory 
Framework, 16
   
1.4.2
 Policy and Practical Controls, 22
   
1.4.3
  
Legal Authorities for Collection and Use of 
 Information, 22
2 BASIC CONCEPTS
 26
 2.1
 A Conceptual Model of the Signals Intelligence Process, 27
  
2.1.1
 Collection, 28
  
2.1.2
 Analysis, 31
  
2.1.3
 Dissemination, 32
 2.2
 Bulk and Targeted Collection, 32
 2.3
 De˜nitions of Critical Terms, 34
3 USE CASES AND USE CASE CATEGORIES
 40
 3.1
 Contact Chaining, 42
  
3.1.1
 Use Case 1, 42
  
3.1.2
 How Metadata Are Used in Contact Chaining, 43
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvi CONTENTS 3.2
 Finding Alternate Identi˜ers, 44
  
3.2.1
 Use Case 2, 44
  
3.2.2
 Use Case 3, 45
  
3.2.3
 Use Case 4, 46
  
3.2.4
  
How Metadata Are Used in Finding Alternate 
 Identi˜ers, 47
 3.3
 Triage, 48
  
3.3.1
 Use Case 4ŠExtension of the Scenario, 49
  
3.3.2
  
Use Case 5ŠThe Immediate Response After a 
 Terrorist Incident, 49
  
3.3.3
 How Metadata Are Used in Triage, 49
 3.4
 Conclusion, 49
4 BULK COLLECTION
 51
 4.1
 Uses of Bulk Collection, 51
  
4.1.1
 Information about the Past, 51
  
4.1.2
 Tactical Intelligence, 52
  
4.1.3
 Strategic Intelligence, 52
  
4.1.4
 Reference Data, 53
  
4.1.5
  
Increasing the Likelihood That Needed Information 
 Is Available, 54
 4.2
 Alternatives to Bulk Collection, 54
 4.3
 Conclusion, 56
5 CONTROLLING USAGE OF COLLECTED DATA
 59
 5.1
 Why It Is Important to Control Usage, 59
 5.2
 Controlling Usage, 60
 5.3
 Manual Controls, 64
 5.4
 Automatic Controls, 65
  
5.4.1
 Isolation, 66
  
5.4.2
 Restricting Queries Automatically, 75
  
5.4.3
 Audit/Oversight Automation, 75
 5.5
 Conclusion, 76
6 LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
 78
 6.1
 The Future of Signals Intelligence, 78
  
6.1.1
  
More Data, Data Types, and Sensors; More 
 Computing and Storage, 79
  
6.1.2
 Business Records, 79
  
6.1.3
 Encryption, 80
  
6.1.4
 Services That Evade Surveillance, 81
  
6.1.5
 SIGINT Must Adapt, 81
 6.2
 Evolution of Privacy Protections, 81
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS xvii 6.3
 Research and Development, 82
  
6.3.1
 Technologies for Isolation, 83
  
6.3.2
 Other Technologies for Protecting Data Privacy, 83
  
6.3.3
  
Approving Queries and Their Results 
 Automatically, 84
  
6.3.4
 Audit/Oversight Automation, 86
  
6.3.5
 Formal Expression of Laws and Regulations, 87
  
6.3.6
 Policy Research, 88
  
6.3.7
  
Measuring Effectiveness of Intelligence Techniques 
 and the Value of Data, 88
 6.4
 Engagement with the Research Community, 89
 6.5
 Conclusion, 90
APPENDIXES
A Observations about the Charge to the Committee
 95
B Acronyms
  97
C  
Biographical Information for Committee Members, 
 99
 Consultants, and Staff 
 Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary
This report of the Committee on Responding to Section 5(d) of Presi
-dential Policy Directive 28: The Feasibility of Software to Provide Alter
-natives to Bulk Signals Intelligence Collection responds to a request to 
the National Academies from the Of˜ce of the Director of National Intel
-ligence (ODNI). That request, in turn, was occasioned by Presidential 
Policy Directive 28 (PPD-28) Section 5(d), which had asked the Director 
of National Intelligence for ﬁa report assessing the feasibility of creating 
software that would allow the Intelligence Community (IC) more easily 
to conduct targeted information acquisition rather than bulk collection [of 
signals intelligence].ﬂ1 This study is among several of the administration™s 
responses to heightened public concern about U.S. intelligence agency 
surveillance programs that followed Edward Snowden™s disclosure of 
numerous internal National Security Agency (NSA) documents beginning 
in mid-2013. These responses include other activities called for in PPD-28 
as well as in a study of big data and privacy by the President™s Council 
of Advisors on Science and Technology that is largely focused on civilian 
applications.
21 The White House, Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-28, ﬁSignals Intelligence Activities,ﬂ 
Of˜ce of the Press Secretary, January 17, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/
˜les/docs/2014sigint_mem_ppd_rel.pdf. 
2 President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, 
Big Data and Privacy: A Techno
-logical Perspective, Executive Of˜ce of the President, May 2014, http://www.
 whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_big_data_and_
 privacy_-_may_2014.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCECONTEXT AND DEFINITIONS 
PPD-28 de˜nes bulk collection as ﬁthe authorized collection of large 
quantities of signals intelligence (SIGINT) data which, due to technical or 
operational considerations, is acquired without the use of discriminants 
(e.g., speci˜c identi˜ers, selection terms, etc.)ﬂ3 and implies that collection is targeted if it is not bulk. But PPD-28 de˜nes ﬁdiscriminantﬂ only by 
example, so it does not provide a precise de˜nition of either bulk or tar
-geted collection. Nor are these terms de˜ned precisely elsewhere in law or 
policy. Moreover, the PPD-28 description of bulk collection is problematic 
because it says that (1) with a broad discriminant, such as ﬁSyria,ﬂ col
-lection is targeted, even though it captures a large volume of information 
and covers vast numbers of people who are not of intelligence value; and 
(2) if the signal itself contains only the traf˜c of a single individual, col
-lection is bulk if there is no discriminant. Both of these results are incon
-sistent with the plain meaning of the words bulk and targeted.
Based in part on brie˜ngs from the IC, the committee adopted a 
de˜nition better suited to understanding the trade-off between civil 
 
liberties and effective intelligence: 
If a signi˜cant portion of the data col
-lected is not associated with current targets,
4 it is bulk collection; otherwise, 
it is targeted. 
There is no precise de˜nition of bulk collection, but rather 
a con
 
tinuum, with no bright line separating bulk from targeted. The 
committee acknowledges that use of the word ﬁsigni˜cantﬂ makes its 
de˜nition imprecise as well. The IC prefers targeted collection because 
it narrows its attention as much as possible during collection to use its 
limited resources ef˜ciently, to comply with rules about what is allowed, 
and to limit intrusions on privacy. 
This report, like PPD-28, focuses on a subset of SIGINT, a broad subset 
termed ﬁcommunications or information about communications.ﬂ
5 This 
includes electronic communications between people and those between 
people and services such as Internet search providers, message services, 
and banks. It also includes ﬁbusiness recordsﬂ about communications. 
Intercepting these signals is of concern because it may intrude on the 
privacy and civil liberties of the communicators. However, this is only 
one ingredient among many that are used to meet the country™s foreign 
intelligence needs. Understanding the nature of groups, individuals, orga
-nizations, or events that may threaten national security and predicting 
their behavior requires complex analysis that pieces together many facts 
from many sources. Studying this whole system was far beyond the scope 
of this study.
3 
Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-28, footnote 5.
4 
The term ﬁtargetﬂ and other key terms used in this report are de˜ned in Section 2.3.
5 
Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-28, footnote 3.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3The committee paid particular attention to collection of ﬁinformation 
about communications,ﬂ or metadata,
6 a focus of the brie˜ngs provided 
by the IC. NSA has been collecting metadata in bulk for domestic tele
-phone calls since 2006; it has done so under the authority of Section 215 
of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA), enacted as part of the 
USA Patriot Act in 2001. This study applies not only to this practice but 
also to a broader set of activities, including the collection of metadata 
and contents of foreign telephone calls, emails, and other communica
-tions. This report addresses the question of alternatives to bulk collection, 
without regard to the speci˜c authorities and restrictions that control the 
various types of bulk collection.
7This study, while focused on a technical question and on technologi
-cal responses, inevitably encounters policy and privacy concerns; policy is 
bound to be affected by what is technically possible or impossible. Indeed, 
PPD-28 is itself a policy directive formed partly in response to privacy 
issues ampli˜ed by the Snowden disclosures. The committee did not 
study these policy questions and tried to avoid making judgments about 
them.
8 The committee tried to answer the technical question in general, 
rather than only in the context of current policy, because technology and 
policy can change rapidly.
9 The next section provides a brief description of the SIGINT collection 
model used by the committee.
6 
In the case of telephone communications, ﬁmetadataﬂ include the calling and called 
telephone numbers, the time and duration of a call, but not its content. For email, metadata 
have been interpreted to exclude the subject line. Other types of communications have dif
-ferent metadata elements.
7 For example, FISA and Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) orders restrict bulk 
collection of domestic telephony records to querying targets with reasonable and articulable 
suspicion (RAS) that they belong to a foreign terrorist organization. For another example, 
PPD-28 restricts collection to six speci˜c purposes.
8 
For recent reports that deal with policy associated with signals collection, see two re
-ports from the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board: 
Report on the Telephone Records 
Program Conducted under Section 215 of the USA Patriot Act and on the Operations of the Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Court, January 23, 2014, http://www.pclob.gov/library/215-Report_
on_the_Telephone_Records_Program.pdf, and 
Report on the Surveillance Program Operated 
Pursuant to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, 
July 2, 2014, http://www.
pclob.gov/library/702-Report.pdf. See also President™s Review Group on Intelligence and 
Communications Technologies, 
Liberty and Security in a Changing World,
 December 12, 2013, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/docs/2013-12-12_rg_˜nal_report.pdf.
9 
Indeed, as this study was under way, the President announced he would seek legislation 
to end bulk collection of domestic telephony metadata (The White House, ﬁThe Admin
-istration™s Proposal for Ending the Section 215 Bulk Telephony Metadata Program,ﬂ Fact 
Sheet, March 27, 2014, Of˜ce of the Press Secretary, Washington, D.C.), and legislation was 
proposed.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEA CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE
In response to intelligence requirements determined by policy 
 makers, 
NSA takes in signals,
10
 extracts data about events, ˜lters data according 
to one or more discriminants, stores the resulting data, analyzes it by 
querying the store, and disseminates the derived intelligence to other 
analysts and policy makers (Figure S.1). The ˜rst three steps are what 
the committee calls 
collection
. The ﬁextractﬂ process decodes communi
-cations protocols to extract items for further inspection. A discriminant 
may be chosen to limit the collection to a set of targets determined at the 
time of collection; this is targeted collection. If a discriminant is chosen 
to collect a signi˜cant quantity of data not relevant to any current target, 
the collection is bulk. In either case, analysts query the data stored from 
multiple SIGINT collections and combine them with data from many 
other sources in order to formulate and disseminate intelligence useful to 
others. Privacy protections of different sorts are applied at various points 
throughout the process. These include choices about where to extract 
signals and what discriminants to use, minimization procedures used to 
protect information about U.S. persons, and controls on how collected 
information can be used.
Much of the data in the signal inevitably will 
not
 be of interest. This 
is because modern communication technology aggregates traf˜c between 
many sources and destinations onto a single channelŠsuch as the ˜ber 
carrying Internet Protocol packets between two routers. With rare excep
-tions, there is no longer a single physical point, like the central of˜ce 
connection of a landline telephone, at which to observe exactly the items 
of interest. Thus, this de˜nition of collection says that data is deemed 
collected only when it is stored for more than a few hours, not when it 
is extracted.
The distinction between bulk and targeted collection is not precise. 
When collection is very broad and it is expected that most of the infor
-mation stored is not relevant to current targets, it is bulk. In contrast, if 
collection is about a person of interest, it is clearly targeted. There are, 
however, many cases in between. Throughout the intelligence process, 
agencies narrow their attention as much as possible, both to comply with 
rules about what is allowed and to use their limited resources ef˜ciently. 
Narrowing applies to choosing signals from which to extract data, ˜lter
-ing the extracted data, querying collected data, and disseminating the 
results. For example, for domestic telephony metadata collected in bulk 
under the authority of FISA Section 215, a query is allowed only when 
10 
The sources of the signals are a separate topic that the committee did not consider, 
although some examples are given later in the report.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5there is a reasonable and articulable suspicion that the target is associated 
with a foreign terrorist organization. Often, queries on bulk collections 
are suf˜ciently constrained that very little of the collected data is ever 
examined. Additional rules usually require collected data to be destroyed 
after a certain time. 
CATEGORIES OF USE CASES
Use cases demonstrate how the results of intelligence analysis are 
used and make the process of intelligence more concrete for outsiders. 
Use cases that cover the full range of intelligence practice can provide con
-˜dence that the consequences of restricting bulk collection are understood 
and guide a search for alternatives. Although the committee was given 
unclassi˜ed use cases in three categories, it was told that this was not 
a complete set, so its search for collection alternatives was limited. The 
use case categories it was given, all of which concern communications 
between people who are designated by 
identi˜ers 
such as telephone num
-bers or email addresses, were the following: 

Contact chaining
, which traces the network of people associated 
with a target by following links of the form ﬁA communicated with Bﬂ 
starting at the target and traversing chains of one or more links. 

Alternate identi˜er
 techniques that seek to keep current the set of 
identi˜ers that a target person is known to be using, when the target is 
changing identi˜ers to avoid being tracked.

Triage
 starts with a list of identi˜ers of interest and categorizes the 
urgency of the threat to national security from the party associated with 
each one.
FIGURE S.1
 A conceptual model for the signals intelligence process.
Figure S-1bitmappedExtractFilterDiscriminantQueryCollectionSignalStoreAnalyzeDisseminateBulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEA broader set of use cases, such as ones involving collection of com
-munications content, detecting suspicious foreign communications pat
-terns and suspicious queries to Internet search engines, might point to 
other possibilities for alternatives to bulk collection.
BULK COLLECTION AND INFORMATION ABOUT PAST EVENTS
A common aspect of the categories of use cases above is that they rely 
in part on information from the past to link or connect identi˜ers. If past 
events become interesting in the presentŠbecause of new circumstances 
such as identifying a new target, a nonnuclear nation that is now pursuing 
the development of nuclear weapons, an individual who is found to be a 
terrorist, or new intelligence-gathering prioritiesŠthen historical events 
and the data they provide will be available for analysis only if they were 
previously collected. If it is possible to do targeted collection of similar 
events in the future, and if they happen soon enough, then the past events 
might not be needed. If the past events are unique or if delay in obtaining 
results is unacceptable (because of an imminent threat or perhaps because 
of press coverage or public demand), then the intelligence will not be as 
complete. So restricting bulk collection will make intelligence less effec
-tive, and technology cannot do anything about this; whether the gain in 
privacy is worth the loss of information is a policy question that the com
-mittee does not address.
CONTROLLING USAGE
Controls on usage can help reduce the con˚icts between collection 
and privacy. There are other entities that collect highly sensitive data and 
use it for purposes that the people who provide it might not like, such 
as companies that provide cloud services such as email and social media 
and ﬁdata brokersﬂ that collect and correlate data from a wide variety of 
public and proprietary sources and sell it to help with decisions about 
extending credit or for marketing purposes. It is worth comparing how 
society controls these activities with how it controls the IC. The accepted 
control paradigm is ﬁnotice and consent,ﬂ the terms of service that almost 
no one reads. Although today people are more tolerant of private data col
-lection than of government data collection, this may change as the collec
-tion of private data grows. The 2014 report on privacy and big data from 
the President™s Council of Advisors on 
 
Science and Technology proposes 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 7instead that people should have control over how their data are used.
11 Controls on use thus offer an alternative to controls on collection as a way 
of protecting privacy. 
There are two ways to control usage: manually and automatically. 
NSA already has both automated and strong manual controls in place. 
Despite rigorous auditing and oversight processes, however, it is hard 
to convince outside parties of their strength, because necessary secrecy 
prevents the public from observing the controls in action, and because 
popular descriptions of the controls are imprecise and sometimes wrong. 
Technical means can isolate collected data and automatically restrict 
 
queries that analysts make, and the way these means work can be public 
without revealing sensitive sources and methods. Then people outside the 
IC concerned about privacy and civil liberties would have new ways to 
verify that the IC has adequate procedures and follows them. Enhanced 
automated controls also offer the promise of reduced burdens on analysts 
because they can be more ef˜cient than manual controls. Some manual 
controls would still be necessary to ensure that the automatic controls are 
actually imposed and that they are con˜gured according to the rules, and 
to decide cases that are too complex to be automated. 
Automated controls and audits require expressing, in software, the 
rules embodied in laws, policies, regulations, and directives that constrain 
how intelligence is collected, analyzed, and disseminated. The current 
rules form a complex network that has grown with changes in technol
-ogy and in the national security environment. They contain con˚icting 
de˜nitions and inconsistencies. Deriving from the legislative and admin
-istrative expressions of the rules, an expression in a concise, consistent, 
machine-processable form would not only simplify automation software 
but also make the rules more understandable to the public.
The next section outlines the key technical elements required to con
-trol and automate usage.
TECHNICAL ELEMENTS OF AUTOMATED CONTROLS
An automated system for controlling usage of bulk data with high 
assurance has three parts: isolating bulk data so that it can be accessed 
only in speci˜c ways, restricting
 the queries that can be made against 
it, and auditing the queries that have been done. In each of these areas, 
there are opportunities for automated control; some of them are already 
11 
President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST), 
Big Data and 
Privacy: A Technological Perspective,
 Executive Of˜ce of the President, May 2014, http://
www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_big_data_and_
 privacy_-_may_2014.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEdeployed in the IC or in private companies, some have been demonstrated 
in research laboratories, and some are promising research directions.
Isolating bulk data
 is one technical method for controlling usage. Fig
-ure S.2 shows the elements of this method. Bulk data are cut off from 
the outside world by an isolation boundary. The only way to cross this 
boundary is to submit a query to the guard, which enforces the policy that 
controls what queries and results are allowed. The guard logs all queries 
and results for later auditing, and the audit log itself is isolated to protect 
it from tampering. The isolated domain is hosted by a mechanism that 
guarantees the isolation. The guard, the isolation boundary, and bulk data 
processing are the critical parts of this system. The simpler and clearer 
their tasks are, and the shorter and clearer the software programs that 
implement them, the more likely they are to be trustworthy.
Restricting queries automatically
 in the guard is another aspect of con
-trolling usage automatically. The goal is to do this well enough that 
software can decide which queries are allowed by the policy, or at least 
drastically reduce the number of queries that require manual, human 
approval. This is certainly feasible for limited classes of queries such as, 
ﬁFind all the phone numbers that have connected in the last month to this 
list of numbers belonging to a known target.ﬂ Indeed, NSA already has 
pre-approved queries.
Auditing usage of bulk data
 is essential to enforce privacy protections. 
Isolation provides con˜dence that every query is permanently logged 
and that the log cannot be altered. Then the log must be reviewed for 
compliance with the rules. Doing this manually is feasible and is, indeed, 
NSA™s current practice. Although it is thorough, it is expensive and not 
FIGURE S.2
 Controlling usage by isolating bulk data.
AnalystsControlQueryResultGuardAuditlogBulk dataPolicyPolicyHost (airgap, hardware, virtual machinemonitor, operating system, etc.)IsolationFigure 5-2 and S-2Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 9 
transparentŠoutsiders must rely on the agency™s assurance that it is being 
done properly because the queries are usually highly classi˜ed. Automa
-tion of auditing, a direction NSA is pursuing, could not only streamline 
audits but also provide assurance to outside inspectors, who can examine 
the auditing technology. Automation of auditing is an area that has been 
neglected by government, industry, and academia.
Automated controls and auditing of SIGINT data held and accessed 
securely may allow suf˜ciently thorough unclassi˜ed inspection of the 
privacy-protecting mechanisms of the SIGINT process to allay privacy 
and civil liberty concerns. The inspection would focus on the automation 
software and the usage rules it enforces rather than on the data, which 
must remain classi˜ed. 
CONCLUSIONS
Although no software can fully replace bulk with targeted informa
-tion collection, software can be developed to more effectively target col
-lection and to control the usage of collected data.
Conclusion 1. There is no software technique that will fully substi
-tute for bulk collection where it is relied on to answer queries about 
the past after new targets become known.
A key value of bulk collection is its record of past SIGINT that may 
be relevant to subsequent investigations. If past events become interesting 
in the present, because intelligence-gathering priorities change to include 
detection of new kinds of threats or because of new events such as the dis
-covery that an individual is a terrorist, historical events and the context they 
provide will be available for analysis only if they were previously collected. 
The committee was not asked to and did not consider whether the 
loss of effectiveness from reducing bulk collection would be too great 
or whether the potential gain in privacy from adopting an alternative is 
worth the potential loss of intelligence information. Nor was it able to 
identify broad categories of use where substitution of alternatives might 
be possible or to detect broadly useful metrics that would inform such 
decisions. ODNI may wish to study these questions further.
Other groups, such as the President™s Review Group on Intelligence 
and Communications Technologies and the Privacy and Civil Liberties 
Oversight Board (in its Section 215 report), have said that bulk collection 
of telephone metadata is not justi˜ed.
12
 These were policy and legal judg
-ments that are not in con˚ict with the committee™s conclusion that there is 
12
 See footnote 8.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEno software technique that will fully substitute
 for bulk collection; there 
is no technological magic.
Conclusion 1.1. Other sources of information might provide a par
-tial substitute for bulk collection in some circumstances.
Data retained from targeted SIGINT collection is a partial substitute if 
the needed information was in fact collected. Bulk data held by other par
-ties, such as communications service providers, might substitute to some 
extent, but this relies on those parties retaining the information until it is 
needed, as well as the ability of intelligence agencies to collect or access it 
in an ef˜cient and timely fashion. Other intelligence sources and methods 
might also be able to supply some of the lost information, but the com
-mittee was not charged to and did not investigate the full range of such 
alternatives. Note that these alternatives may introduce their own privacy 
and civil liberties concerns.
Conclusion 1.2. New approaches to targeting might improve the 
relevance of the collected information to future use and would rely 
on capabilities such as creating and using pro˜les of potentially 
relevant targets, possibly by using other sources of information.
Because bulk collection cannot for practical reasons be truly compre
-hensive, it is itself inherently selective and unable to capture all relevant 
history.
13
 It may be possible to improve targeted collection to the point 
where it provides a viable substitute for bulk collection in at least some 
cases, using pro˜les of potential targets that are compiled from a wide 
range of information. This might reduce collection against persons who 
are not targets, but it might also introduce new privacy and civil liberties 
concerns about how such pro˜les are developed and used.
Rapidly updating discriminants of ongoing collections to include 
new targets as they are discovered will collect data that would otherwise 
be lost. If targeted collection can be done quickly and well enough, bulk 
information about past events may not be needed. Targeted collection 
cannot be a substitute if the past events were unique or if the delay 
incurred to collect new information would be unacceptable. 
Conclusion 2. Automatic controls on the usage of data collected in 
bulk can help to enforce privacy protections.
13 
The FISA Section 215 program collects ﬁonly a small percentage of the total telephony 
metadata held by service providersﬂ (President™s Review Group on Intelligence and Com
-munications Technologies, 
Liberty and Security in a Changing World,
 2013, p. 97).
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 11Automation of usage controls may simultaneously allow a more 
nuanced set of usage rules, facilitate compliance auditing, and reduce 
the burden of controls on analysts. Similarly, there are opportunities to 
automate the various audit mechanisms to verify that rules are followed. 
Such capabilities could be enhanced as the information technology sys
-tems for collection and analysis are refreshed and modernized. These 
techniques may permit more of the use controls and audit mechanisms 
to be explained clearly to the public. It may be possible to express a large 
fraction of the rules required by law and policy in a machine-processable 
form and thus apply them rapidly and consistently during collection, 
analysis, and dissemination. 
Conclusion 2.1. It will be easier to automate controls if the rules 
governing collection and use are technology-neutral (i.e., not tied 
to speci˜c, rapidly changing information and communications tech-nologies or historical artifacts of particular technologies) and if they 
are based on a consistent set of de˜nitions.
14
Conclusion 2.2. Automated controls can provide new opportunities 
to make the controls more transparent by giving the public and 
oversight bodies the opportunity to inspect the software artifacts 
that describe and implement the controls. Increased transparency 
can give people outside the IC more con˜dence that the controls are 
appropriate, although the need for secrecy about some of the details 
makes complete con˜dence unlikely.
Conclusion 3. Research and development can help in developing 
software intended to (1) enhance the effectiveness of targeted col
-lection and (2) improve automated usage controls.
15
Conclusion 3.1 The use of targeted collection can be improved by 
enriching and streamlining methods for determining and deploy
-ing new targets rapidly, using automated processing and/or stream
-lined approval procedures.
16
14
 This conclusion is consistent with Recommendation 2 in PCAST, 
Big Data and Privacy: 
A Technological Perspective
, 2014.
15
 See also Ibid., Recommendation 3.
16
 Examples of manual procedures for target approval are in National Security Agency, 
NSA™s Civil Liberties and Privacy Protections for Targeted SIGINT Activities Under Executive 
Order 12333
, NSA Director of Civil Liberties and Privacy Of˜ce Report, October 7, 2014, 
https://www.nsa.gov/civil_liberties/_˜les/nsa_clpo_report_targeted_EO12333.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEAnalytics, such as ﬁbig data analytics,ﬂ may help narrow collection, 
even if they are not suf˜ciently precise to identify individual targets. If 
the government is constrained by privacy concerns to collect less data, it 

may nevertheless be able to use the power of large private-sector data
-bases, analytics, and machine learning to shape the constraints to collect 

only data predicted to have high value. New uses by the government of 

private-sector databases would also raise new privacy and civil liberties 

questions.
Advanced targeting methods may require a great deal of computing, 
so that ˜lters should be cascaded to ˜rst apply cheap tests, followed by 

more expensive ˜lters only if earlier ˜lters warrant. For example, if meta
-data indicate a civilian telephone call to a military unit under surveillance, 

speech recognition and subsequent semantic analysis might be applied to 

the voice signal, resulting in an ultimate collection decision. Richer target
-ing may require enhancing the ability of collection hardware and software 

to apply complex discriminants to real-time signals feeds.
Conclusion 3.2. More powerful automation could improve the 

precision, robustness, ef˜ciency, and transparency of the controls, 

while also reducing the burden of controls on analysts. 
Some of the necessary technologies exist today, although they may 
need further development for use in intelligence applications; others will 
require research and development work. This approach and others for 

privacy protection of data held by the private sector can be exploited by 

the IC.
17
 Research could also advance the ability to systematically encode 
laws, regulations, and policies in a machine-processable form that would 

directly con˜gure the rule automation.
It does not necessarily follow from Conclusion 1 that current bulk 
collection must continue. What it does mean is that curtailing bulk col
-lection would deprive analysts of some information. Reduction in bulk 

collection may be partially mitigated by improvements in targeting, a 

direction for future research outlined above. If the IC continues to collect 

SIGINT in bulk, the technology described in this report can reduce risk 

and improve oversight and transparency and, thus, perhaps mitigate 

public concerns about it. 
17
 PCAST, 
Big Data and Privacy: A Technological Perspective
, 2014. Recommendation 1, Sec
-tions 4 and 4.5.2.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
1.1
 ROADMAP TO THIS REPORT
This chapter provides the basic context in which this report is being 
written. Chapter 2 of this report introduces some basic concepts of signals 
intelligence (SIGINT) and provides some key de˜nitions. Chapter 3 pres
-ents use casesŠscenarios in which bulk collection may make contributions 
to intelligence investigations. Chapter 4 presents the committee™s technical 
conclusions about the use of bulk collection. Chapter 5 describes ways of 
protecting information gathered through SIGINT processes. Chapter 6 
looks to the future. Appendix A makes some observations about how the 
committee addressed its charge. 
1.2
 PRESIDENTIAL SPEECH OF JANUARY 2014 AND PPD-28
In January 2014, President Obama addressed the nation and the 
broader global community to explain U.S. policy regarding the collection 
of foreign intelligence.
1 In this speech, he explicitly acknowledged that 
U.S. government collection and storage of bulk data ﬁcreates a potential 
for abuse,ﬂ but he explained that signals intelligence data were collected 
only for ﬁlegitimate national security purposesﬂ and that the govern-ment had no interest in using any collected data to target minorities or 
1 The White House, ﬁRemarks by the President on Review of Signals Intelli
-gence,ﬂ Of˜ce of the Press Secretary, January 17, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/
the-press-of˜ce/2014/01/17/remarks-president-review-signals-intelligence.
1Introduction and Background
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEsuppress any political activity. He clari˜ed that the use of any bulk col
-lection of SIGINT was even more limited, explicitly stating that it could 
be used only for six speci˜c security requirements: ﬁcounterintelligence; 
counterterrorism; counterproliferation; cybersecurity; force protection for 
our troops and our allies; and combating transnational crime, including 
sanctions evasion.ﬂ 
While defending the nature of American collection and use of bulk 
data to support national security, the President also acknowledged how 
many in America and around the world might still be concerned. He 
declared an interest in exploring how the United States can preserve 
current intelligence capabilities but with less government collection and 
storage of bulk data. He conceded that it would not be easy to ﬁmatch the 
capabilities and ˜ll the gaps that the [metadata
2 collection program] was 
designed to address,
ﬂ but he is committed to exploring several options 
that might enhance protections of privacy, including decreasing the num
-ber of ﬁhopsﬂ in a contact network search to two from three, having the 
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) review reasonable and 
articulable suspicion (RAS) selectors and identifying a means to have the 
storage of the bulk metadata occur outside the federal government. 
Shortly after the President™s speech, the White House released Presi
-dential Policy Directive 28 (PPD-28),
3 the topic of which was U.S. policy 
on SIGINT. PPD-28 both laid out the principles that govern how the U.S. 
collects SIGINT and strengthened executive branch oversight of SIGINT 
activities. PPD-28 seeks to ensure that U.S. policy takes into account secu
-rity requirements, alliances, trade and investment relationships (including 
the concerns of U.S. companies), and the U.S. commitment to privacy and 
basic rights and liberties. The document also promised review of U.S. 
decisions about intelligence priorities and sensitive targets by the Presi
-dent™s senior national security team on an annual basis.
Of most importance to this report, PPD-28 requested the Of˜ce of the 
Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) to ﬁassess the feasibility of creat
-ing software that would allow the Intelligence Community more easily 
to conduct targeted information acquisition rather than bulk collection.ﬂ 
In turn, ODNI asked the National Academies to study and report on this 
question. The Committee on Responding to Section 5(d) of Presidential 
Policy Directive 28: The Feasibility of Software to Provide Alternatives to 
Bulk Signals Intelligence Collection was formed in response.
2 The term metadata is de˜ned in Section 2.3. Loosely, for telephone calls it includes calling 
and called number, and time and duration of call, but not any content of the call.
3 See The White House, Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-28, ﬁSignals Intelligence Ac
-tivities,ﬂ Of˜ce of the Press Secretary, January 17, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/
the-press-of˜ce/2014/01/17/presidential-policy-directive-signals-intelligence-activities.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 151.3
 CONTEXT FOR THIS REPORT
The broader context for the committee™s report includes the many 
security threats the United States faces, issues of international relations 
and global competitiveness, balanced against privacy and civil-liberties 
concerns. The committee believes that both the public and national secu
-rity of˜cials recognize the need for surveillance to anticipate, disrupt, 
and respond to national security threats (such as terrorism). Indeed, 
recent events make clear that national security threats will continue to be 
dynamic and more unpredictable than those during the Cold War, so that 
effective intelligence capabilities will remain essential.
At the same time, disclosures by Edward Snowden about the extent 
and nature of U.S. intelligence collection have raised concerns about the 
appropriate balance between the surveillance needed to achieve national 
security and respect for individual privacy. The revelations have compli
-cated U.S. relations with other nations. (This is true even as some of these 
same nations have bene˜ttedŠand continue to bene˜tŠfrom U.S. intel
-ligence collection.) A number of foreign nations have threatened to avoid 
Internet-delivered products and services offered by U.S. information tech
-nology vendors because of insecurities alleged in these disclosures.
4 The 
magnitude of the ˜nancial impact is unclear at this point;
5 what is clear is 
that increased attention to U.S. intelligence collection has made the inter
-national marketplace a more challenging environment for U.S. companies.
The Snowden disclosures have also generated a range of concerns 
about privacy and civil liberties. In the United States, tension over poten
-tial government infringement of personal liberties goes back to the found-ing of the republic. In the recent past, domestic legislation and case law 
have worked to create a balanced approach to surveillance of telephone 
communications. But new technologiesŠand how government authori
-ties use such technologiesŠhave always posed challenges for existing 
law and practice. Technological advancements can undo a previously 
agreed-upon consensus. In the controversy that gives rise to this report, 
domestic public concerns about privacy and civil liberties have often been expressed as concerns about the ﬁ[U.S.] government spying on innocent 
Americans.ﬂ Abroad, a Pew poll in July 2014 indicated that in most coun
-4 Whether this reason is in some sense ﬁsincere,ﬂ or a cover for protectionism is unclear. 
But it may not matter. Whether perception or reality, U.S. leadership has concluded that the 
upset created is suf˜cient to require a response.
5 For example, a 
New York Times
 article of March 2014 reports on estimates of losses to 
U.S. technology companies ranging from $35 billion to $180 billion by 2016. See Claire Cain 
Miller, ﬁRevelations of N.S.A. Spying Cost U.S. Tech Companies,ﬂ 
The New York Times
, March 21, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/22/business /fallout-from-snowden-
hurting-bottom-line-of-tech-companies.html?_r=0. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEtries surveyed, the majority of their publics opposed U.S. surveillance 
of their citizens or their leaders.
6 Foreign leadership, including that of 
traditionally close U.S. allies, expressed signi˜cant public anger in the 
immediate aftermath of the Snowden disclosures.
7Recent disclosures have ampli˜ed two underlying trends in the 
United States: distrust of government and concerns about privacy, espe
-cially privacy of data and communications. These trends put pressure on 
SIGINT techniques and practices, which in turn may affect the quality 
of intelligence they provide. But another attack of the magnitude of the 
9/11 attacks would quickly raise expectations for the capabilities of U.S. 
intelligence generally and surveillance in particular. Actions by Congress 
and the executive branch in the wake of the 9/11 attacks rapidly resulted 
in substantive changes that are now being questioned after more than a 
decade of relative domestic security. As this cycle may easily repeat, it is 
all the more imperative to examine now the value of bulk collection and 
potential alternatives while there is time to re˚ect thoughtfully on the 
issues such collection poses. 
1.4
 LEGAL AND POLICY SETTING
1.4.1
 The U.S. Constitution and the Legal and Regulatory Framework
As the committee proceeded with its work, it became clear that public 
con˜dence in the management of intelligence programs is essential and 
might be enhanced through even greater use of automation in managing 
oversight structures. To provide the context for the committee™s subse
-quent discussion, particularly on ways to automate oversight strategies, 
this section provides a brief overview of the constitutional and legal frame
-work that currently governs intelligence surveillance activities. Mindful 
that many long-standing legal interpretations are now under review by 
Congress and have also been challenged in lower federal courts, and that 
there has been no ˜nal disposition of these questions by either Congress 
or the Supreme Court, the committee does not discuss the current legal 
debate in depth.
Among the nations of the world (including the Western democra
-cies), the United States is the most open in the regulation of its intel
-ligence activities. The United States regulates its intelligence activities 
6 Pew Research Center, 
Global Opposition to U.S. Surveillance and Drones
, but Limited Harm to America™s Image
, Washington, D.C., July 14, 2014, http://www.pewglobal.org/2014/07/14/
global-opposition-to-u-s-surveillance-and-drones-but-limited-harm-to-americas-image/. 
7 Josh Levs and Catherine E. Shoichet, Europe furious, ‚shocked™ by report of U.S. spying, 
CNN, 
July 1, 2013, http://www.cnn.com/2013/06/30/world/europe/eu-nsa/
. Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 17according to a legal framework established by the U.S. Constitution. This 
overarching constitutional structure is premised on the commitment that 
all governmental activities, even those national security activities most 
important to the nation™s existence, must be subject to the rule of law. 
This framework is further explicated by a hierarchy of public statutes 
and internal executive branch regulations, which include public executive 
orders and subordinate classi˜ed instructions and directives. 
All three branches of government have a constitutional role to play 
in intelligence programs. The executive branch is responsible for execut
-ing intelligence programs; congressional committees have responsibility 
for the initial authorization, funding, and oversight of programs; and the 
federal courts provide legal review in the course of litigation and also, 
in a limited number of cases, prior authorization through the specially 
created FISC.
8 Authoritative descriptions of the legal constraints imposed 
on U.S. intelligence functions are available elsewhere,
9 but a brief outline 
of this legal framework will help illustrate how U.S. intelligence pro
-grams function and facilitate the discussion that follows about various 
programs conducted by the National Security Agency (NSA). 
Article II of the U.S. Constitution assigns three functional roles to 
the President: Commander in Chief, responsibility for the conduct of 
foreign affairs, and at home, execution of the laws. The responsibilities as 
Commander in Chief and for foreign affairs carry with them an inherent 
constitutional power to gather intelligence. Like all such constitutionally 
granted powers, limits contained in the Bill of Rights amendments to the 
Constitution apply. With regard to intelligence, particularly the SIGINT 
for which NSA is responsible, two are particularly relevant: the Fourth 
Amendment, which protects individuals against unreasonable searches 
and seizures; and the First Amendment, which protects freedom of speech 
and assembly, as well as freedom of the press.
The U.S. Supreme Court has interpreted the Fourth Amendment™s 
protections against a standard of reasonableness so that an individu
-al™s privacy interest must be weighed against the legitimate interests of 
the government for national security and public safety. In addition, the 
Amendment has differential applications depending on the purpose of 
the surveillance, where it occurs (e.g., inside or outside the United States), 
and the subject of the surveillance (e.g., a non-U.S. person or a U.S. per
-son outside the United States). Finally, the committee notes that privacy 
8 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, 50 U.S.C., Ch. 36 (1978), as amended.
9 Robert S. Litt, ﬁPrivacy, Technology and National Security: An Overview of Intelligence 
Collection,ﬂ speech, Washington, D.C., July 18, 2013, http://www.dni.gov/index.php/
newsroom/speeches-and-interviews/174-speeches-interviews-2009. See also Dycus, Banks, 
Raven-Hansen, Vladeck, ﬁNational Security Lawﬂ (5th edition) and ﬁCounterterrorism Lawﬂ 
(2nd edition), Wolters Kluwer, 2014-2015 supplement. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEinterests may be limited insofar as information is shared voluntarily with 
others.
10
NSA was originally created by presidential memorandum under the 
statutory authority of the Department of Defense to create combat sup
-port agencies. By contrast, most other agencies that implement the Presi
-dent™s intelligence needs have been created directly by Congress pursuant 
to their own explicit ﬁorganicﬂ statutes. All, however, may only act insofar 
as they are authorized to do so, whether by statute, regulation, or execu
-tive order. In some cases, they are speci˜cally prohibited from action. 
For example, by statute the Central Intelligence Agency may not conduct 
domestic law enforcement. NSA, as a part of the Department of Defense, 
has no separate authorizing statute, but the same prohibition applies to 
it by regulation.
As has already been noted, law sometimes lags behind changes in 
technology. One example is that wiretaps were not considered subject 
to Fourth Amendment protections until 1967 when the Supreme Court 
concluded that a right of individual privacy existed to protect against 
warrantless searches.
11 In subsequent years, an increasing number of laws 
have been passed at both the national and state levels to regulate the ways 
in which the government, including its intelligence components, may 
make use of evolving telecommunications and computer technologies.
For this report, focused on NSA programs, among the most signi˜cant 
is the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) of 1978, later amended 
in 2001 and 2008 to add authorities. Although FISA establishes speci˜c 
procedures to govern intelligence collection activities that involve U.S. 
citizens or territory,
12
 NSA™s institutional charter is found in Executive 
Order 12333 and is further de˜ned by guidelines called U.S. Signals Intel
-10
 Signi˜cant for some metadata collection programs, in an opinion authored by Justice 
Harry Blackmun, the U.S. Supreme Court found in 
Smith v. Maryland
, 442 U.S. 735, 1979, 
that no ﬁlegitimate expectation of privacyﬂ existed if a third party, such as the phone com
-pany, already had access to information. Thus, because the phone company had retained 
the numbers of calls made, collecting them with a ﬁpen registerﬂ was not a Fourth Amend
-ment search requiring prior court authorization by warrant. Some question whether Smith 
remains ﬁgood lawﬂ today in light of the differing technology involved in modern metadata 
collection; this is the subject of current litigation.
11 Compare 
U.S. v. Olmstead
, 277 U.S. 438, 1928, holding no Constitutional protection for 
phone conversations with 
Katz v. United States
, 389 U.S. 347, 1967, ˜nding a right to privacy 
under the Fourth Amendment for the content of such communications. 
12
 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance act of 1978 (http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/
STATUTE-92/pdf/STATUTE-92-Pg1783.pdf), 50 U.S.C. § 1881a, 1978, and brief de
-scription of its provisions (http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-110hr6304enr/
pdf/BILLS-110hr6304enr.pdf).
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 19ligence Directives (USSID), the most important of which for this report is 
USSID 18, which has been declassi˜ed in substantial part.
13
 The original enactment of FISA responded to signi˜cant contempo
-rary political pressures, which resulted from abuses revealed in a series 
of congressional hearings in the 1970s, and demanded greater control of 
foreign intelligence collection by SIGINT methods when an activity occurs 
in the United States or involves U.S. persons. The level of statutory and 
regulatory control responds to political pressures that ebb and ˚ow over 
time; as will be seen. The 9/11 attacks caused an adjustment in this bal
-ance to respond to foreign attacks in domestic space. 
At its initial enactment, FISA was not without controversy. Although 
some argued that there was a critical need for the oversight that FISA 
provided through a specially created court, others argued (and continue 
to do so today) the long-standing view that foreign intelligence, as a core 
presidential function, could not be regulated constitutionally by congres
-sional statute.
14
 Nonetheless, passage of FISA, which introduced court 
approval of intelligence collection for the ˜rst time, was encouraged by 
a contemporaneous decision of the U.S. Supreme Court, intimating that 
much of such domestic national security collection might be subject to 
Fourth Amendment requirements for prior judicial approval through a 
warrant application process.
15
 In response, FISA created a unique pro
-cedural approval process overseen by a new Article III court, the FISC, 
which was designed to authorize electronic intelligence surveillance in the 
13
 National Security Agency, United States Signals Intelligence Directive USSID SP0018, 
(U) Legal Compliance and U.S. Persons Minimization Procedures, Issue Date January 25, 
2011, approved for release on November 13, 2013, referred to as USSID 18, http://www.dni.
gov/˜les/documents/1118/CLEANEDFinal USSID SP0018.pdf
.14
 A recently released May 6, 2004, Memorandum for the Attorney General authored 
by Professor Jack L. Goldsmith, then Assistant Attorney General, Department of Justice, 
 
Of˜ce of Legal Counsel, describes this view. See Jack L. Goldsmith, 
Review of the Legality of 
the STELLAR WIND Program
, Of˜ce of the Assistant Attorney General, Washington, D.C., 
May 6, 2004, http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/˜les/pages/attachments/2014/09/19/
may_6_2004_goldsmith_opinion.pdf.
15
 Although Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. 
§§2510-2520, 1968, authorizes electronic surveillance for speci˜cally limited crimes with a 
prior court order, a proviso at 18 U.S.C. §2511(3) protected the President™s long-standing 
right to conduct surveillance for national security purposes. Nonetheless, Justice Lewis 
Powell™s language in the majority decision of 
U.S. v. United States District Court
 (Keith),
 407 
U.S. 297, 1972, had made clear that this exception would be narrowly construed in cases of 
domestic security. FISA responded to indications of the direction of Supreme Court deci
-sions. In the Keith decision, it was argued that the defendants, U.S. citizens who had acted 
only domestically, constituted national security threats by bombing a government facility 
and so the warrant requirement of the Fourth Amendment did not apply. The Supreme 
Court rejected this contention, but left open the possibility that the executive branch might 
not be so limited if national security threats involved foreign powers.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEUnited States by NSA and the Federal Bureau of Investigation upon appli
-cation to, and approval by, the court. The FISC decisions have remained 
largely classi˜ed throughout much of the court™s history. This proved 
controversial to some. They questioned the independence of a judicial 
body that operated largely out of the public eye to authorize intrusive 
surveillance that, unlike warrants in criminal matters, would likely never 
be publicly available, lacked any adversarial process, and limited the right 
of appeal to the government applicant alone. These questions remain and 
provide part of the backdrop to this report.
As originally enacted, FISA governed electronic surveillance for 
foreign intelligence or counterintelligence information when collection 
would occur within the United States. To collect such information, a 
showing must be made to the FISC establishing probable cause that the 
target is either a foreign power or an agent of a foreign power. Where the 
target is a U.S. person, a showing based solely on First Amendment activi
-ties is not suf˜cient. Collection is subject to 
minimization
 protections, pro
-cedures designed to limit ﬁthe acquisition and retention, and prohibit the 
dissemination, of nonpublicly available information concerning uncon
-senting United States persons,ﬂ but in ways nonetheless consistent with 
the need for foreign intelligence.
16
 As a practical matter, minimization 
involves removing the names of and references to U.S. persons with these 
exceptions: the information is necessary to assess the value of the foreign 
intelligence or the targeting of a U.S. person was approved by the FISC. 
FISA was amended following the collection of domestic communica
-tions metadata that began in 2001. This was done initially at presidential 
direction outside normal FISA processes, a decision that proved contro
-versial.
17
 It was subsequently brought within the FISA process in 2006 
through the ﬁbusiness recordsﬂ provision of Section 215 of the USA Patriot 
Act.
18
 This allowed the FISC to require production of documents and 
other tangible things determined relevant to national security investiga
-tions, much as other courts do in criminal and grand jury investigations. 
This provision has served as the authority under which the U.S. govern
-ment has requested telecommunications providers to produce telephony 
metadata, when relevant to a national security investigation.
19 This provi
-16
 See Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, 50 U.S.C. §§1801(h)(1) and 1821(4)
(A), 1978.
17
 See footnote 14.
18 USA Patriot Act 2001, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-107publ56/pdf/PLAW-
107publ56.pdf.
19
 Standards of relevance vary according to context. What is relevant for a criminal investi
-gation will differ from the far broader standard for civil discovery or a grand jury subpoena. 
The FISC has acceded to the government™s argument that for national security investiga
-tions, ﬁrelevanceﬂ must be broadly construed. See Robert S. Litt, ﬁPrivacy, Technology and 
National Security,ﬂ 2013, p. 6.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 21sion, approved in the course of several reviews by the FISC since 2006, 
was also reauthorized by Congress in 2009 and again in 2011. It should 
be noted that the interpretation of Section 215 permitting bulk collection 
of such business records, although provided to Congress and relevant 
committees, was not publicly acknowledged by the U.S. government until 
after the Snowden disclosures.
20
A third provision was added when Section 702 was passed as part of 
the FISA Amendments Act of 2008 and reauthorized in 2012.
21
 The Sec
-tion 702 amendment brought all communications, whether by satellite, 
radio, wire, etc., acquired with the assistance of electronic communication 
service providers under FISC oversight and supervision, even though 
these communications were occurring overseas. Section 702 allows the 
targeting of non-U.S. persons who are reasonably believed to be outside 
the United States and expected to possess, receive, and/or communicate 
foreign intelligence information, consistent with the Fourth Amendment. 
Although full communications content, not just metadata, can be 
collected under this authority, only non-U.S. persons may be targeted for 
approved foreign intelligence purposes. To ensure that these limitations 
are followed while preserving the ˚exibility and nimbleness needed for 
effective foreign intelligence collection, annual certi˜cations by the U.S. 
Attorney General are presented to the FISC for approval, rather than spe
-ci˜c prior judicial approval on a case-by-case basis. 
The foregoing FISA provisions do not fully describe NSA™s collec
-tion authority. To ensure that all collection was consistent with constitu
-tional requirements, a broad operational ﬁcharter,ﬂ Executive Order 12333,  
ﬁUnited States Intelligence Activities,ﬂ was promulgated in 1981 by the 
Reagan Administration; this has continued without signi˜cant change 
in collection authorities until the present. This executive order provides 
the basic authorities and principles under which all national security 
agencies must operate.
22
 Importantly, at §2.8, ﬁConsistency with Other 
Laws,ﬂ it provides: ﬁNothing in this Order shall be construed to autho
-rize any activity in violation of the Constitution or statutes of the United 
States.ﬂ The provisions of Executive Order 12333 are further supported 
by detailed operating regulations applicable to each individual agency; 
in the case of NSA, Department of Defense Regulation 5240.1-R, its clas
-20
 David S. Kris, On the bulk collection of tangible things, 
Journal of National Security Law 
and Policy
 7:209, 2014.
21 FISA Amendments Act of 2008, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-110hr6304enr/
pdf/BILLS-110hr6304enr.pdf.
22 Executive Order 12333, http://www.archives.gov/federal-register/codification/
 executive-order/12333.html. NSA™s 13 speci˜ed responsibilities are de˜ned at Executive 
Order No. 12333 §1.12(b), 3 C.F.R. 200, 1981, Intelligence Components Utilized by the Sec
-retary of Defense.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEsi˜ed annex, and USSID 18, approved by the Attorney General, provide 
the speci˜c implementation guidance for all authorized activities. 
USSID 18 offers an important window into the detailed operational 
authorities that govern NSA activities.
23
 It begins by observing that all 
NSA activities must be consistent with the Constitution™s provisions, as 
interpreted by the U.S. Supreme Court. Annex A to USSID 18 sets forth 
minimization procedures approved by the Attorney General that govern 
the handling of information under FISA authority that may relate to U.S. 
persons. The procedures limit the retention and dissemination of infor
-mation about U.S. persons, whether or not the information is pertinent. 
Incidental collection of data about individuals who are not themselves 
subjects of interest is common to all forms of collection, and the concept 
of minimization is thus one of long standing in law enforcement activities.
1.4.2
 Policy and Practical Controls
Responding to the legal framework described above, NSA has devel
-oped a system of internal compliance and oversight. All parts of the for
-eign intelligence collection system are involved: access, storage, analysis, 
and dissemination.
Both manual and automated controls are used to implement the legal 
search framework that governs foreign intelligence information. Controls 
and secure databases are used next to protect the subsequent storage of for
-eign intelligence information. Subsequent review of all actions is extensive. 
An automatically generated audit trail and internal and external human 
review are involved. Extensive training for all NSA employees also occurs. 
An example of how policy and practical controls work together to 
protect privacy in the case of data gathered under Section 215 authority 
is provided in Box 1.1.
1.4.3
 Legal Authorities for Collection and Use of Information
The legal authorities under which NSA operates are described in a 
public document entitled NSA Missions, Authorities, Oversight and Partner
-ships
.24
 As noted above, these authorities include Executive Order 12333 
and the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978, as amended. Execu
-tive Order 12333 is the foundational authority on which NSA relies to 
collect, retain, analyze, and disseminate foreign SIGINT information. 
23
 See USSID 18.
24 National Security Agency, 
The National Security Agency: Missions, Authorities, Over-sight and Partnerships
, August 9, 2013, https://www.nsa.gov/public_info/_˜les/speeches_
 testimonies/2013_08_09_the_nsa_story.pdf. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 23BOX 1.1
 Privacy Protections for Phone Metadata 
Collected Under Section 215Privacy protections for telephone metadata collected under Section 215 
 
authority were described in a speech by Of˜ce of the Director of National Intel
-ligence (ODNI) General Counsel Robert Litt on July 18, 2014.
a,b He noted that 
before reports from queries are returned to analysts, the queries themselves must 
be  approved to ensure compliance with legal and policy rules. These rules may 
stem from law (e.g., Section 215 restrictions on surveillance of U.S. persons) or 
from internal controls (e.g., that an analyst must be trained on the proper use of 
the returned data). All queries must meet a reasonable and articulable suspicion 
test. These rules seek to ensure that there can be no domestic ﬁ˜shing expedi
-tionsﬂ in which queries seek information about parties unrelated to an intelligence 
investigation. 
Litt also reported on other measures that are applied to protect privacy of 
Section 215 telephone metadata: 







counterterrorism.








-lable suspicion that the telephone number is associated with a terrorist organiza
-tion that has been identi˜ed by the FISC.




other telephone numbers.




that warrants further investigation, that number may only be disseminated in a way 
that avoids identifying a person associated with the number. Further investigation 
may be done only by other lawful means, including other FISA provisions and law 
enforcement authority.








compliance-checking procedures applies, implemented by not only NSA but also 
ODNI and the Department of Justice.
In addition, only a limited number of NSA of˜cials (22) are designated to make 
a determination that a telephone number satis˜es the reasonable and articulable 
suspicion (RAS) criteria.
ca Robert S. Litt, ﬁPrivacy, Technology and National Security: An Overview of Intelligence 
Collection,ﬂ speech, Washington, D.C., July 18, 2013, http://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/
speeches-and-interviews/174-speeches-interviews-2009.
b PPD-28 added two additional restrictions: a requirement that the FISC approve the RAS 
and a reduction in the number of hops that can be followed from three to two (The White 
House, Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-28, ﬁSignals Intelligence Activities,ﬂ Of˜ce of the 
Press Secretary, January 17, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-of˜ce/2014/01/17/
presidential-policy-directive-signals-intelligence-activities). 
c Testimony of Chris Inglis, Statement, House Permanent Select Committee on Intelli
-gence, Hearing on ﬁHow Disclosed NSA Programs Protect Americans, and Why Disclosure 
Aids Our Enemies,ﬂ June 18, 2013, http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/post/57812486681/
hearing-of-the-house-permanent-select-committee-on.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEAccording to the document mentioned immediately above, some of 
the most important FISA authorities include the following:












the FISA Act as amended), under which NSA collects information (meta
-data) about telephone calls to, from, or within the United States. 


-sons who are reasonably believed to be located outside the United States 
but who are using U.S. communications service providers. NSA believes 
that collection under this authority is ﬁthe most signi˜cant tool in the 
NSA collection arsenal for the detection, identi˜cation, and disruption of 
terrorist threats to the U.S. and around the world.ﬂ
25











outside the United States for foreign intelligence purposes if there is prob
-able cause to believe the U.S. person is a foreign power or is an of˜cer, 
employee, or agent of a foreign power. Use of this authority requires a 
speci˜c, individual court order.









collection similar to that allowed under Section 704 against a U.S. person 
who is already the subject of a FISC order obtained pursuant to Sec
-tion 105 or 304 of FISA.
In addition, PPD-28 limited the purposes for which SIGINT collected 
in bulk can be used to six purposes, namely for detecting and countering 
the following:
26
(1) Espionage and other threats and activities directed by foreign powers 
or their intelligence services against the United States and its interests; 
(2) Threats to the United States and its interests from terrorism; 
(3) Threats to the United States and its interests from the development, 
possession, proliferation, or use of weapons of mass destruction; 
(4) Cybersecurity threats; 
(5) Threats to U.S. or allied Armed Forces or other U.S. or allied per
-sonnel; and 
(6) Transnational criminal threats, including illicit ˜nance and sanctions 
evasion related to the other purposes named in this section. 
There have been two important changes to the Section 215 program 
as a result of the current public debate. A January 2014 presidential state
-25
 Joint Statement: NSA and Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence.
26
 The White House, Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-28, ﬁSignals Intelligence Activities,ﬂ 
2014.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 25ment announced that the number of ﬁhopsﬂ would be reduced from three 
to two and that the FISC would be tasked with approving RAS selectors.
27 27
 See The White House, ﬁRemarks by the President on Review of Signals Intelligence,ﬂ 
2014, and U.S. Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, ﬁIn Re Application of the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation for an Order Requiring the Production of Tangible Things. Order 
Granting the Government™s Motion to Amend the Court™s Primary Order Dated January 3, 
2014,ﬂ Docket No. BR 14-01, Washington, D.C., http://www.uscourts.gov/uscourts/courts/
˜sc/br14-01-order.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
Broadly speaking, the intelligence function involves the collection, 
analysis, and dissemination of information to decision makers. Intel
-ligence analysts use all available sources of such information to under
-stand problems of interest to decision makers. These sources include 
human intelligence, imagery, and a variety of other kinds of intelligence 
in addition to signals intelligence (SIGINT). This report focuses on signals 
intelligence.
In general, the intelligence process starts with decisions by policy 
makers on the areas of national security interest for which intelligence 
will be useful. Some of these areas cover imminent or anticipated threats, 
while others pertain to strategic intelligence to develop an understand
-ing of regions or organizations that might become threatening. Based 
on the priorities stated by decision makers, intelligence of˜cials in the 
community identify speci˜c collection methods and opportunities that 
are expected to yield useful information. These methods and opportuni
-ties interact with and support each other (much as the various elements 
in an ecosystem interact with each other), so that, for example, a piece of 
information from one method may cue collection with another method or 
may corroborate or support information derived from another. 
The intelligence process seeks information about both tactical matters 
(i.e., speci˜c dangerous persons, groups, or plots, such as known 
 terrorist 
organizations or plans to bomb subways or investigations of recent bomb
-ings) and strategic matters (i.e., a broad picture of a threat, such as a 
country™s plans to build nuclear weapons). Increasingly, this is not a sharp 
2Basic Concepts
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BASIC CONCEPTS 27distinction, because context is often important to understanding a tactical 
threat, and tactical information is required to respond to strategic threats.
A characteristic of tactical investigations is often (although not always) 
a highly compressed timeline. For example, in investigating a bombing, 
investigators must work quickly to determine whether the bomb that just 
exploded is the ˜rst in a series.
2.1
 A CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF THE 
SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE PROCESS 
Signals intelligence is de˜ned by the National Security Agency (NSA) 
to be ﬁintelligence derived from electronic signals and systems used by 
foreign targets, such as communications systems, radars, and weapons 
systems.ﬂ
1 In the modern world, distinctions between paper records and 
electronic recordings that may once have been technically meaningful are 
increasingly obsolete as all forms of information storage become electronic.
In this section, the committee presents a simpli˜ed conceptual model 
of the parts and functions of the SIGINT process, which is used for fur
-ther discussion. In Chapter 3, ﬁuse cases,ﬂ examples of the use of SIGINT 
data in plausible scenarios, are shown. The description below is primarily 
technical in nature. Constraints on SIGINT imposed by law, regulation, 
and policy are discussed in Section 1.3.
As with other forms of intelligence gathering, SIGINT is conducted 
in response to requirements for intelligence from policy makers. Priori
-ties are established by different agencies in the policy community and are 
reviewed at least annually. Based on these priorities, agencies in the Intel
-ligence Community (IC), including NSA, design and develop mechanisms 
for collecting information in different locations, information that will meet 
the wide variety of policy maker requirements. To the extent possible, col
-lection mechanisms are consolidated for greater ef˜ciency, both between 
the various intelligence agencies and within NSA, as the entity charged 
with SIGINT collection. Thus, a given collection mechanism may provide 
information that is useful for a variety of different topics. This process 
seeks to avoid the development and deployment of collection mecha
-nisms individually for each and every target, an approach that would be 
inef˜cient and expensive.
The committee™s conceptual model of the SIGINT process is depicted 
in Figure 2.1. In this model, NSA extracts signals data from various 
sources, ˜lters it for items of interest, stores the items, analyzes them, 
and disseminates selected information to policy makers and other units 
of the IC. (Not described here, and discussed later in the report, are the 
1 See NSA, ﬁSignals Intelligence,ﬂ http://www.nsa.gov/sigint/, accessed January 16, 2015. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEExtractFilterDiscriminantQueryOtherintelligencesourcesSignalStoreAnalyzeDisseminateCollectionFigure 2-1FIGURE 2.1
 A conceptual model of signals intelligence. 
audits and other measures to establish compliance with rules and regula
-tions concerning personal privacy.) There are many signal types; among 
the most important are the digital signals that carry the voice content 
of telephone calls. Information pertaining to telephony is also collected 
as SIGINT; this is information about the calling and called telephone 
numbers and time and duration of callŠso-called ﬁtelephony metadata.ﬂ 
Internet communications, such as email or commands to search engines, 
may also be collected, and, once again, a distinction is drawn between 
content and metadata. 
2.1.1
 Collection
Signals are derived from many sources, but the speci˜c steps taken to 
winnow large data streams to those that are manageable and potentially 
productive are the same regardless of the source. Figure 2.1 shows how 
one signal might be collected. The ˜rst three steps in the SIGINT model, 
taken together, are what the committee informally calls 
collection
:22 The committee™s de˜nition of 
collection
 differs from that used by NSA in certain ways. 
See, for example, NSA, NSA™s Civil Liberties and Privacy Protections for Targeted SIGINT 
 
Activities Under Executive Order 12333
, NSA Director of Civil Liberties and Privacy 
 Of˜ce 
Report, October 7, 2014, https://www.nsa.gov/civil_liberties/_˜les/nsa_clpo_report_
 targeted_EO12333.pdf. See also footnote 3 in this chapter.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BASIC CONCEPTS 29
Extract. 
The ˜rst step is to obtain the signal from a source, con
-vert it into a digital stream, and parse the stream to extract the kind of 
information being sought, such as an email message or the digital audio 
of a telephone call. Extraction interprets layers of communications and 
Internet protocols, such as Optical Transport Network (OTN), Synchro
-nous Digital Hierarchy (SDH), Ethernet, Internet Protocol (IP), Transmis
-sion Control Protocol (TCP), Simple Mail Transport Protocol (SMTP), or 
Hypertext Transport Protocol (HTTP). In cases where business records 
are sought, this step extracts and reformats relevant SIGINT data from a 
business record format used by the business.

Filter. 
This step selects, from all the items extracted, items of inter
-est that should be retained. It is sometimes controlled by a ﬁdiscriminant,ﬂ 
which the IC agency running the collection provides to describe in precise 
terms the properties of an item that should be retained. For example, 
a discriminant might specify ﬁall telephone calls from 301-555-1212 to 
Somalia,ﬂ ﬁall telephone calls from France to Yemen,ﬂ or ﬁall search-
engine queries containing the word ‚sarin.™ﬂ If there is no discriminant, 
then all extracted items are retained.

Store. 
Retained items are stored in a database operated by the U.S. 
government. This is the point at which collection is deemed in this model 
to occur for the retained data.
3 By contrast, the previous steps are ˚eet
-ing, with data processed in near real-time (keeping data only for short 
periods of timeŠminutes to hoursŠfor technical reasons) as fast as it is 
supplied, with all but the items to be retained discarded. Items collected 
from separate sources are usually combined into a modest number of 
large databases to facilitate searching and analysis.
In modern communication systems, traf˜c from many sources and 
destinations is aggregated into a single channel. For example, the radio 
signals to and from a base station serving all mobile phones in a cell are 
all on the same radio channels, and all of the IP packets between two 
routers may be carried on the same ˜ber. With rare exceptions, there is 
no single physical access point comparable to the central of˜ce connec
-tion of a landline telephone at which to observe only the items of interest 
and nothing more. Re˚ecting this reality, the committee™s de˜nition of 
ﬁcollectionﬂ says that SIGINT data is collected only when it is stored, 
not
 when it is extracted. Put another way, every piece of data that passes 
by a potential monitoring point must be machine-˜ltered as part of the 
3 Not everyone agrees on a de˜nition of the word 
collection
, which is widely used in policy, 
law, and regulation pertaining to SIGINT. This lack of collective agreement extends to enti
-ties within the IC itself. Moreover, subtle distinctions among the de˜nitions lead to different 
views on certain SIGINT properties, especially its intrusion on privacy.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEextraction process to determine whether it is potentially relevant or can 
be thrown away without further examination. 
The committee notes that there are at least two differing conceptions 
of privacy with respect to when data are acquired. One view asserts that 
a violation of privacy occurs when the electronic signal is ˜rst captured, 
irrespective of what happens to the signal after that point. Another view 
asserts that processing the signal only to determine if it is irrelevant does 
not compromise privacy rights in any way, even if that signal is held for a 
non-zero period of time. In a technological environment in which different 
communications streams are mixed together on the same physical chan
-nel, picking out the sought-after communication stream 
requires
 the latter 
approach. Further, note that the committee has made a technical judgment 
about a useful de˜nition of collection while remaining silent about what 
does or does not constitute an appropriate de˜nition of privacy.
The committee also uses ﬁcollectionﬂ as a term to describe only govern-ment retention of data. If non-government actors acquire information from 
or about various parties in some legal manner but the government does 
not have access to that information, the government is not engaging in 
collection as a result of the actions of those parties. In contrast, if the 
government gains access to that information through technical or legal 
means and stores some or all of it for government use, it is reasonable to 
consider this collection.
Note that intelligence agencies narrow their focus throughout the 
various steps of collection as much as possible, both to comply with rules 
about what is allowed and to use their limited resources ef˜ciently. Pri
-vacy protections of different sorts are applied at various points through
-out the process. These include choices about where to extract signals 
and what discriminants to use, minimization procedures used to protect 
information about U.S. persons, and controls on how collected informa
-tion can be used.
Notwithstanding the operation of the predecessor program to Foreign 
Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) Section 215, outside of the requirements 
of FISA, most agree now that the IC can target U.S. persons only when 
permitted explicitly with Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) 
involvement using procedures designed to ensure Fourth Amendment 
protections. The legal protections provided by the Fourth 
 
Amendment and 
various domestic legislation, such as FISA, distinguish between foreign 
and U.S. persons; in particular, the latter enjoy the protections of the 
Fourth Amendment. In cases where information about U.S. persons is 
collected as a part of authorized foreign intelligence collection activities, 
minimization rules approved by the U.S. Attorney General require special 
handling for privacy protection, consistent with foreign intelligence needs, 
which typically will require removing the names of U.S. persons or other 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BASIC CONCEPTS 31identifying information prior to dissemination. Of course, the names of 
U.S. persons can be included when necessary to understand the foreign 
intelligence information.
4Stated policy calls for strict rules for the dissemination of identities of 
U.S. persons in intelligence reports. 
2.1.2
 Analysis
Intelligence collection results in large databases holding records that 
are expected to have intelligence value. (Table 2.1 provides a hypothetical 
example of records in such a database.) In counterterrorism investiga
-tions, an analyst generally starts with a ﬁseed,ﬂ an identi˜er of a com
-munications endpoint that has been obtained in the course of intelligence 
gathering and is deemed relevant to a possible threat. The analyst uses 
the seed identi˜er to formulate one or more queries of the databases to 
seek more information, for example, identi˜ers for other parties commu
-nicating with the seed. The analyst may also query for communications 
content, if it exists or can be obtained. Thus, analysts can build a pattern 
of a seed™s connections to other parties and/or to other data that provide 
a richer and fuller picture of that party™s role within a larger enterprise, 
such as a terrorist organization. Other databases may be consulted as 
4 The committee™s understanding, based on the brie˜ngs it received, is that most data in
-cidentally collected about U.S. persons are never examined, because U.S. person data is not 
returned in response to analyst queries for foreign intelligence information.
TABLE 2.1
 Hypothetical Call Detail Records as They Might Appear 
in a Signals Intelligence Database 
CallerCalledCall Start Time
Call Duration+1-617-555-0131+1-703-555-01982014:10:3:15:45:103:41+1-703-555-0198+1-703-555-00132014:10:3:15:49:101:10+1-415-555-0103+963 99 22104032014:10:3:16:01:4373:43+1-603-555-0141+1-603-555-01522014:10:3:22:10:033:01+1-617-555-0183+1-413-555-01372014:10:3:22:33:487:03+1-802-555-0141+1-802-555-01082014:10:3:22:41:173:02NOTE: In this hypothetical example of call detail records as they might appear in a signals 
intelligence database, the call shown in the ˜rst line might be relaying a message through 
an intermediary at +1-703-555-0198. The call on the third line is to an international number, 
which might belong to a foreign national or a U.S. person. The call in the fourth line was 
probably ordering a pizza, since a directory of telephone numbers reveals that the called 
number is a pizza shop.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEwell. In this way, analysts can build a network that depicts how parties of 
interest relate to one another and characterize the activities of each of the 
parties in a network or more formally structured enterprise.
Analysts use a variety of software tools as they work with SIGINT 
data. They may use tools to formulate queries or display the results (e.g., 
see Figure 3.1). They may set up ﬁstanding queriesﬂ (which need special 
approval) that run each day to report new events associated with their 
active targets. Using results of queries of the data, they build a record of 
data and evidence for investigations in a ﬁworking store,ﬂ a set of digital 
˜les separate from the SIGINT databases.
2.1.3
 Dissemination
The last step in the SIGINT process is dissemination. SIGINT analysts 
will routinely disseminate the results of their work to others, both inside 
and outside the IC. For example, NSA analysts working on a speci˜c 
terror
 
ism investigation might disseminate their ˜ndings to other analysts 
and collectors who are working on related issues or directly to policy 
makers who may choose to take action based on the SIGINT. 
Like the initial collection, SIGINT dissemination is governed by vari
-ous laws and regulations designed to protect the sources and methods 
involved in the collection as well as the privacy and civil liberties of the 
subjects of the collection, especially if the intelligence involves U.S. per
-sons.
5 Speci˜cally to the latter, and pursuant to U.S. Signals Intelligence 
Direcive (USSID) 18,
6 such reports will normally cloak the identity of U.S. 
persons until a reader of the report speci˜cally asks for the identity to be 
disclosed and provides a valid reason for the release, such as initiating 
a further investigation. This process is designed to ensure that both the 
requesting agency and NSA, as the disseminator of the information, can 
verify that disclosing this sensitive information is appropriate and neces
-sary to understand the foreign intelligence value of the report. 
2.2
 BULK AND TARGETED COLLECTION 
Presidential Policy Directive 28 (PPD-28) asks whether it is feasible 
to create software that could replace ﬁbulk collectionﬂ with ﬁtargeted 
5 Section 4 of PPD-28 indicates that the IC should endeavor to give the same protections 
to foreign persons as to U.S. persons with regard to the retention and dissemination of 
identifying information.
6 National Security Agency, ﬁUnited States Signals Intelligence Directive USSID SP0018, 
(U) Legal Compliance and U.S. Persons Minimization Procedures,ﬂ Issue Date January 25, 
2011, approved for release on November 13, 2013, referred to as USSID 18, http://www.dni.
gov/˜les/documents/1118/CLEANEDFinal USSID SP0018.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BASIC CONCEPTS 33collection.ﬂ7 This section attempts to explain this distinction, which, unfor-tunately, is quite unclear. This question will be answered in Chapter 4.
Bulk collection results in a database in which a signi˜cant portion of 
the data pertains to identi˜ers not relevant to current targets. Such items 
usually refer to parties that have not been, are not now, and will not become 
subjects of interest. Moreover, they are not closely linked to anyone of that 
sort: knowing to whom these parties talk will not help locate threats or 
develop more information about threats. Bulk collection occurs because 
it is usually impossible to determine at the time of ˜ltering and collection 
that a party will have no intelligence value. Although the amount of infor
-mation retained from bulk collection is often large, and often larger than 
the amount of information retained from targeted collection, it is not their 
size that makes them ﬁbulk.ﬂ Rather, it is the (larger) proportion of extra 
data beyond currently known targets that de˜nes them.
Targeted collection tries to reduce, insofar as possible, items about 
parties with no past, present, or future intelligence value. This is achieved 
by using discriminants that narrowly select relevant items to store. For 
example, if the email address hardcase45@example.com was obtained from 
a terrorist™s smartphone when he was arrested, using a discriminant to 
instruct the ˜lter to save only ﬁemail to or from hardcase45@example.comﬂ 
would result in a targeted collection. Some or many of the people commu
-nicating with this person might turn out to have no intelligence value, but 
the collection is far more selective than, say, collecting all email to or from 
anyone with an email address served by aol.com. A discriminant could be a 
top-level Internet domain, a country code (e.g., .cn for China, .fr for France), 
a date on which communication occurred, a device type, and so on. A dis
-criminant could even refer to the content in a communication, such as ﬁall 
email with the word ‚nuclear™ in it.ﬂ Note that if a discriminant is broadly 
crafted, the ˜lter may retain such a large proportion of data on people of no 
intelligence value that the collection cannot be called ﬁtargeted.ﬂ 
PPD-28 seeks ways to reduce or avoid bulk collection in order to 
increase privacy and civil liberty protections for those not relevant to the 
intelligence collection purposes. Note that there is no precise threshold in 
collecting data on such ﬁharmlessﬂ persons that will distinguish between 
bulk and targeted; it™s a matter of degree. Also note that the bulk/targeted 
distinction applies broadly to different data types: telephony content, 
metadata, business records, Internet searches, and so on. 
The fundamental trade-off, which can be seen in the Chapter 3 ﬁuse 
casesﬂ and is explored further in Chapter 4, is between more intrusive 
7 The White House, Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-28, ﬁSignals Intelligence Activities,ﬂ 
Of˜ce of the Press Secretary, January 17, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/
˜les/docs/2014sigint_mem_ppd_rel.pdf. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEinformation collection that may yield extremely valuable information 
about threats unknown at the time of collection and less intrusive infor
-mation collection that may miss information about dangerous threats. 
Bulk and targeted collection can apply to many different kinds of 
communication modalitiesŠtelephone, email, instant message, and so 
on. Various web-based applications, such as electronic banking or online 
shopping that allow users to exchange information electronically, are 
among these modalities, even if they are not usually thought of as means 
for communication, per se. Obtaining phone metadata under Section 215 
authority also counts as bulk collection.
2.3
 DEFINITIONS OF CRITICAL TERMS
The laws, regulations, court rulings, and other writings about SIGINT 
use a number of terms to describe intelligence gathering and analysis. 
These terms are not always used precisely or consistently. Intelligence and 
law enforcement cultures use different words for the same concept or the 
same word for slightly different concepts. It is easy, when describing and 
debating intelligence processes, to stumble over problems of de˜nition 
rather than of substance. Indeed, for several years in some instances, NSA 
analysts were accessing the database of domestic telephone metadata 
without proper reasonable and articulable suspicion (RAS) authority; this 
was due to differing NSA and FISC de˜nitions of the word ﬁarchive.ﬂ
8 Several presenters to the committee acknowledged these problems and 
indicated that the IC is continuing to work on them. The term target
 is also used loosely and in different forms throughout the community. 
The preceding section addresses the de˜nitions of 
bulk
 and 
targeted
 collection; this section provides working de˜nitions adopted by the com
-mittee for several other key terms. For the purposes of this report, the 
committee has formulated the following lexicon (see Figure 2.2):

Identi˜er:
 A text or bit string that denotes a communication end 
point.

Unknown: An identi˜er that may or may not have intelligence value.

Ruled out:
 An identi˜er that has been determined to have no intel
-ligence value at the present time.
8 John DeLong testimony to committee; see also Memorandum of the United States in Re
-sponse to the Court™s Order Dated January [sic] 28, 2009 at 11, In re Production of Tangible 
Things From [REDACTED], No. BR 08-13 (FISA Ct. February 17, 2009), http://www.dni.
gov/˜les/documents/section/pub_Dec%2012%202008%20Supplemental%20Opinions%20from%20the%20FISC.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BASIC CONCEPTS 35Figure 2-2˜˚˛˝˙ˆˇ˚˘(known not of interest)RASTargetsSeedsFIGURE 2.2
 Classi˜cation of identi˜ers used in signals intelligence analysis.

Subject of interest:
 An identi˜er that may have intelligence value 
and is likely to be part of an intelligence investigation.

Target:
 A subject of interest that may be a security threat.

Seed:
 A subject of interest that is used as the starting point for an 
intelligence investigation.

RAS target:
 A target for which there is a reasonable and articulable 
suspicion that the person is associated with a foreign terrorist organization.
9For the purposes of this report only, 
and realizing that they may have 
different and possibly broader meanings in the IC, the committee uses 
the working de˜nitions presented in Box 2.1, drawn from statutes and 
its understanding of IC practices in the context of SIGINT and technol
-ogy. (For de˜nitions used by the U.S. SIGINT System, see USSID SP0018, 
Section 9.
10
)9 RAS is a term of art used in the context of Section 215 collection. See David Kris, On 
the bulk collection of tangible things, 
Journal of National Security Law and Policy
 7:209, 2014.
10
 National Security Agency, USSID 18, approved for release in 2013.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEBOX 2.1
  Working Definitions in Signals Intelligence and Technology
identi˜erA text or bit string that denotes a communication endpoint, such 
as a telephone number, mobile phone subscriber number, 
Internet Protocol (IP) address, or email address.
subject of 
interestAn identi˜er of a party (person, group) that may have intelligence 
value and is likely to be part of an intelligence investigation.
target  (n, adj)A subject of interest in an intelligence investigation.

This term is used liberally by the Intelligence Community (IC) to 
denote an identi˜er or person that is the subject of interest or 
surveillance. 
A target need not be the principal subject of interest. For 
example, an associate of a known threat might be a target.
Note that a target can be a computer identi˜ed by its IP address.

Target identi˜ers may be used in selectors or discriminants to 
obtain, from a large collection of data, data pertaining only to 

the target.seed (target)An initial target used to start an intelligence investigation.
RAS targetA target for which there is a reasonable, articulable suspicion 
(RAS) that it is associated with a foreign terrorist organization. 

Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act Section 215 requires a 

RAS target designation to permit certain queries.
In 2012, fewer than 300 identi˜ers met the RAS standards and 
were used as seeds in the Section 215 collection.
1___________query
Detailed instructions for searching a database of collected data.

Note: this is consistent with computer technology usage, and is 
akin to an SQL query.
A query may have several ﬁtermsﬂ or ﬁselectorsﬂ:

Example: ﬁcalls made from identi˜er x000325 after July 2, 2013ﬂ

Example: ﬁInternet search requests using the term ‚sarin™ or 
emails containing ‚poison gas™
discriminant
Same meaning as query, but used in conjunction with ˜ltering 
applied as part of collection. Discriminants must be simple 

enough to be applied in real time as signals intelligence 
(SIGINT) data is extracted and ˜ltered.
This word appears explicitly in Presidential Policy Directive 28 
(PPD-28) as part of the de˜nition of ﬁtargeted collection.ﬂ
Example: ﬁall the email addresses used in communications to or 
from Yemenﬂ
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BASIC CONCEPTS 37selector(usually) A query term that cites a speci˜c identi˜er.
(sometimes) Any query term.

Example: ﬁcalls made from identi˜er x000325ﬂ

Example: ﬁcalls made from identi˜er x000235 or identi˜er y4576ﬂ
___________collection 
(of SIGINT 
data)Storing SIGINT data on government-controlled information 
technology (IT) systems so as to enable authorized access by 

IC analysts and the software tools they use.
Storing on a government-controlled IT system the results of a 
query of an external database constitutes collection in the 

sense of the committee™s de˜nition.
Under the proposal to have communications carriers retain call 
detail records and allow authorized access to those records 

by IC analysts, the records at the carrier are not ﬁcollectedﬂ 

in the sense of the committee™s de˜nition, but if the records 

transmitted to the government in answer to a query are 

stored, they are considered collected.
bulk 

collectionCollection in which a signi˜cant portion of the retained data 
pertains to identi˜ers that are not targets at the time of 

collection.Note: Although the term ﬁbulkﬂ suggests that the set of collected 
data is large, and bulk data can indeed be large, size alone is 

not the controlling factor in de˜ning bulk collection.
targeted 
collectionCollection that stores only the SIGINT data that remains after a ˜lter discriminant removes most non-target data.
minimizationProcedures, approved by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Court (FISC), that must be ﬁreasonably designed in light of 

the purpose and technique of the particular surveillance, 

to minimize the acquisition and retention, and prohibit the 

dissemination, of nonpublicly available information concerning 

unconsenting U.S. persons consistent with the need of the 

United States to obtain, produce, and disseminate foreign 

intelligence information.ﬂ 
See, e.g., 50 U.S.C. §§ 1801(h)(1) and 1821(4)(A); USSID-18.
2___________continued
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEmetadataLoosely, ﬁdata about data,ﬂ distinct from the data itself 
(ﬁcontentsﬂ).Sometimes called ﬁnon-content data.ﬂ
3There is no standard de˜nition that enumerates metadata 
elements associated with a telephone call or an email transmission; instead, statutes and court orders that authorize 

collection of metadata list explicitly the elements that can 

be collected. However, metadata does not include ﬁcontent 

of any telephone call, or the names, addresses, or ˜nancial 

information of any party to a call.ﬂ
4In telephony, generally includes calling and called numbers, 
duration of call, time of the call, and perhaps more 

information. 
In email, generally includes from and to email addresses, time 
of sending, IP addresses of email services, and the like. The 

ﬁsubjectﬂ and ﬁreﬂ ˜elds of email headers are considered 

content, not metadata.5call detail 
record 
(CDR)Business records kept by telephone service providers (usually for 
billing purposes) detailing for each call information such as 

the calling and called numbers, the time and duration of the 

call, and possibly additional information.
Sometimes called ﬁtelephony metadata.ﬂ
business 

recordsﬁTangible things, including books, records, papers, documents 
and other items.ﬂ
Further, the FISC has ruled that the electronic form of these 
records counts as a tangible thing whose production can be 

compelled under Section 215.See USA Patriot Act,
6 also ﬁAdministration White Paper: Bulk 
Collection of Telephony Metadata under Section 215 of the 

USA Patriot Act.
ﬂ7BOX 2.1
 ContinuedBulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BASIC CONCEPTS 39foreign 
intelligence 
information
ﬁForeign intelligence means information related to the 
capabilities, intentions, or activities of foreign governments or 

elements thereof, foreign organizations, foreign persons, or 

international terrorists.ﬂ (PPD-28 and Executive Order 12333). 
For details see Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978.
8 Foreign intelligence collection priorities are set annually at the 

policy level.
U.S. person 
ﬁA citizen of the United States, an alien lawfully admitted for 
permanent residence, an – association [of citizens and 

permanents residents] or a corporation which is incorporated 

in the United States –ﬂFor details see Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978.
91 ﬁAdministration White Paper: Bulk Collection of Telephony Metadata Under Section 215 
of the USA Patriot Act,ﬂ August 9, 2013, p. 4. Found various places online, including http://big.
assets.huf˜ngtonpost.com/Section215.pdf.
2 National Security Agency, ﬁUnited States Signals Intelligence Directive USSID SP0018, 
(U) Legal Compliance and U.S. Persons Minimization Procedures,ﬂ Issue Date January 25, 

2011, approved for release on November 13, 2013, referred to as USSID 18, http://www.dni.
gov/˜les/documents/1118/CLEANEDFinal USSID SP0018.pdf.
3 See U.S. Department of Justice, Justice News, ﬁActing Assistant Attorney General 
 Elana Tyrangiel Testi˜es Before the U.S. House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, 
Homeland Security, and Investigations,ﬂ March 19, 2013, http://www.justice.gov/iso/opa/doj/
 speeches/2013/olp-speech-1303191.html.4 ﬁAdministration White Paper,ﬂ 2014.
5 FISC ruling, U.S. Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, ﬁIn Re Motion of Propublica, 
Inc. for the Release of Court Records, Docket No.: Misc. 13-09, The United States™ Opposition 
to the Motion of Propublica, Inc. for the Release of Court Records,ﬂ http://www.dni.gov/˜les/
documents/1118/CLEANEDPRTT%201.pdf, p. 11.
6 USA Patriot Act 2001, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-107publ56/pdf/
 PLAW-107publ56.
pdf, p. 17.
7 ﬁAdministration White Paper,ﬂ 2014.
8 Ibid., p. 2, item (e).
9 Ibid., p. 4, item (i).
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40
To understand the uses of signals intelligence (SIGINT) data, several 
ﬁuse casesﬂ are presented below. These are hypothetical scenarios that 
describe episodes in which analysts query SIGINT metadata as part of an 
investigation of a threat to national security, such as counterterrorism, or 
to stem the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
1 (Some public 
sources of information on actual cases are listed in Box 3.1.) The commit
-tee asked National Security Agency (NSA) briefers for unclassi˜ed use 
cases illustrating the use of metadata, under any authority, whether col
-lected in bulk or targeted, whether foreign or domestic. The committee 
focused on how metadata are used, not on the authorities or restrictions 
under which it is collected. Three categories of use cases are presented 
below, which, the committee was told, account for the majority of meta
-data use: contact chaining, ˜nding alternate identi˜ers, and triage.
2 This 
set is 
not
, however, exhaustive. 
The examples contain more detail than is strictly necessary to illus
-trate the use case categories. The detail is presented to show that an 
investigation may
1 For scenarios of four counterterrorism investigations studied by the Privacy and Civil 
Liberties Oversight Board, see 
Report on the Telephone Records Program Conducted under Sec
-tion 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act and on the Operations of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Court, January 23, 2014, http://www.pclob.gov/library/215-Report_on_the_Telephone_
 Records_Program.pdf, p. 144 ff.
2 National Security Agency, presentation to the committee on August 28, 2014.
3Use Cases and Use Case Categories
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USE CASES AND USE CASE CATEGORIES
 41














different ways,


















protected.
Note that the SIGINT data used in these examples are metadata col
-lected from telephone and email communications. The only metadata 
BOX 3.1
 Some Specific Cases of Signals Intelligence in Use
Very little has been made public about actual cases where U.S. signals intel
-ligence has contributed to counterterrorism. A principal reason is that the Intel
-ligence Community (IC) carefully protects information about sources and methods 
from adversaries. Nevertheless, information on some cases can be found in public 
speeches and testimony to Congress by IC leaders and in two reports prepared 
by the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board.
The accounts of these cases are incomplete and possibly inconsistent. The 
selection of the cases that were made public, the details of the accounts, and their 
signi˜cance have all been controversial. 
Pointers to some of this public information are provided below, not because 
the committee endorses the views of its authors, but simply to supplement the ab
-stract use case categories presented in this chapter with some concrete examples:





-lect Committee on Intelligence, June 18, 2013, http://icontherecord.tumblr.com/
post/57812486681/hearing-of-the-house-permanent-select-committee-on.



authority:
 ŠBasaaly Moalin, ˜nancial support of Al Shabab.
 ŠNajibullah Zazi, plotted to bomb the New York Subway system.
 ŠDavid Coleman Headley, helped plan the 2008 Mumbai attack.




Exchange.




Report on the 
Telephone Records Program Conducted under Section 215 of the USA Patriot Act 
and on the Operations of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
, http://www.
pclob.gov/library/215-Report_on_the_Telephone_Records_Program.pdf, p. 144 ff.




Civil Liberties Oversight Board, 
Report on the Surveillance Program Operated 
Pursuant to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act
, http://www.
pclob.gov/library/702-Report.pdf, p. 104 ff.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEelements used are the ﬁtoﬂ and ﬁfromﬂ identi˜ers in the form of telephone 
numbers or email addresses, or the Internet Protocol (IP) address of a 
computer used for communication. Collection methods are not described, 
and it is assumed that the data are collected in such a way that they con
-tain the entries that are required to satisfy the scenario. The Intelligence 
Community (IC) may collect additional kinds of SIGINT metadata.
3.1
 CONTACT CHAINING
Communications metadata, domestic and foreign, are used to develop 
contact chains by starting with a target and using metadata records to 
indicate who has communicated directly with the target (one hop), who 
has in turn communicated with those people (two hops), and so on. 
Studying contact chains can help identify members of a network of people 
who may be working together; if one is known or suspected to be a terror
-ist, it becomes important to inspect others with whom that individual is in 
contact who may be members of a terrorist network. Similarly, studying 
contact chains can help analysts to understand the structure of an organi
-zation under investigation.
3.1.1
 Use Case 1
In Use Case 1, the U.S. government has identi˜ed a Somali pirate 
network that includes target A. An analyst queries and displays all the 
call contacts to or from A™s telephone number in the last 18 days. Some 
contacts are identi˜ed as already known targets; others are undetermined. 
The analyst invokes a similar query and display for target B, who has com
-municated frequently with A, and notes that there are three people, not 
yet determined to be targets, who have been in contact with both A and B. 
The analyst can see this relationship immediately, because the contact sets 
of A and B are displayed as a network, with contacts as nodes, linked by 
lines to indicate calls. The analyst invokes the query-and-display function 
again on one of these three, C, and discovers this person is in contact not 
only with targets A and B but also with other known pirates. Perhaps C is 
a ﬁmissing linkﬂ between the networks in which A and B are operating.
3Many contacts uncovered this way are ruled out as having no intel
-ligence value. Calls to a car mechanic, an IT help desk, or an automated 
3 ﬁInside the NSA,ﬂ60 Minutes, CBS News, video segment, December 15, 2013, 3:40-4:45, http://www.cbsnews.com/videos/inside-the-nsa/. The transcript for the 
60 Minutes
 segment is at CBS News, ﬁNSA Speaks out on Snowden, Spying,ﬂ December 15, 2013, 
http://www.cbsnews.com/news/nsa-speaks-out-on-snowden-spying/. Note that the video 
that plays on the page with the transcript is not guaranteed to be the correct segment of 
60 Minutes
; the URL for the correct video segment is given above.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USE CASES AND USE CASE CATEGORIES
 43FIGURE 3.1
 A network of contacts among identi˜ers.
weather report are likely to be ruled out, although perhaps some may 
later be found to have intelligence value. Further, laws or regulations 
restrict what an analyst is allowed to do. For instance, there are special 
rules applied to subjects of interest who are or might be U.S. persons 
and various (and differing) sets of rules depending on which authority 
allowed the collection of the underlying information (see Section 1.4).
3.1.2
 How Metadata Are Used in Contact Chaining
Either bulk or targeted collection can lead to the result in Figure 3.1. 
Since A and B are targets, targeted collection using a discriminant that 
speci˜es ﬁcollect all calls to or from A or Bﬂ would collect all the contacts 
and subjects shown in the ˜gure. However, if all calls between A or B 
and C occurred before either A or B was identi˜ed as a target, later col
-lection targeted on A or B will not ˜nd C by way of A or B, but might 
˜nd C because of communication with some other target. Bulk collection 
provides useful ﬁhistory,ﬂ because it does not limit collection to only the 
targets known at the time of collection. 
ABCseedidenti˜er of interestcontacttargetunknownFigure 3-1Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE3.2
 FINDING ALTERNATE IDENTIFIERS
Targets may use several communication channels, each characterized 
by a speci˜c identi˜erŠin the example above, a telephone number, email 
address, or IP address. Targets may use different channels as a matter of 
convenience or as a form of operational security to try to evade detection 
by spreading their communications over several channels, by initiating 
new channels, or by stopping use of some channels. In some cases, iden
-ti˜ers may be assigned by the technology, such as an Internet service 
provider (ISP) that assigns a temporary IP address to a laptop.
An analyst can continue tracking a target by knowing the set of identi
-˜ers the target uses and tracking changes to the set over time, for example, 
when the target switches to a different email address. Activity detected 
using these identi˜ers is an important part of intelligence about the target. 
For example, a frequently used identi˜er that goes silent or that is found 
to have moved (e.g., by being detected at a different site) may indicate 
target activities of interest.
To succeed, alternate identi˜ers must be found quickly, with a speed 
and rate that meets or exceeds that with which the target acts. If targets are 
changing phone or email identi˜ers every day, the surveillance required to 
track the changes must be undertaken at a similar rate.
3.2.1
 Use Case 2
In Use Case 2, an international cyber-criminal is thwarted when U.S. 
government access to his email communication allows anticipation and 
mitigation of a cyber attack. In response, the criminal transfers his com
-munications to an alternate identi˜erŠusing a smaller ISP within the 
United States that is known for outspoken resistance to government sur
-veillance. The U.S. government, via a Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Court (FISC) order, obtains bulk email metadata from the ISP, also impos
-ing a gag order on the ISP and preventing deliberate or inadvertent dis
-closure of surveillance to the cyber-criminal. The intent of this action is 
to uncover the criminal™s alternate identi˜er for the purpose of collecting 
additional intelligence.
The alternate identi˜er technique is applied to the email metadata 
obtained from the ISP, in order to ˜nd a new identi˜er that communicates 
with the same identi˜ers as the old email address, leading to the dis
-covery of an alternate identi˜er used by the cyber-criminal.
In the following use case, alternate identi˜ers are used in a more 
complex scenario that combines communications surveillance with other 
intelligence methods.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USE CASES AND USE CASE CATEGORIES
 453.2.2
 Use Case 3
In Use Case 3, country X is a U.S. adversary that produces chemical 
and biological warfare weapons. The U.S. policy community wants con
-tinued monitoring of the program and to know if the country is supplying 
terrorists with weapons of mass destruction (WMD). The IC knows the 
following about the program:



university in the country. The institute also conducts legitimate medical 
and pharmacological research. There are also a variety of known and 
suspected laboratories associated with the program spread throughout 
the country.








in Europe, Russia, and the United States. The institute seeks medical 
research equipment from legitimate suppliers around the world.











-tute regularly works with the United Nations and international aid orga
-nizations to mitigate the threat posed by these and other diseases.










the Sons of the Western Sun, a U.S.-designated terrorist group attempting 
to overthrow the government in a neighboring country.
The IC goals are to 










-ated laboratories are attempting to purchase and who the suppliers are 
or could reasonably be.











associated with the institute.


institute.










-bers of the institute.











directions provided to them by the institute.
To obtain information relevant to these goals, the IC may collect 
against the institute, the country, and the terrorist organization. The col
-lection options are constrained by the following:



are also very wary of communications intelligence activities.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE










watched, and the staff is small.









often will contact suppliers with unsolicited emails asking for information 
on a wide range of products and services.










a national pastime.











˜nancial, logistical, and personnel support from elements in Europe and 
the United States, many of whom are unknown.
Use Case 3 illustrates a complex scenario in which several different 
ways of gathering intelligence may be involved. Most likely, the entire 
institute would be the focus of communications data collection. Accord
-ing to the committee™s de˜nition, this might be considered bulk collection, 
because it would collect a signi˜cant amount of data about communica
-tions of legitimate researchers who have no role in WMD efforts. How
-ever, focusing collection on the institute is less intrusive than collecting on 
the whole country. The alternate identi˜er method may be applied to the 
identi˜ers of everyone in the institute in order to track all ongoing com
-munications. Correlations with known members of Sons of the Western 
Sun may help distinguish targets from innocents.
3.2.3
 Use Case 4
In Use Case 4, following the events of Use Case 3, country X elimi
-nated its WMD programs. The United States aided with the destruction 
of the weapons, but despite public declarations, the IC remains convinced 
that a number of facilities were never identi˜ed by the country. The new 
government has been rumored in press articles to want to re-establish the 
WMD program. U.S. policy makers are concerned about a new arms race 
in the region and want to know the status and intention of the country 
toward its WMD program. The IC knows the following:











on the old WMD program have been traveling widely in the United States 
and Asia.









and the United States, and a number of U.S. tourists travel yearly to X to 
bathe in the renowned hot springs.









have winter villas in X. They were known to buy goods from both U.S. 
and Asian suppliers for the program.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USE CASES AND USE CASE CATEGORIES
 47










accounts in the United States, among other places.
Analysts have to determine the current status of the WMD program 
and leadership intentions toward the program. Unfortunately, after X 
agreed to dismantle its WMD program, most collection efforts on the 
program were ended or drastically reduced. Thus, the IC goals are to 








materials and equipment.

policy makers toward the WMD program, despite public pronouncements.










possible new facilities, and identify the use of new agents to purchase 
WMD-related materials and equipment.










and how.
This example draws on many intelligence sources of which SIGINT 
is only one. Part of the approach will be to collect bulk communications 
data focused on areas where IC analysts expect the scientists to be com
-municating. They may use some of the same identi˜ers they used before 
the WMD program shutdown. Doubtless, new identi˜ers will come to 
light, some identifying U.S. persons and, therefore, requiring minimiza
-tion procedures.
Intelligence reports from the period 
before
 the shutdown may contain 
references to identi˜ers or other evidence that will help target or focus 
collection or seek contemporaneous alternate identi˜ers. It is possible 
that during the shutdown a reduced collection effort was sustained in 
order to monitor the termination of WMD activity; parts of that data that 
have not exceeded the IC™s retention limits may be used in the alternate 
identi˜er search.
3.2.4
 How Metadata Are Used in Finding Alternate Identi˜ers
Finding alternate identi˜ers depends on collecting timely commu
-nications metadata in bulk. The collection must be in bulk in order for 
the metadata to include the new identi˜ers, which are not known at the 
time of collection to be associated with a target because they are 
two hops from the old identi˜er. Collection that is focused around the target (i.e., 
communications channels and modes that the target is known to use) 
is used, in part, to limit intrusion on innocents. Focus is also driven by 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEconcerns of cost and computer processing time to run the correlation 
algorithms.
4Note that the two-hop restriction announced by the President in Janu
-ary 2014 on queries of domestic telephone metadata still allows alterna
-tive identi˜ers to be found for known domestic reasonable and articulable 
suspicion (RAS) targets.
5 Starting from a target, a query will ˜nd all the 
target™s one-hop contacts, then ˜nd all two-hop contacts; among these, 
there may be an identi˜er that communicates with many of the target™s 
one-hop contacts. This identi˜er may be an alternate identi˜er for the 
target.
Reverse targeting
 is another approach to ˜nd a target™s alternate identi
-˜ers by working backwards from persons known to be in contact with the 
target. In this approach, each identi˜er that communicates with the target 
is used as a query against bulk metadata or as a selector in future tar
-geted collection, which will reveal any new identi˜er that communicates 
with the target™s previous communication partners. Because this method 
explicitly collects against persons known 
not
 to be persons of interest, 
apart from the fact that they communicate with the target, the use of this 
method raises extra privacy concerns. Current policy and statutes forbid 
the use of this method under certain authorities.
6 3.3
 TRIAGE
Investigations or events may uncover lists of identi˜ers that need 
triageŠthat is, categorizing identi˜ers according to the danger that their 
owners might pose to national security. Queries about each identi˜er are 
made to the IC™s databases to determine whether the identi˜er can be 
matched against a currently known target, is related to a target, or exhibits 
other properties of a dangerous person. Most often, the list presented for 
triage cites only identi˜ers and not names of persons.
Queries for triage are matched against historical metadata (both bulk 
and targeted) to ˜nd evidence of connections between the identi˜er and 
events or people that were or are of interest. The identi˜er may have 
once been a target, but the information about the target has since been 
discarded. Or the identi˜er may have been retained because it arose in the 
4 Note that these algorithms will examine metadata associated with many innocents. The 
set of identi˜ers examined will certainly include all those associated with reverse targeting, 
explained below.
5 The White House, ﬁRemarks by the President on Review of Signals Intelligence,ﬂ Of˜ce of the 
Press Secretary, January 17, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-of˜ce/2014/01/17/
remarks-president-review-signals-intelligence.
6 See U.S. Code Title 50, Chapter 36, Subchapter VI, 
§ 
1881a, Procedures for targeting 
certain persons outside the United States other than United States persons.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USE CASES AND USE CASE CATEGORIES
 49course of an investigation. In any case, the alternate identi˜er technique is used to ˜nd new identi˜ers related to the one offered for triage that might 
be used by the same person.
3.3.1
 Use Case 4ŠExtension of the Scenario
In Use Case 4, when the IC resumes investigation of country X, 
the many identi˜ers obtained during the original investigation must be 
 
triaged for use in the new context.
3.3.2
 Use Case 5ŠThe Immediate Response After a Terrorist Incident
7In Use Case 5, a bombing suspect is identi˜ed, along with an associ
-ated email address. The triage process, which includes ˜nding alternate 
identi˜ers used by the suspect, is used to quickly ˜nd possible associates 
of the suspect and other information about these identi˜ers held in IC 
databases.
3.3.3
 How Metadata Are Used in Triage
Triage bene˜ts from all retained metadata, bulk or targeted, because 
it seeks information about an identi˜er that may not have previously 
been the subject of explicit IC attention. A timely response in Use Case 5 
requires historical information; initiating targeted collection using the rel
-evant email addresses obtained only after a suspect was identi˜ed would 
mean that only future information would be available, probably trickling 
in too slowly to be useful. Other communications channels used by the 
suspect in the past, such as a cell phone, might never be found using pres
-ent and future SIGINT data alone. 
If an identi˜er presented for triage has never been associated with a 
target, then past bulk data is probably more likely to ˜nd direct associ
-ates, and contact chaining or alternate identi˜er techniques may lead to 
additional associates. But the identi˜er may also be found in metadata 
targeted to a particular terrorist organization, even though the identi˜er 
was not previously known to be associated with the organization.
3.4
 CONCLUSION
The use case categories described aboveŠcontact chaining, alternate 
identi˜ers, and triageŠillustrate the growing importance in intelligence 
work of discovering and de˜ning networks. Indeed, doing so may be as 
7 
National Security Agency, presentation to the committee on August 28, 2014.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEimportant as examining content to know what members of the network 
are saying. It is a task where bulk collection is especially important. 
The use case categories above do not exhaust the use cases for SIGINT 
data, or even for telephony metadata. Many uses are ad hoc and do not 
˜t into neat categories. For example, to ˜nd whether any of a number of 
targets associated with a terrorist group have communicated with any of 
a number of explosives suppliers, a query listing the targets and the sup
-pliers can be constructed and applied against stored metadata. This is an 
iterative use of a simple query to determine whether one group contacted 
another.
The committee had hoped that analyzing use cases might suggest 
alternatives to bulk collection. But this path is limited, for two reasons: 
(1) the three categories do not cover all uses of SIGINT data and (2) the 
use cases show that both bulk and targeted collection are used. If the use 
case is focused in some way, targeted collection may provide enough 
data, especially if the focus has been under targeted surveillance for some 
time. For investigations that have little or no prior targeting history, bulk 
collection may be the only source of useful information. Thus it appears 
that it is the context of the investigation, rather than the technique for using 
collected metadata, that most in˚uences the value of bulk collection. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51
This chapter builds on the use cases presented in Chapter 3 to describe 
in more general terms some ways in which bulk collection is used by the 
Intelligence Community (IC) and some of the challenges associated with 
alternatives that use targeted collection.
4.1
 USES OF BULK COLLECTION
4.1.1
 Information about the Past
If past events become interesting in the present for understanding 
new events, such as the discovery of a nuclear weapons test by a pre
-viously non-nuclear nation, historical facts and the context they pro
-vide will be available for analysis only if they were previously collected. 
Sometimes review of a targeted collection (e.g., against leaders of the 
non-nuclear nation) may reveal information for a new purpose that was 
not in mind when the information had been collected (e.g., the intent of 
the nation™s leaders regarding nuclear weaponry). But sometimes useful 
information, such as the nexus of suppliers for the weapons technology, 
will be present only if previously there had been bulk collection. If it is 
possible to do targeted collection of similar events in the future, and they 
happen soon enough, then the past events might not be needed. If the past 
events are unique or if delay in obtaining results is unacceptable (perhaps 
because of press coverage or public demand), then the intelligence will 
not be as complete.
4Bulk Collection
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE4.1.2
 Tactical Intelligence
Chapter 3 presented several use cases illustrating the use of bulk 
collection for tactical intelligence. Tactical intelligence requires prompt 
attention to newly discovered targets and imminent threats. Collecting 
and saving information in bulk, without a speci˜c set of targets, is the 
only way to have past information about a party on hand when that 
party becomes one of interest. Sometimes that information will be avail
-able because of a targeted collection in which certain uses were not yet 
realized. But sometimes information becomes interesting only because of 
new events or information, in which case previous bulk collection may 
be the only possible source. Targeted collection provides data only on 
present and future actions of parties of interest at the time of collection, 
but not on their past activities. For example, bulk collection may allow 
the identi˜cation of hostile actors and their associates because they made 
mistakes as their activities began, perhaps because of ineffective tradecraft 
or other casual interactions.
Understanding the signi˜cance of past activities and their actors is a 
feature of all investigations, foreign and domestic. In contrast to domestic 
law enforcement, however, the world of intelligence analysis has many 
fewer tools available for investigation. In hostile foreign environments, 
personal interviews and observations and records review are much more 
limited. Accordingly, the role of bulk data as a way to understand the 
signi˜cance of past events is important, and the loss of this tool becomes 
more serious. Of course, bulk collection can also be useful in a domestic 
context. 
Some kinds of targeted collection are focused on topics rather than 
people, and some targeting based on topics will be more speci˜c than 
others. For example, a discriminant that collects all queries to Internet 
search engines that ask about ﬁsarinﬂ or ﬁpoison gasﬂ will collect informa
-tion about many people of no intelligence interest because only a handful 
of those making such searches will be of actual interest. However, other 
discriminants citing speci˜c military code names might yield information 
about fewer people who are of no intelligence interest.
4.1.3
 Strategic Intelligence
In strategic intelligence, information is gathered to build understand
-ing about a topic (e.g., climate change, migration patterns), an entity 
or area (e.g., region, nation, subnational group), or set of activities and 
sometimes takes the form of statistics or trends. Some examples include 
the following: 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BULK COLLECTION 53


makers. 









an army to help understand its morale, quality of training, or location. If 
the collection is only against the communications of army personnel, this 
might be considered a targeted collection. 









power, or agricultural data that is not reported accurately, or at all, by a 
government. 



into local sentiment about political trends that might lead to, for example, 
a government overthrow. For example, social networking communications 
during the Arab Spring reported unfolding events in real time.
Some of the data collected for strategic intelligence is analyzed using 
statistical techniques: rather than looking for speci˜c persons or groups, 
the goal is to monitor trends or patterns in communications that might 
lead to intelligence insights. This is one application of analytical tech
-niques that are known today as ﬁbig data analytics.ﬂ
4.1.4
 Reference Data
Bulk collection is used to acquire reference data that supports other 
signals intelligence (SIGINT) collection or analysis. For example, analyz
-ing communications data is greatly enhanced if analysts have ﬁtelephone 
directoriesﬂ for organizations of intelligence interestŠthat is, a list of 
who™s who in the organization and their communications identi˜ers.
Another role for bulk collection is to guide targeted collection; the IC 
refers to this role as ﬁSIGINT development.ﬂ For example, the decision 
about where to gather information can depend on knowing the target™s 
likely modes of communication. Because the target will not assist the 
collector in this decision, the collector will have to discover the likely 
modes of communicationŠperhaps by collecting information from all the 
modes of communication that the target might useŠto understand their 
signi˜cance for national security priorities. Similarly, the National Secu
-rity Agency (NSA) may have the resources to thoroughly monitor only 
one of several communication channels, and learning that some of them 
carry mostly communications of U.S. persons would make those chan
-nels less likely to be selected because they are not apt to be good sources 
of foreign intelligence. In addition to making NSA™s work more ef˜cient, 
such decisions may reduce collection of information about people who 
are not of interest.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE4.1.5
 Increasing the Likelihood That Needed Information Is Available
Does bulk collection overwhelm analysts with too much data, as is 
sometimes argued? The ﬁneedle in the haystackﬂ metaphor is relevant 
here. If the needle is not found in the smaller haystack, there are two 
approachesŠnot mutually exclusiveŠthat may result in success. One 
approach is to add more hay (because that additional material may con
-tain the needle of interest). A second approach is to do a smarter search 
(because a smarter search may turn up a needle that was in the haystack 
all along), such as using techniques described by Cortes et al.
1 Of course, if the needle is not in the smaller haystack, no amount of 
smarter searching will help. The use case category of alternate identi˜ers 
illuminates this problem. An analyst has determined that a new target is 
of interest, where ﬁnewﬂ means that this target has not previously been 
explicitly targeted for collection. With luck, previously targeted collec
-tion may provide information on alternate identi˜ers that the new target 
has used. 
Adding bulk data may help, because, by de˜nition, bulk collection 
may contain alternate identi˜ers. But there is still no guarantee, because 
the bulk data might have been collected in the wrong location or through 
the wrong communications channel, etc. The alternate identi˜ers might 
still be missed, even though they exist.
Is a smarter search more or less likely than the use of bulk data to 
result in identi˜cation of the needle? Without details of the speci˜c use 
case in question, this question cannot be answered in the abstract. In prac
-tice, analysts do not know if the haystack contains the needle without ana-lyzing all the dataŠso they cannot know when to stop adding more hay.
Thus, collecting more data is necessary but it is not necessarily suf
-˜cient. It is true that more data may burden the analyst, while increasing 
the risk of intruding on parties that are not of interest, and may still fail to 
provide the data of interest, even when such data exists. Still, if the nec
-essary data is not already available, collecting more is the only possible 
way to ˜nd the needle. This trade-off between too much data and ˜nding 
the necessary information is inevitable. Although it can sometimes be 
reduced, it cannot be eliminated.
4.2
 ALTERNATIVES TO BULK COLLECTION
Below are some alternatives to present-day bulk collection practices 
that might mitigate some of the privacy and civil liberties concerns that 
1 C. Cortes, D. Pregibon, and C. Volinsky, Computational methods for dynamic graphs, 
Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics
 12(3):950-970, 2003.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BULK COLLECTION 55such practices raise. Each also involves a variety of performance trade-offs 
when compared to bulk collection as currently handled.

Federating business record databases by allowing them to be held by 
telecommunications carriers and allowing authorized queries by the U.S. gov
-ernment. 
This ﬁfederated storageﬂ approach, which primarily applies to 
domestic collection, is discussed more fully in Chapter 5. By providing the 
U.S. government with certain access to business records stored by the tele
-phone companies, this alternative retains the principal bene˜t of bulk col
-lection by the U.S. governmentŠaccess to telephone call historyŠbut it is 
not as operationally effective as bulk collection. As detailed in Chapter 5, 
federation offers advantages for safeguarding privacy and enforcing poli
-cies. It also has disadvantages that include divergent incentives between 
the government and third parties, greater technical and organizational 
complexity, and potentially poorer performance. 

Bulk analysis.
 A class of alternatives extracts bulk SIGINT data from 
a source, applies ﬁanalysis algorithmsﬂ to all of it, saves the results of the 
algorithm, and then discards the SIGINT data. For example, one scheme 
might construct the contact network from call detail records (CDRs), store 
the entire network, and discard the CDRs. If a signi˜cant portion of the 
stored network pertains to nontargets, this technique should be viewed 
as a variant of bulk collection. Some proposals go even farther and use 
algorithms to fuse data from several different intelligence sources into 
an annotated ﬁhypergraph,ﬂ where the annotations retain information 
gleaned from intelligence data.
2 These schemes are arguably more intru
-sive on privacy and civil liberties than bulk collection of raw SIGINT, 
because they analyze and store a multi-source picture of many people 
who are of no intelligence value. Moreover, automatic analysis seems 
unlikely to replace human analysis, although it may be useful as an aug
-mentation to what humans do.

Fast near-real-time targeting.
 Targeted collection is most effective 
when targets can be added to the discriminant quickly as they are identi
-˜ed in previous communications. If a call from a target X to an unknown 
Y is rapidly followed by a call from Y, the second call may be signi˜cantŠ
possibly a message being passed on. If the ˜rst call quickly adds Y as a 
new target in the collection discriminant, the second call will be collected; 
otherwise, it will not, because both ends of the call are unknown identi
-2 J.C. Smart, Georgetown University, brie˜ng to the committee on September 9, 2014; 
see also AvesTerra Program, ﬁThe FOUR-Color Framework: A Reference Architecture for 
 
Extreme-Scale Information Sharing and Analysis: Overview,ﬂ V1.6, Georgetown University, 
October 2014, http://avesterra.georgetown.edu/sites/avesterra/˜les/4CF%20
 Overview%20%28V1.6%29.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE˜ers. Collection software could be designed to chain targets this way only 
if such chaining is pre-approved. While this approach may collect a few 
more rapidly unfolding scenarios, it does not provide the complete view 
of past events afforded by bulk collection.

Big data analytics.
 It may be possible to use big data analytics to 
help narrow collection, even if the results from such analytical tools are 
not suf˜ciently precise to identify individual targets. That is, the govern
-ment may be able to rely on the power of large private-sector databases, 
analytics, and machine learning to shape data collection constraints to 
data predicted to have high value. But even if the government collection 
becomes more narrowly targeted through the use of such analytic tools to 
develop the targeting, this is not necessarily a win for privacy. Depend
-ing on what aggregate data is used to determine the targeted govern
-ment collection, use of such techniques may well raise privacy concerns. 
There will also be concerns that the methods used for targeting are akin 
to socially unacceptable pro˜ling (e.g., targeting purchases of camping 
goods, males, ages 15 to 30). Thus, the use of big data analytics to provide 
better targeting may not be acceptable from a policy point of view, even if 
such techniques were to ultimately result in a more narrow government 
collection.

Cascaded ˜ltering.
 Some of these methods may bene˜t from the use 
of cascaded ˜ltering. One bene˜t of this approach is that it allows one 
to reduce the computing burden by ˜rst applying cheap tests, followed 
by more expensive ˜lters only if earlier ˜lters warrant. For example, if 
metadata indicates a civilian telephone call to a military unit under sur
-veillance, speech recognition and subsequent semantic analysis might be 
applied to the voice signal, resulting in an ultimate collection decision. 
Richer targeting may require enhancing the ability of collection hardware 
and software to apply complex discriminants to real-time signals feeds. 
Another bene˜t is that it will tend to reduce the amount of data that ends 
up being collected through fast and early ˜ltering.
4.3
 CONCLUSION
There is no doubt that bulk collection of SIGINT leaves many uncom
-fortable. Various courts have indeed questioned whether such collection 
is constitutional. This discomfort arises for many reasons. Some ˜nd the 
idea that the U.S. government collects vast amounts of communications 
signals information about unsuspected U.S. persons abhorrent to the 
very notion of democracy, while others object to this decision being made 
under the cover of secrecy. 
This chapter has explored uses of bulk collection and technical alter
-natives the committee uncovered during its work that might mitigate 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BULK COLLECTION 57some of the privacy and civil liberties concerns of that collection. None 
of these alternatives changes a fundamental point: A key value of bulk 
collection is its record of past SIGINT that may be relevant to subsequent 
investigations. If past events become interesting in the present because of 
new circumstancesŠsuch as the identi˜cation of a new target, indications 
that a nonnuclear nation is now pursuing the development of nuclear 
weapons, discovery that an individual is a terrorist, or emergence of new 
intelligence-gathering prioritiesŠhistorical events and the data they pro
-vide will be available for analysis only if they were previously collected.
Conclusion 1. There is no software technique that will fully substi
-tute for bulk collection where it is relied on to answer queries about 
the past after new targets become known.
This conclusion does not mean that all current bulk collection must 
continue. What it does mean is that a choice to eliminate all forms of bulk 
collection would have costs in intelligence capabilities. The analysis in this 
report provides a partial basis from which to make such policy choices.
Other groups, such as the President™s Review Group on Intelligence 
and Communications Technologies and the Privacy and Civil Liberties 
Oversight Board have said that bulk collection of telephone metadata is 
not valuable enough to justify the loss in privacy.
3 This is a policy judg
-ment, which is not in con˚ict with the committee™s conclusion that there 
are no technical alternatives that can accomplish the same functions as 
bulk collection and serve as a complete substitute for it; there is no tech
-nological magic.
The committee was not asked to and did not consider whether the 
loss of effectiveness from reducing bulk collection would be too great, 
or whether the potential gain in privacy from adopting an alternative is 
worth the potential loss of intelligence information. Nor was it able to 
identify broad categories of use where substitution of alternatives might 
be possible or detect metrics that would inform such decisions. The Of˜ce 
of the Director of National Intelligence may wish to study these questions 
further.
Data retained from targeted SIGINT collection might be a partial 
substitute if the needed information was in fact collected. Bulk data held 
by other parties might substitute to some extent, but this relies on those 
3 President™s Review Group on Intelligence and Communications Technologies, ﬁ
 
Liberty 
and Security in a Changing World,ﬂ http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/
docs/2013-12-12_rg_˜nal_report.pdf, and Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, 
Report 
on the Telephone Records Program Conducted under Section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act and on the 
Operations of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
, January 23, 2014, http://www.pclob.
gov/SiteAssets/Pages/default/PCLOB-Report-on-the-Telephone-Records-Program.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEparties retaining the information until it is needed, as well as the ability of 
intelligence agencies to collect or access it in an ef˜cient and timely fash
-ion. Other intelligence sources and methods might also be able to supply 
some of the lost information, but the committee was not charged to and 
did not investigate the full range of alternatives that intelligence agen
-cies could bring to bear. Note that all of these alternatives may introduce 
distinct privacy and civil liberties concerns.
Conclusion 1.1. Other sources of information might provide a par
-tial substitute for bulk collection in some circumstances.
Because bulk collection cannot for practical reasons be truly compre
-hensive, it is itself inherently selective and unable to capture 
all
 relevant 
history. As a result, at least in some cases, it may be possible to develop 
techniques that would improve targeted collection to the point where it 
provides a viable substitute for bulk collection. Although such approaches 
might reduce the extent of collection against persons other than targets 
of interest, they might also introduce new privacy and civil liberties con
-cerns about how such pro˜les are developed and used.
Rapidly updating discriminants of ongoing collections to include 
new targets as they are discovered will enable the collection of data 
that would otherwise be lost. If targeted collection can be done quickly 
and well enough, then there may be cases where information about past 
events becomes less important. But such an approach is not a substitute if 
the past events were unique or if the delay incurred in collecting the new 
information is unacceptable (because the threat is imminent or perhaps 
because of press or public demand for instant results).
Conclusion 1.2. New approaches to targeting might improve the 
relevance of the collected information to future use and would rely 
on capabilities such as creating and using pro˜les of potentially 
relevant targets, possibly by using other sources of information.
Chapter 6 describes some possibilities. Chapter 5 discusses technolo
-gies that can reduce risk and improve oversight and transparency. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.59
5.1
 WHY IT IS IMPORTANT TO CONTROL USAGE
Many people are concerned about how the large and rapidly grow
-ing amount of private data that exists online is handled, and whether 
privacy and civil liberties are properly protected. For signals intelligence 
(SIGINT), these concerns increase because the data is collected by the 
government. The disclosures by Edward Snowden have further increased 
concerns about the privacy of information that the National Security 
Agency (NSA) collects. 
This chapter describes a number of ways to implement controls on 
the use of collected information. NSA is already using some of them, as the 
committee learned when the agency described in brie˜ngs how it complies 
with the legal authorities that govern its activities. NSA may be using 
other controls that the committee did not hear about, but there may also be 
opportunities to make compliance with the rules both more ef˜cient and 
more transparent without increasing the compliance burden on analysts.
In understanding the security of any computer system, it is important 
to be clear about the ﬁthreat model,ﬂ that is, the set of threats that the 
system must be defended against. In the context of bulk collection, there 
are three broad classes of threats:








-criminals, foreign intelligence agencies;

















5Controlling Usage of Collected Data
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEThe last two are the main threats for most people concerned about 
privacy and civil liberties. Hence, the emphasis of this report is on con
-trols, oversight, and transparency, which are the principal ways to address 
these threats.
5.2
 CONTROLLING USAGE
Chapter 4 states the committee™s conclusion that refraining entirely 
from bulk collection will reduce the nation™s intelligence capability and 
that there is no kind of targeted collection that can fully substitute for all 
of today™s bulk collection. However, the committee believes that control
-ling the 
usage
 of data collected in bulk (and indeed all data) is another 
way to protect the privacy of people who are not targets (see Figure 5.1).
Controls on usage can help reduce the con˚icts between collection and 
privacy. There are two ways to control usage: manually and automatically. 
NSA automates some of its controls and plans additional 
 automation. 
Despite rigorous auditing and oversight processes, however, it is hard 
to convince outside parties of their strength because necessary secrecy 
prevents them from observing the controls in action, and because popular 
descriptions of the controls are imprecise and sometimes wrong.
1 Exam
-ples of usage controls in place today are minimization (Section 1.4.1) and 
restricting queries to targets with reasonable and articulable suspicion 
(Section 1.4.3).
Technical means can 
isolate collected data and restrict
 queries that 
analysts can make, and the way these means work can be made public 
without revealing sources and methods. 
This is similar to the well-established doctrine in cryptography
2 that 
the security of the system should depend only on keeping the crypto
-graphic 
key
 secret, not on keeping the cryptographic 
algorithm
 secret. The 
main reason for this is that the algorithm exists in many more places than 
the keyŠwith every sender or receiver of messages that uses the crypto
-systemŠso it is much harder to keep the algorithm secret and to change 
it if it is compromised. In contrast, a key is usually used only between a 
single sender and receiver, or at most a few of them, and only for a limited 
time, so it is much easier to keep it secret and to change it if it is compro
-mised. In addition, a public algorithm may be more secure because many 
people can scrutinize it for weaknesses.
1 See, for example, this newspaper account of President Obama™s description of NSA 
practices: http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/obamas-
 restrictions-
on-nsa-surveillance-rely-on-narrow-de˜nition-of-spying/2014/01/17/2478cc02-7fcb-11e3-
93c1-0e888170b723_story.html, 
Washington Post
, January 17, 2014.
2 First formulated by Kerckhoff in 1883. See Fabien Peticolas, 
electronic version and English 
translation of ﬁLa cryptographie militaire.ﬂ
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTROLLING USAGE OF COLLECTED DATA
 61ExtractFilterDiscriminantQueryCollectionSignalStoreAnalyzeDisseminateFigure 5-1FIGURE 5.1
 Focus of controls on usage.
In the same way, the speci˜cs of actual use cases would be kept secret 
while the rules and the usage controls that enforce them are made public. 
This transparency makes the control of usage more credible. 
Implementing usage controls in technology also forces those specify
-ing the rules to be much more explicit than if they are providing instruc
-tions for human analysts to follow. Today, many of the descriptions for 
what is and is not allowed are in certain ways imprecise and ambiguous. 
Such ambiguities can lead to confusion and differing interpretations of 
the same rule. Furthermore, automatic controls may reduce the need for 
human labor implementing manual controls. Thus, technology may make 
the control more reliable and economical as well as more transparent. 
It is impossible, however, for technical means to 
guarantee
 that infor
-mation is not misused, because someone with properly authorized access 
can always misuse the information they obtain. This is like the ﬁanalog 
holeﬂ in digital media; there are many ways to prevent digital copying, 
but when a human views or hears information, that information can be 
copied with a camera or sound recorder. Similarly, when an analyst sees 
information, he or she can misuse it. Thus misuse can only be 
deterred
 by 
the threat of punishment. Deterrence requires technical capabilities to 
detect access, to identify the (authorized) accessing party, and to audit 
records of access to spot suspicious patterns of access.
3 In addition, both 
3 Note that, to date, the only allegations that information collected in bulk has been used 
for an unauthorized purpose was the so-called ﬁLOVINTﬂ set of incidents in which some 
NSA analysts inappropriately used this data to track the activities of signi˜cant others. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEmanual and automatic controls are primarily aimed at analysts and others 
not in positions of authority. Detecting bad behavior by people in posi
-tions of authority needs multiple independent audit paths and oversight. 
Lastly, it may be true that manual controls can be overridden more 
easily than automatic controls, because a technical change is usually 
more dif˜cult than a procedural change. Changes are sometimes neces
-sary to ˜x problems that arise, but whether it is good or bad for changes 
to be easily made is a policy judgment.
Manual and automatic methods can control usage in many ways, 
including the following:










approved in some way (e.g., analysts may target only those parties for 
which they have reasonable and articulable suspicion of involvement 
with terrorism); 




















algorithms that look for patterns, or various statistical techniques); and









disclosure, as described below.
The bulk of this chapter discusses how to control queries that analysts 
make against collected data. Controlling the use of such a large amount 
of data is critical, which is why the committee has emphasized it. When 
the data are queried, rules are applied about what uses of collected data 
are allowed. If a policy decision is made to continue bulk collection, pro
-tection of privacy and civil liberties will necessarily rely on these rules. 
Once the results of a query are delivered to an analyst, other means 
must be used to control proper use of the data between queries and dis
-seminated intelligence reports. These other means must be matched to 
what analysts actually do and to the tools they use. This cannot be done 
in the same way that queries on the collection database are controlled, for 
several reasons:
1.
 To do their jobs, analysts need ˚exibility to use the query results in 
many ways, such as combining them with other data or processing them 
with other programs, some perhaps written speci˜cally for the current 
These involved very few incidents (around a dozen). A letter from NSA to Senator Charles 
 
Grassley on September 11, 2013, details these incidents (see https://www.nsa.gov/
 
public_
info/press_room/2013/grassley_letter.pdf). According to testimony to the committee on 
 
August 23, 2014, by NSA Director of Compliance, the activities were uncovered through 
internal investigations.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTROLLING USAGE OF COLLECTED DATA
 63purpose. These uses are much less standardized than the collection data
-base and the ways of querying it, and it is not practical to control them in 
detail. The reason is that in order to construct software that tracks in detail 
the way that the inputs of a program affect its outputs, it is ˜rst necessary 
to formalize how the program works. This is usually much more dif˜cult 
than writing the program in the ˜rst place. 
2.
 Analysts share their work in progress with other analysts, so that 
even if the queries made by a single analyst return only 50 items, the 
 
queries made by 200 analysts may return 10,000 items altogether, and a 
single analyst or systems administrator may end up with all of these items.3.
 In some cases, analysts import query results into commercial appli
-cations such as a spreadsheet like Excel or a statistical analysis system 
like SAS/STAT. It is not practical to modify these applications to track the 
way that their inputs affect their outputs, and it is impractical for the IC 
to develop its own substitutes.
4.
 Analysts do their work and store their data on workstations and 
servers that run commercial off-the-shelf operating systems because it is 
neither economical nor ef˜cient for the IC to build its own operating sys
-tems and the applications. Furthermore, there are many versions of these 
systems in use at any given time, as is normal for any large organization. 
It is not practical to use these systems for ˜ne-grained control of data.
It would be naive for the committee to claim that it understands what 
happens today, and presumptuous to pretend to design an ideal system 
for NSA™s use. Furthermore, it is not enough to understand the normal 
information ˚ow; possible changes, mistakes, and errors also need to be 
dealt with. For instance, something might change that would make yester
-day™s legitimate query unacceptable today. A target might have become 
a non-target, or an error might have been found in the rules governing 
queries.
It is possible, however, to have very coarse-grained controls on the 
data held by analysts, controls that implement the existing U.S. govern
-ment information classi˜cation system. Indeed, the IC has supported 
research on such controls since the 1970s, under the rubric of ﬁmulti-level 
security.ﬂ More recent academic work calls it ﬁinformation ˚ow control.ﬂ 
It is quite well understood in theory, and several systems have been built 
that enforce the rules for handling classi˜ed data. Unfortunately, attempts 
to use these systems in practice have been unsuccessful, and almost none 
are deployed. Information ˚ow control cannot do the kind of query-
speci˜c control that is described in this chapter; instead, it tends to push 
computed outputs to the highest level of classi˜cation, which is not useful 
in practice. However, it is the best technique known at present. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE5.3
 MANUAL CONTROLS
To ensure compliance with the rules laid down by the legal authori
-ties under which it operates, NSA has a system of internal auditing and 
oversight, combining automated and redundant human components. 
The system covers all parts of the foreign intelligence collection system: 
 
storage, querying, analysis, and dissemination.
Technology is used to some extent to implement the legal framework 
for foreign intelligence information, in the form of access controls, secure 
databases, and an automatically generated audit trail. 
There is also extensive human review of all actions, both internal 
and external. NSA™s compliance program is supported by more than 300 
personnel across the agency, which includes the Of˜ce of the Director of 
Compliance (established in 2009).
4 Internal oversight is provided by the 
NSA™s Of˜ce of Inspector General and the Of˜ce of General Counsel. NSA 
also has a Civil Liberties and Privacy Of˜ce, ˜rst established in January 
2014 shortly after the President™s speech on signals intelligence.
5 The other 
major staff organizations that have responsibility for some facets of civil 
liberties and privacy responsibilities are the Of˜ce of the Director of Com
-pliance, the Authorities Integration Group, and the Associate Director for 
Policy and Records. The Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence 
(ODNI) has its own Civil Liberties and Privacy Of˜ce,
6 and the ODNI 
Of˜ce of General Counsel and the Department of Defense Of˜ce of Gen
-eral Council have responsibility for oversight as well.
Continuing external oversight is provided by the Department of Jus
-tice, congressional oversight committees, and the Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act (FISA) court. The Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight 
Board (PCLOB)
7 and the Intelligence Oversight Board of the President™s 
Intelligence Advisory Board have also examined NSA operations from 
4 Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence, 
DNI Clapper Declassi˜es Intelli-gence Community Documents Regarding Collection Under Section 501 of the Foreign Intel
-ligence Surveillance Act (FISA), 2014, http://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/
press-releases/191-press-releases-2013/927-draft-document.
5 National Security Agency Central Security Service, 
NSA Announces New Civil Liberties 
and Privacy Of˜cer, January 29, 2014, https://www.nsa.gov/public_info/press_room/2014/
civil_liberties_privacy_of˜cer.shtml.
6 See Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence, Civil Liberties and Privacy Of˜ce, ﬁWho 
We Are,ﬂ http://www.dni.gov/index.php/about/organization/civil-liberties-
 privacy-of˜ce-
who-we-are, accessed January 16, 2015.
7 Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, 
Report on the Telephone Records Program 
Conducted under Section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act and on the Operations of the Foreign Intel
-ligence Surveillance Court
, January 23, 2014, available at http://www.pclob.gov/library/215-
Report_on_the_Telephone_Records_Program.pdf; and Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight 
Board, 
Report on the Surveillance Program Operated Pursuant to Section 702 of the Foreign Intel
-ligence Surveillance Act
, July 2, 2014, http://www.pclob.gov/library/702-Report.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTROLLING USAGE OF COLLECTED DATA
 65a privacy and civil liberties standpoint. None has found any deliberate 
attempts to circumvent or defeat these procedures, although there have 
been documented incidents of error.
 Purely automatic control of usage would mean that the rules would 
be enforced automatically using published mechanisms. Then people 
outside the IC concerned about privacy and civil liberties would not have 
to trust that the IC has adequate procedures and follows them, which 
many of them are reluctant to do. Such purity is not possible, however; 
it is thus necessary to independently audit the IC™s procedures to some 
extent. The impractical alternative is to make every step on the path from 
raw data to query results secure from any possible tampering; this would 
be a rigid and unworkable system. Some manual controls are necessary 
to ensure that the automatic controls are actually imposed and that they 
are con˜gured according to the rules, and to decide cases that are too 
complex to be automated.
Thus, the goal of reassuring the public by the exclusive use of trans
-parent automatic controls is elusive. Those who do not trust the power 
of government, both its elected of˜cials and the IC, will argue that its 
technical expertise could be misused to override automatic controls, and 
no amount of manual or automatic oversight is likely to reassure them. In 
short, perfect controls are impossible. The goal should be to balance con
-trols against practicality, recognizing that some amount of risk, tempered 
by trust in those who manage the system, will always remain.
5.4
 AUTOMATIC CONTROLS
A technical system for controlling usage of bulk data has three parts: 
isolating
 the bulk data so that it can only be accessed in speci˜c ways, 
restricting
 the queries that can be made against it, and 
auditing
 the queries 
that have been done. All three parts are equally important, although iso
-lation is most fully developed and hence has the fullest description, and 
auditing is the least developed. This chapter gives brief descriptions of 
each of these parts. It emphasizes the architecture of the possible systems, 
giving only a sketch of the technical details; consult the references for the 
full story. 
Note that any technical mechanism must be tested under realistic 
conditions to establish con˜dence that it actually works. This is especially 
important for mechanisms that are intended to handle rare events, like the 
ones described here. The only practical way to do this is to deliberately 
inject disallowed queries into the running system and verify that they are 
detected and handled correctly.
Some of the methods described here are in widespread use commer
-cially, and perhaps within NSA. Others have been demonstrated in the 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCElaboratory at a moderate scale. Except for full homomorphic encryption, 
it should be possible to deploy any of them at scale within the IC in the 
next 5 years. However, the committee is not recommending deployment 
of any of them. Whether more powerful automatic controls should be 
deployed is a policy question. The answer depends both on the cost to the 
IC in dollars and in reduced capability, and on how important it is to have 
better controls. The committee notes that, in some cases, better technology 
could reduce the cost of existing controls.
5.4.1
 Isolation
Isolating bulk data is one technical method for controlling usage. Iso
-lation also makes it easy to log all the queries against it and their results, 
which is essential for the auditing discussed in Section 5.4.3. Figure 5.2 
shows the elements of this method, which is closely related to the stan
-dard access control method used in cybersecurity. The bulk data is cut off 
from the outside world by an isolation boundary. The only way to cross 
this boundary is to submit a query to the guard, which is responsible for 
enforcing the policy that says what queries and results are allowed. The 
guard logs all queries and results for later auditing, and the audit log itself 
is isolated to protect it from tampering. The isolated domain is hosted by 
some mechanism that guarantees the isolation; in some sense it runs on 
the host, and its security therefore depends on the host operating cor
-rectly. There are many such mechanisms: airgaps, operating systems, etc.; 
some of them are discussed below. In all cases, the host is implementing 
the isolation; if it does not work correctly, the bulk data will not be pro
-AnalystsControlQueryResultGuardAuditlogBulk dataPolicyPolicyHost (airgap, hardware, virtual machinemonitor, operating system, etc.)IsolationFigure 5-2 and S-2FIGURE 5.2
 Isolating bulk data.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTROLLING USAGE OF COLLECTED DATA
 67tected. For example, if an operating system is corrupted by malware, it 
will not properly isolate the application processes that it hosts.
Note that isolation depends on the guard as well as the host. If the 
guard lets through inputs that it should have blocked, the bulk data will 
not be properly protected. See Section 5.4.1.3.
The critical points in this architecture are the bulk data processing 
itself, the guard, and the host that implements the isolation boundary. 
These constitute the trusted computing base (TCB), the parts of the system 
that must work correctly for the system to be trustworthy. The smaller and 
simpler they are, the more likely they are to be correct, making it easier 
for manual review and automated tools to check for mistakes. 
Bulk data processing is trusted to correctly implement a query, rather 
than return something else that might violate the policy. Again, if the TCB 
is simple, it is easier to understand and more likely to work. There are 
ways to implement the system so that the most complicated parts are kept 
outside the TCB; they are described below. 
The guard is critical, no matter how the isolation is done; it is trusted 
to correctly enforce the policy and block malformed inputs. The latter is 
dif˜cult if the inputs are too complicated for the guard to fully under
-stand. Simple policies and simple inputs make it much more likely that 
the guard will work correctly. With simple inputs, the guard can concen
-trate on the job of making sure that all the queries it passes are allowed by 
the policy. With complicated inputs, it is much easier to hide some piece 
of malware that is not really a query at all. A familiar example of this is 
executable malware included in an email message. A policy that says to 
only accept email from friends is not enough, because friends might be 
infected themselves. The guard needs to block all executable content that 
has not been properly vetted.
Traditionally in computer security, the guard implements an 
access 
control
 policy that, as shown in Figure 5.2, would specify which analysts 
are allowed to access which items of bulk data, by attaching to each 
data item some description of the analysts authorized to access it. NSA 
has reported that its analysts use some variant of this scheme within a 
private cloud.
8 Although it is a useful line of defense, this mechanism 
cannot express more complex policies such as, ﬁReport all contacts that 
are one hop away from this target and were in Afghanistan during the 
communication.ﬂ
8 Dirk A.D. Smith, ﬁExclusive: Inside the NSA™s private cloud,ﬂ 
Network World
, Septem
-ber 29, 2014, http://www.networkworld.com/article/2687084/security0/exclusive-inside-
the-nsa-s-private-cloud.html. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE5.4.1.1
 Federation of Nongovernment Parties
A partly technical approach to isolating bulk data is 
federation
: when 
possible, leaving the data in the hands of multiple parties that are not 
part of the government; these might be the parties that acquire the data 
in the ˜rst place, such as telephone companies or other communication 
service providers, or they might be independent third parties. Querying 
the database then requires querying all the relevant parties and combin
-ing the results, as shown in Figure 5.3. In general, it cannot be done in 
 
parallel, and it might require repeated queries to the same party. For 
example, when tracing out a chain of communication in which different 
links come from different providers, each link may require a separate 
query. Furthermore, some kinds of preprocessing of the data may be 
much less effective, for example, working out all the tightly knit cliques 
of people who communicate with each other a lot, so that it is possible to 
quickly ˜nd all the cliques that an individual belongs to.
Federation has clear advantages for safeguarding privacy and enforc
-ing policies: 










may have no incentive to break the rules, which would help 
 reassure those 
who are concerned that NSA may have incentives to break the rules.
9









Federation also has clear drawbacks for intelligence: 











paid; indeed, their customers may object to such cooperation.











not, it may introduce privacy risks.











because it is being asked to do things that are not part of its normal busi
-ness. This may make it dif˜cult to get good results. Note that federation 
is much more dif˜cult to implement than the cloning of call detail records 
that is the current practice under FISA Section 215.











-tralized ones, both because communicating across organizational bound
-aries is slow and because database-wide optimizations may be impos
-sible, as described above.
9 This is the process used in wiretap investigations authorized by the 1986 Pen Register 
Act (Title III of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act).
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTROLLING USAGE OF COLLECTED DATA
 69FIGURE 5.3
 Federation of non-government parties.
In addition, federation makes the collected data both more and less 
secure. It is more secure because breaking into one party exposes only 
some of the data. It is less secure because some of the federated data is 
exposed if the adversary breaks into any one of the parties.
5.4.1.2
 Hosts and Isolation Boundaries
The choice of hosts depends on two things: the acceptable cost of 
isolation (both capital cost and reduced performance) and the threats it 
must defend against. More severe threats incur a higher cost, of course, 
but depend less on manual controls. There are many possible implemen
-tations of isolation boundaries with different security strengths and weak
-nesses and different costs. Here are a few examples: 

Airgap.
 The most secure and most expensive isolation boundary is 
an airgap: separate physical machines, or networks of physical machines, 
inside and outside the isolation boundary that is breached only by a care
-fully controlled network connection. The airgap is costly, because there 
are two networks of machines to buy and maintain, and the connection 
between them may be slow. The IC has traditionally used airgaps to 
isolate classi˜ed from unclassi˜ed systems; perhaps they are also using 
airgaps to isolate collected data from analysts. Note that although an air
-AnalystsAggregatorQueryResultGuardAuditlogBulk dataPolicyGuardAuditlogBulk dataPolicyGuardAuditlogBulk dataPolicyFigure 5-3Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEgap is a very good isolation boundary, the isolation also depends on the 
guard that is supposed to check all inputs, as discussed below.
10

Hypervisor.
 A cheaper host is a hypervisor that implements separate 
virtual machines instead of separate physical ones. Currently, the hyper
-visor is part of the TCB, and, unfortunately, commercial hypervisors are 
rather complicated because their main selling point is performance rather 
than security. But this is cheaper than the airgap because there is only one 
physical machine, and the bandwidth of communication between the 
virtual machines can be close to the full memory bandwidth. There are 
many variations on the hypervisor idea, with different costs and security 
considerations.
11
Enclaves.
 In between separate physical machines and separate vir
-tual machines is a fairly new way of doing isolation, called an 
enclave
 in 
the implementation, developed by Intel. This is like a virtual machine, 
but its isolation is provided directly by the central processing unit (CPU). 
Because this mechanism is tightly integrated into the CPU and the mem
-ory system, it can provide good performance much more simply than a 
hypervisor.
12
Language virtual machines.
 Programs written in languages intended 
for web pages, such as Java and JavaScript, are usually executed inside 
isolation boundaries with names like Java Virtual Machine. In this case, 
the main purpose of the isolation is to protect the rest of the system from 
the untrusted web program rather than the other way around.
5.4.1.3
 The Guard
If the isolation mechanism is sound, the guard is the main weak point; 
if the guard makes the wrong decisions about what to allow through, the 
system inside the isolation boundary can be completely compromised, 
and this has happened many times in practice with every kind of iso
-lation boundary, including airgaps. For example, executable malware 
included in an email message can infect an isolated system. The same 
thing can happen with a USB ˚ash drive, which can contain malware that 
is executed automatically. The guard needs to block all executable content 
that has not been properly vetted. As with every aspect of security, the 
10 Although a good example of an isolation technique, technology alternatives listed in this 
subsection can be engineered to provide adequate isolation for this application.
11 M. Pearce, S. Zeadally, and R. Hunt, Virtualization: Issues, security threats, and solu
-tions, 
ACM Computing Surveys
 45(2), Article No. 17, 2013. 
12
 F. McKeen, I. Alexandrovich, A. Berenzon, C. Rozas, H. Sha˜, V. Shanbhogue, and 
U. Savagaonkar, Innovative instructions and software model for isolated execution, in 
Pro
-ceedings of the Second International Workshop on
 Hardware and Architectural Support for Security 
and Privacy
, Association of Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y., 2013. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTROLLING USAGE OF COLLECTED DATA
 71only practical approach today is to keep both the speci˜cation of what the 
guard has to do and the code that does it as simple as possible.
If each item of bulk data is tagged with access control information 
that speci˜es which analysts are allowed to see it, the job of the guard 
is easier. The Apache Accumulo open-source database, for example, has 
this feature; it was originally developed by NSA, which transferred it 
to Apache, an organization that develops open-source software for the 
Internet. This kind of tagging is the standard way of doing access control 
in computer security; it is helpful for controlling usage of collected data, 
but not suf˜cient for enforcing a rule such as ﬁtrace contacts for at most 
two hops,ﬂ which restricts the algorithm that processes the data rather 
than access to the data itself.
5.4.1.4
 Bulk Data Processing
In general, there are a lot of bulk data, so that simply storing the 
bits securely and reliably is complex, and the data are processed by a 
general-purpose database system that is even more complex, usually tens 
of millions of lines of code. Much of this code might not be needed for 
a particular application, but it is likely to be impractical to separate the 
parts that are needed from the rest. Thus, it is highly desirable to keep 
as much of this storage and processing out of the TCB, which should be 
small and simple.
There has been a lot of work on isolation to protect a cloud client from 
its cloud service provider, because there is a big market for cloud comput
-ing, and many customers care about the security of their data and do not 
want to trust the service provider. This is the most important application 
for the enclaves described above. Figure 5.4 shows another way for a 
client to store and process data in the cloud without trusting the cloud 
provider. The idea is to do everything in the cloud in encrypted form, so 
that the result appears in encrypted form as well. Only the client holds the 
key, so only the client can see anything about the data or the result except 
its size, and perhaps something about the shape of the query. This gives 
no guarantee that the result is correct or that it reads only the data actually 
needed for the query, but it does guarantee that only the client sees any 
data, and since the client is entitled to see all the data, the client™s secrecy 
is maintained. It is not obvious how to actually implement this scheme, 
but in some cases it is possible, and ways to do it are explained below.
Unfortunately, although the architecture shown in Figure 5.4 serves 
the needs of the cloud client, it is not enough for automatic control of 
access to bulk data. Unlike the cloud client, the analyst is not entitled to 
see all of the data. How can the guard enforce the policy about what the 
analyst is allowed to see? This takes a 
proof
, or perhaps some convincing 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEFIGURE 5.4
 Smaller trusted computing base by processing encrypted data for a 
client.
evidence, provided by the untrusted cloud side of the picture, that the 
result is correct or at least that it does not reveal any 
more
 data than 
the query demands. Figure 5.5 illustrates this approach; the parts that are 
unchanged from Figure 5.2 are dimmed. 
What would such a proof look like? That depends on the query. For 
example, if the query is ﬁReturn all the endpoints of communications with 
this target,ﬂ a proof would be a list of all the database entries that yielded 
the result; recall that these are all encrypted, so the untrusted side can
-not make them up. If the target is X, and each database entry represents 
a call detail record with a triple <from, to, time>, verifying the proof 
means checking that every result endpoint Y is in an entry <X, Y, time> 
or <Y, X, time>. Note that this does not prove that the result is correct, but 
it does prove that no extra information is disclosed. For another example, 
see the next section.
5.4.1.5
 Encrypted Data at Rest
The simplest example of the idea in Figure 5.5 uses the untrusted side 
only to store data, not to do any computing on it, as shown in Figure 5.6 
(where the unchanging left side of the ˜gure has been cut off). This means 
that each data block is encrypted before being handed over to untrusted 
storage by the collection system and decrypted when it is read back. Each 
Clientdata/queryDecryptEncryptData/QueryEncrypted
bulk dataResultClientCloudUntrustedprocessingFigure 5-4Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTROLLING USAGE OF COLLECTED DATA
 73AnalystsQueryResultGuardAuditlogTrustedprocessingVerify/DecryptPolicyHost (airgap, hardware, virtual machinemonitor, operating system, etc.)AditgPolicypgy)QueryEncryptedbulk dataResult+ proofTrustedComputing BaseConventionalNSA systemsConventionalprocessingFigure 5-5Bulk dataprocessingVerify/
DecryptReadblockEncrypted
bulk dataData
+ MACTrusted
Computing Base
Untrusted
Storage
Figure 5-6
FIGURE 5.5
 Smaller trusted computing base by verifying untrusted processing 
of a query.
FIGURE 5.6
 Smaller trusted computing base by encrypting bulk data at rest.
data block also has a message authentication code (MAC), a well-known 
cryptographic mechanism that the trusted veri˜er can use to check that the 
encrypted data it reads back is indeed the same data that it wrote earlier. 
The MAC serves as the proof that the untrusted storage is returning the 
correct result of the read. This scheme has been widely implemented, and 
it removes the storage hardware from the TCB. It also removes a lot of soft
-ware, because reliably and ef˜ciently storing large amounts of data is com
-plex, and it takes millions of lines of code to deal with this complexity.
13
 13 Ken Beer and Ryan Holland, ﬁSecuring Data at Rest with Encryption,ﬂ Amazon Web Ser
-vices white paper, November 2013, http://media.amazonwebservices.com/AWS_
 Securing_Data_at_Rest_with_Encryption.pdf.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE5.4.1.6
 Simulating Homomorphic Cryptography
A fancy form of cryptography called homomorphic encryption 
makes it possible to do 
all
 the processing on encrypted data, producing 
an encrypted result without exposing any data in the clear.
14
 It is quite 
surprising that this works at all, but it turns out there are theorems show
-ing that any computation can be done in this way. Doing the untrusted 
processing with homomorphic encryption provides a complete imple
-mentation of Figure 5.4. Unfortunately, the best known ways of doing it, 
in general, are at least a million times too slow to be practical.
For queries that only need to test whether two values are equal, 
simple deterministic encryption is suf˜cient. Perfect encryption would 
reveal nothing at all about the data values except their approximate size. 
Deterministic encryption reveals only which values are equal. For queries 
that need to test whether one value is less than another, order preserving 
encryption is suf˜cient. It is more expensive and of course reveals the 
relative order of the values. Many practical queries fall into one of these 
categories, and it is not too hard to modify an existing database system 
to make these queries work entirely on encrypted data.
15
 Work using an 
encrypted search may yield useful results in the future; see Section 6.3.1.
The idea behind homomorphic encryption is that any basic compu
-tation on encrypted data, such as adding two numbers, comparing two 
strings for equality, or sorting a list of items, can be done (slowly) directly 
on the encrypted data. A practical alternative is to add a small compo
-nent to the TCB that decrypts the data, does the operation, and encrypts 
the result, as shown in Figure 5.7; compare this with Figure 5.5. Because 
most of the basic operations are simple, this component can be small 
and simple. Indeed, for many applications, it can be simple enough to be 
implemented in special purpose hardware using ˜eld programmable gate 
arrays, which is both fast and dif˜cult to infect with malware.
16
 14
 Craig Gentry, Computing arbitrary functions of encrypted data, 
Communications of the 
ACM
 53(3):97-105, 2010. 
15
 R.A. Popa, C.M.S. Red˜eld, N. Zeldovich, and H. Balakrishnan, CryptDB: Protecting 
con˜dentiality with encrypted query processing, in 
Proceedings of the Twenty-Third ACM 
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, Association of Computing Machinery, New York, 
N.Y., 2011. 
16 A.A. Arasu, S. Blanas, K. Eguro, M. Joglekar, R. Kaushik, D. Kossmann, R. Ramamurthy, 
P. Upadhyaya, and R. Venkatesan, Secure database-as-a-service with Cipherbase, in 
Proceed
-ings of the 2013 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data
, Association of 
Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y., 2013. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTROLLING USAGE OF COLLECTED DATA
 75FIGURE 5.7 Smaller trusted computing base by simulating homomorphic 
cryptography.
5.4.2
 Restricting Queries Automatically
Restricting queries automatically is another way to control usage. The 
goal is to do this well enough that software can decide which queries are 
allowed by the policy, or at least drastically reduce the number of queries 
that require human approval. The conventional access control discussed 
above is one way to do this, but there are many policies that it cannot 
express. Automated restriction is certainly feasible for limited classes of 
queries such as, ﬁFind all the phone numbers that have connected in the 
last month to this list of numbers belonging to a known target.ﬂ Indeed, 
NSA already has pre-approved queries, but their scope can probably 
be extended signi˜cantly. The more mechanized the process, the better. 
Sometimes the software will refer to a human for a decision, but an auto
-mated decision is cheaper, faster, potentially more transparent, and less 
burdensome to analysts. The ideal is that the analyst only sees informa
-tion about targets, so that there is no intrusion on the privacy of people 
who are not targets. 
Chapter 6 discusses some of the major opportunities for advances 
here.
5.4.3
 Audit/Oversight Automation 
Auditing usage of bulk data is essential to enforce privacy protec
-tions. The ˜rst step is to ensure that every query is permanently recorded 
in a log. Isolation provides con˜dence that every query is permanently 
logged. Then the log must be reviewed for compliance with the rules. 
GuardAuditlogTrustedprocessingVerify/DecryptPolicyHost (airgap, hardware, virtual machinemonitor, operating system, etc.)AditgPolicySimpletrustedprocessingDecryptEncryptQueryEncryptedbulk dataResult+ proofTrustedComputing BaseConventionalNSA systemsSimulatedhomomorphiccryptographyConventionalprocessingFigure 5-7Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEDoing this manually is feasible, and is, indeed, NSA™s current practice. 
Although it is thorough, it is expensive and not transparentŠoutsiders 
must rely on the agency™s assurance that it is being done properly, because 
the queries are usually highly classi˜ed. Automation of auditing, a direc
-tion NSA is pursuing, could both streamline audits and provide assurance 
to outside inspectors, who can then examine the auditing technology. 
The resulting ability to inspect the privacy-protecting mechanisms 
of the SIGINT process on an unclassi˜ed basis may help allay privacy 
and civil liberty concerns. The inspection would focus on the automation 
software and the usage rules it enforces, rather than on the data, which 
must remain classi˜ed. 
Greater automation of auditing is an area that has been greatly 
neglected by government, industry, and academia; for example, operat
-ing systems write voluminous logs of security-relevant events, but they 
are seldom looked at, and when they are, a great deal of manual effort is 
required. Chapter 6 discusses some possible improvements.
5.5
 CONCLUSION
This chapter has reviewed a variety of feasible mechanisms, both 
manual and automatic, for controlling the way that collected data is used. 
Some of these are deployed in the IC. Others may be deployed, but the 
committee was not told about them in brie˜ngs. All of these mechanisms 
are feasible to deploy within the next 5 years. Opportunities to introduce 
enhancements to such capabilities are expected to arise as the informa
-tion technology systems used for collection and analysis are refreshed 
and modernized.
Automation of usage controls may simultaneously allow a more 
nuanced set of usage rules, facilitate compliance auditing, and reduce 
the burden of controls on analysts. Similarly, there are opportunities to 
automate the various audit mechanisms to verify that rules are followed. 
These techniques may permit more of the use controls and audit mecha
-nisms to be explained clearly to the public. It may be possible to express 
a large fraction of the rules required by law and policy in a machine-
processable form that can be rapidly and consistently applied during 
collection, analysis, and dissemination. 
Conclusion 2. Automatic controls on the usage of data collected in 
bulk can help to enforce privacy protections.
Conclusion 2.1. It will be easier to automate controls if the rules 
governing collection and use are technology-neutral (i.e., not tied 
to speci˜c, rapidly changing information and communications tech-Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTROLLING USAGE OF COLLECTED DATA
 77nologies or historical artifacts of particular technologies) and if they 
are based on a consistent set of de˜nitions. 
Conclusion 2.2. Automated controls can provide new opportunities 
to make the controls more transparent by giving the public and 
oversight bodies the opportunity to inspect the software artifacts 
that describe and implement the controls. Increased transparency 
can give people outside the IC more con˜dence that the controls are 
appropriate, although the need for secrecy about some of the details 
makes complete con˜dence unlikely.
Whether any given method should actually be deployed is a policy 
question that requires determining whether increased effectiveness and 
apparent transparency is worth the cost in equipment, labor, and potential 
interference with the intelligence mission. In any case, some automatic 
methods might be able to replace existing manual ones at a lower cost.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
The future of signals intelligence (SIGINT) may look very different 
from what we see today. Details of communications technologies are 
changing rapidly and are likely to continue to change. Encryption increas
-ingly protects communications data both in transit and at rest. Private-
sector business records may become fewer in number and less useful for 
intelligence purposes. On the other hand, more powerful computation can 
analyze raw data, such as speech and images, to extract useful intelligence 
information in real time. More data will certainly be available, driven by 
commercial, data-driven marketing as well as the spread of networked 
sensors of many sorts. Research to develop algorithms to proceed ﬁfrom 
data to knowledgeﬂ may well bene˜t intelligence analysis.
The public policy landscape may also change. Public concerns with 
privacy, driven by the explosion of data as well as disclosures and mis
-adventures in both public and private sectors, may lead to new legal 
frameworks. A shift from controlling collection to controlling usage is 
being discussed in policy circles. And, of course, the publicly acceptable 
trade-off between privacy and security might change immediately if the 
nation is attacked, if severe national security threats emerge, or if interna
-tional security is further destabilized.
6.1
 THE FUTURE OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE
There are a number of trends, already under way today, that may 
have a deep impact on SIGINT. The net effect of these trends on SIGINT 
in the future is not clear today.
6Looking to the Future
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
 796.1.1
 More Data, Data Types, and Sensors; 
More Computing and Storage 
Declining costs of all elements of digital infrastructure continue to 
spur technology™s pervasive spread. Not long ago, ﬁcloud computing,ﬂ the 
use of giant computer centers to assign, as needed, dozens to thousands 
of computers to a taskŠwas new. Now we are experiencing the effects 
of ﬁbig data,ﬂ exploiting large amounts of data collected for business or 
scienti˜c purposes to pursue new business opportunities or uncover new 
science. Just beginning is an ﬁInternet of things,ﬂ deploying sensors of 
new types in many new places to control or optimize roadways, buses, 
trains, production lines, crop management, and countless other activities. 
And smart phones increasingly sense things of interest, notably location 
today, but also audio and video. While not all of this new data, and the 
communications that carry it, is likely to have intelligence value, some 
will surely offer new intelligence opportunities.
Increasingly, algorithms can digest raw signal data into much more 
useful forms. License plates can be located in images taken from road
-ways, and the license numbers recognized. Faces can be isolated in images 
captured by surveillance cameras, and databases of images can be queried 
to identify people.
1 Audio signals of speech can be converted to text with 
enough reliability for dictation, making it easy to spot words of intelli
-gence interest in communications. These algorithms all have a form that 
make it technically easy to scale up the processing to handle many inputs: 
you can assign each of 50 computers to analyze each of 50 license plate 
images, or you can deploy the same 50 computers to recognize speech. 
Flexibly adapting and scaling these computations is easy.
In SIGINT applications, these algorithms can be applied either at the 
time of collection or later, on demand, for analyzing selected data. Today, 
NSA says it cannot collect any sizeable fraction of all global communica
-tions data, and it may likewise be that despite declining computing costs, 
NSA will not be able to automatically analyze more than a tiny bit. How
-ever, in many cases, the operators of the sensors will apply the algorithms 
to meet business needs, such as identifying license plates to bill parking 
charges. In these cases, the analyzed data may be available to NSA in the 
form of business records.
6.1.2
 Business Records 
Business records can be very valuable for intelligence, and the pro
-liferation of information technology (IT) in businesses of all sorts means 
1 Closed-circuit TV surveillance, a form of bulk collection, has been practiced for years 
with relatively little complaint, despite its privacy invasion. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEthat many more details of everyday life are recorded in this way. How
-ever, businesses that wish to minimize surveillance of their customers 
can arrange to reduce or eliminate the intelligence value of their records. 
For example, if a telephone company bills a ˚at monthly rate, it need 
not keep a record of each call, so no call data records would be available 
for intelligence purposes.
2 Communications providers today are acutely 
aware of their customer™s concerns about surveillance,
3 a fact that gives 
providers an additional incentive to refrain from keeping records that 
might be used against them.
Services that hold data for customers may ˜nd ways to encrypt the 
data with a key known only to the customer so as to evade surveillance. 
This technique could be used by email providers and social-
 
networking 
services, among others. Some businesses are being established with 
exactly this objective. But today, the ability to examine customer data and 
use it for marketing purposes is an essential part of the hosting company™s 
business model, so customers are unlikely to have email that is both free 
and surveillance-proof.
Attempts to evade surveillance are unlikely to slow the big data trend. 
Businesses collect huge amounts of data not associated with individuals, 
which may not cause privacy concerns, and are sure to collect still more. 
Some of this data has a large public bene˜t, such as for weather predic
-tion, crop management, or public health monitoring. Businesses may 
implement different levels of protection for different business records, so 
that customer-sensitive data is not comingled with data that has benign 
uses, both public and private.
6.1.3
 Encryption 
One of the most imminent threats to SIGINT collection is the increas
-ing use of strong encryption for signals in transmission. Increasingly, 
website servers are routinely encrypting traf˜c to and from the browser 
clients. To a lesser extent, data at rest is being encrypted. The cyber-
security vulnerabilities of the endpoints (browser, server) are becoming 
much greater than the vulnerability of the communications between them, 
a point suggesting that access may still be possible (although more dif
-˜cult), even when transmission links are encrypted.
2 Other business records of such a company, however, linking customer name, address, 
and telephone number, might still be very valuable for intelligence purposes.
3 See, for example, Vodafone Group, ﬁLaw Enforcement Disclosure Report,ﬂ 2014, http://
www.vodafone.com/content/sustainabilityreport/2014/index/operating_responsibly/
 privacy_and_security/law_enforcement.html, accessed January 16, 2015.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
 816.1.4
 Services That Evade Surveillance
Although today™s common Internet services, such as VoIP (Voice 
over Internet Protocol) are not speci˜cally designed to make surveillance 
dif˜cult, they can be redesigned to evade surveillance. An important 
idea in many cases is ﬁpeer-to-peerﬂ communications, which establishes 
an encrypted channel between two communicators without needing a 
third party to set up the communication. This technique means there is 
no third-party business that might hold business records or other data 
that could identify the communicators. It can be a bit tricky to design 
protocols that eliminate the third party, which often serves as a ﬁdirec
-toryﬂ for a calling party to ˜nd the called party. And, of course, it is hard 
on the third-party business, which is trying to make money when callers 
communicate.
6.1.5
 SIGINT Must Adapt
An unsurprising conclusion from the preceding subsections is that 
SIGINT techniques and operations will need to evolve as dynamically as 
the signals environment they monitor. As new protocols and businesses 
arise, collection methods and software must evolve. Adapting to traf˜c 
volume of different types is also essential, but it can be partially addressed 
by using techniques similar to those used in cloud computing.
Policy, law, and regulations will need to keep up with future SIGINT 
sources, which may evolve in dynamic and even surprising ways. Today, 
the laws governing collection of SIGINT are largely derived from legisla
-tion that applies to rotary dial telephones. Although policy and regula
-tions have adapted to modern technologies, their pace of change does not 
match that of technology.
6.2
 EVOLUTION OF PRIVACY PROTECTIONS 
A striking change in the past few decades is the extent to which the 
private sector collects personal information. This trend had its origins in 
the 1960s with the rise of credit bureaus and has resulted in a cascade of 
law and regulation. In 1998, the Federal Trade Commission published a 
list of ˜ve core principles: (1) notice (give the consumer notice of data col
-lection), (2) choice (give the consumer choice about whether the private 
data will be collected), (3) access (give the consumer the ability to access 
data about him- or herself), (4) integrity/security (the data collector must 
work to make sure data is correct and must give the consumer the right 
of redress if it is not), and (5) enforcement/redress. Today, these principles 
are known by the shortened phrase ﬁNotice and Consent.ﬂ
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEThe notice and consent framework is showing signs of stress. A recent 
President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) 
report ridiculed the turgid privacy terms that the public is typically asked 
to accept today: ﬁOnly in some fantasy world do users actually read these 
notices and understand their implications before clicking to indicate their 
consent.ﬂ
4 Moreover, ﬁconsentﬂ may imply that a person is volunteer
-ing personal data, which will mean it is afforded weaker Constitutional 
protection.
An alternative, which is starting to be discussed in policy circles, is to 
control 
use
 rather than collection of data. One variant calls for tagging all 
data with its origin and asking permission of its provider before using it. 
The data can be encrypted, so that only the provider™s grant of permission 
will reveal the actual data. Protecting use of data is not new; digital rights 
management (DRM) schemes encrypt songs and videos and only decrypt 
and play them when the player is given the key. Changing to protecting 
use of private data would be a major effort, requiring changes in laws and 
enforcement and, of course, a lot of software.
5Protecting use rather than limiting the collection of sensitive data 
would be consistent with maintaining the bulk collection of SIGINT. 
Perhaps if the public comes to embrace the philosophy and practice of 
usage controls for sensitive personal data, such as health and ˜nancial 
data, and comes to trust private sector IT implementations of the protec
-tion procedures, controlled-use approaches to intelligence information 
can ˜nd greater favor.
6.3
 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
This section contains a collection of topics that came up during the 
committee™s deliberations that are potentially useful to the IC. None of 
these topics directly addresses ways to replace bulk collection with 
 targeted 
collection. Because the main focus of this report was not to determine the 
full set of research areas to explore, this list is not meant to be complete.
Research is under way on all of the topics mentioned in this sec
-tion. In many cases, NSA already implements some of the capabilities 
(e.g., certain kinds of query checking). The IC has research efforts under 
way in many of these areas as well. Of particular note is the Intelligence 
Advanced Research Projects Activity™s (IARPA™s) Security and Privacy 
4 President™s Advisory Committee on Science and Technology (PCAST), 
Big Data: A 
Technological Perspective,
 May 1, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/
 microsites/ostp/PCAST/pcast_big_data_and_privacy_-_may_2014.pdf, p. xi.
5 Craig Mundie, Privacy pragmatism: Focus on data use, not data collection, Foreign 
 Affairs, March/April 2014, http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/140741/craig-mundie/
privacy-pragmatism.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
 83Assurance Research (SPAR
6) program, which addressed topics of par
-ticular relevance to implementing secure SIGINT systems of the sort 
described in Chapter 5. 
This section does not delve into the many technologies that NSA and 
other IC organizations use to operate large, complex IT operations. It does 
not cover network security, operating-system security, physical security of 
computer systems, authentication of users, or a host of other areas that are 
part of making SIGINT technologies trustworthy. Research in these and 
other areas that affect the general state of complex IT will help the IC too.
6.3.1
 Technologies for Isolation
The approaches described in Section 5.4 are not in widespread use, 
but they are not unexplored either. Their successful use will depend on 
not only choosing a sound architecture, but also on developing a care
-ful implementation: the trustworthiness of key components depends on 
keeping them simple to avoid mistakes that lead to vulnerabilities. And 
system-wide properties, such as security, will depend on many details, 
such as managing cryptographic keys properly, distributing them securely, 
changing them occasionally, ensuring that no single system administrator 
can penetrate security, and so on. These are not simple systems to engi
-neer and operate. 
Variants of the systems described in Chapter 5 often involve execut
-ing separate components on separate computers (often under control of 
separate organizations) and protecting the communications among the 
components. Techniques for doing this, usually based on encryption, are 
the topic of a research area dubbed ﬁsecure multi-party computation,ﬂ 
which was investigated by the IARPA SPAR program. For example, recent 
research shows how to protect data and communications in a three-part 
system: one issues queries, a second authorizes queries, and a third holds 
data and performs searches speci˜ed by authorized queries.
76.3.2
 Other Technologies for Protecting Data Privacy
Although the focus of this report is signals intelligence that provides 
data about individual people and groups, signals intelligence can also 
6 Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence, Intelligence Advanced Research Projects 
Activity, ﬁSecurity and Privacy Assurance Research (SPAR),ﬂ http://www.iarpa.gov/index.
php/research-programs/spar, accessed January 16, 2015.
7 S. Jarecki, C. Jutla, H. Krawcyzk, M. Rosu, and M. Steiner, Outsourced symmetric pri
-vate information retrieval, pp. 875-888 in 
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC Conference 
on Computer and Communications Security
, Association of Computing Machinery, New York, 
N.Y., 2013.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEbe used to answer questions such as ﬁWhat is the most common disease 
mentioned in Internet search requests from Yemen?ﬂ In these cases, the 
question is statistical, and protecting the identities of people cited in 
the source database can be done using techniques quite different from 
those prescribed for tracking speci˜c threats. Although it might seem that 
statistical questions by their nature do not reveal identities, if the query 
speci˜es a suf˜ciently small group, identities can often be inferred using 
queries to different databases.
Collecting and publishing large data sets (ﬁopen dataﬂ) has spurred 
work on ways to bene˜t from the data without revealing personal informa
-tion. One class of techniques attempts to ﬁanonymizeﬂ (or de-
 
identify) the 
data by transforming it to retain useful information but prohibit identi˜ca
-tion of individuals. But it turns out that most anonymization schemes are 
easy to defeat.
8 Effective anonymization remains an open problem.
Differential privacy is an active research area tackling the problem 
of enabling statistical queries from collections of data while preserving 
the privacy of individuals.
9 The purpose is to permit useful informa
-tion to be determined while not exposing data on speci˜c individuals, 
including individuals not included in the data. This is done by adding 
probabilistically structured noise (small probabilistic changes to the data) 
to the responses to the queries. Although statistical databases have value 
in many domains, the type of queries relevant to this report need to pro
-duce information about individual items, so the techniques of differential 
privacy are not immediately applicable. There is also work on using dif
-ferential privacy techniques with social networks.
10
6.3.3
 Approving Queries and Their Results Automatically
Automatically restricting or approving a query requires automati
-cally understanding it at a deeper level than syntax; this points to another 
advantage of automated decision making, namely, that it forces precision 
about what is being collected, which is useful both for analysts and for 
privacy. Automated understanding can be either static or dynamic. 
Static 
8 See PCAST, 
Big Data, 2014, p. 38. A good view of anonymization and reidenti˜cation is in 
Sections 3 and 4 of ﬁOpinion 05/2014 on Anonymisation Techniquesﬂ (European Commis
-sion, Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, adopted April 10, 2014, http://ec.europa.eu/
justice/data-protection/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/˜les/2014/
wp216_en.pdf).
9 Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth, 
The Algorithmic Foundations of Differential Privacy
, Now 
Publishers, Boston, Mass., 2014.
10
 C. Task and C. Clifton, A guide to differential privacy theory in social network analysis, 
pp. 411-417 in 
Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE/ACM International Conference on
 Advances in Social 
Networks Analysis and Mining
 (ASONAM)
, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, D.C.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
 85understanding tries to infer from a set of axioms whether a particular 
query or class of queries is allowed by policy, independently of the state 
of the database being queried. Taking pre-approved queries as axioms 
is a simple case of this. For example, ﬁIf X is an identi˜er for a reason
-able and articulable suspicion (RAS) target, return all the identi˜ers that 
communicated with X in the last year.ﬂ The query is ˜xed except for 
some 
 parameters, such as X in this example. It is a human decision to 
pre-approve it, and no automated reasoning is needed to apply it. A 
more powerful system could deduce that this query is OK from more 
general axioms such as, ﬁX is associated with Y if X and Y communicated 
in the last yearﬂ and ﬁAny identi˜er associated with a RAS target can be 
disclosed.ﬂ
Dynamic understanding
 looks at the 
actual
 results of a query, rather 
than considering all possible results, and asks whether policy allows 
them to be disclosed. A simple example is a kind of minimization: if a 
query returns a set of identi˜ers, any identi˜ers for U.S. persons should 
be removed from the results. 
Tags
 on the data that track its provenance 
or other properties can make dynamic understanding more powerful; the 
example uses a ﬁU.S. personﬂ tag that is added to database entries for an 
identi˜er when it is determined that the identi˜er refers to a U.S. person.
11 This kind of understanding has been studied extensively in the context of 
information ˚ow control, where the goal is to keep secrets from being dis
-closed to uncleared people, even if it is processed by untrusted programs. 
Decentralized information ˚ow can very ˚exibly represent both degrees 
of secrecy and authorities for disclosure.
12
 Dynamic systems can also take 
account of context and history by applying the rules in force at the time a 
query is made, considering questions such as, Is there an emergency? Is 
the query part of a pattern known to need more scrutiny? Are the results 
being combined with other data to deanonymize the results in a way that 
is contrary to policy? 
There are many similarities between static and dynamic understand
-ing and the thriving ˜elds of static and dynamic program understanding, 
which suggests that there may be rich opportunities here. Not surpris
-ingly, programs written in languages that are designed for automated 
understanding are much easier to understand. The same thing applies to 
query languages; indeed, the standard SQL database query language is 
11 NSA has developed and donated to the Apache open-source community such a data
-base. Accumulo is a scalable key/value store that allows ﬁaccess labelsﬂ to be attached to 
each cell that enables low-level query authorization checks (Apache Software Foundation, 
ﬁApache Accumulo,ﬂ https://accumulo.apache.org/, accessed January 16, 2015).
12
 A.C. Myers and B. Liskov, A decentralized model for information ˚ow control, pp. 129-
142 in 
Proceedings of the 17th ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles (SOSP)
, 1997, 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEdesigned for automatic understanding of queries, and database systems 
make heavy use of this to optimize their execution.
13
 A system that can 
understand a query can also rewrite it to add access control checks or calls 
to functions that encrypt and decrypt sensitive ˜elds. For example, the 
CryptDB and Cipherbase systems do this (see Section 5.4.1.6 on simulat
-ing homomorphic encryption).
In most cases, a query is issued by an analyst, and the results are 
returned to the analyst, but there are also programs, called 
analytics
 by the 
IC, that issue queries and process the results themselves. Understanding 
these analytics programs requires combining an understanding of the 
queries with an understanding of the program that issues them. How
-ever, the issuing program can supplement the query itself with additional 
information that can be used in making a decision whether to approve the 
query. In other words, the program generating the query can be expected 
to do more work to support a decision whether to approve the query than 
might be practical for a human analyst.
The most likely approach to query approval is to proceed from easy 
cases to harder ones, reserving for human attention those that cannot be 
automated. 
6.3.4
 Audit/Oversight Automation 
Auditing access to bulk data is essential for ensuring compliance 
with the rules. The ˜rst step is to ensure that every query is permanently 
recorded in a log; isolation makes it feasible to do this by technical 
means. Then the log must be reviewed. Doing this manually is feasible 
and, indeed, this is NSA™s current practice, but it is expensive and not 
 
transparentŠoutsiders must rely on the agency™s assurance that it is 
being done properly, because the queries are usually highly classi˜ed. 
In analogous fashion, operating systems and networking equipment 
write voluminous logs of security-relevant events, and review of such 
logs usually requires a great deal of manual effort.
14
 It should be possible 
to develop much better tools that automatically review the log, highlight 
13
 S. Chaudhuri, An overview of query optimization in relational systems, pp. 34-43 in 
Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Principles of Database Systems, 
1998, Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, N.Y.
14
 See, for example, USENIX, WASL ™08, First USENIX Workshop on the Analysis of Sys
-tems Logs, ﬁWorkshop Sessions,ﬂ https://www.usenix.org/legacy/event/wasl08/tech/ 
(last changed January 26, 2009) and, to infer causality, see M. Chow, D. Meisner, J. Flinn, 
D. Peek, and T.F. Wenisch, ﬁThe mystery machine: End-to-end performance analysis of 
large-scale Internet services, pp. 217-231 in 
11th USENIX Syposium on Operating Systems 
Design and Implementation, October 2014, https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi14/
technical-sessions/presentation/chow.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
 87suspicious patterns, ˜lter out the great majority of queries that do not 
raise any issues or that were vetted by automatic query approval, and 
present the remainder for manual review. 
Automating the audit or overview process has much in common 
with automating query authorization. Because there is a lot of audit data, 
machine learning can also play a role, although it would probably require 
introducing a lot of synthetic misbehavior (that is, deliberately introduced 
misbehavior) to get enough true positives into the training set.
6.3.5
 Formal Expression of Laws and Regulations
If it were possible to express the laws, policies, and rules governing 
SIGINT in a machine-understandable form, it might be possible to gener
-ate tools that do automatic approval and oversight for a portion of the 
queries. One approach would be to develop formal policy languages to 
represent the precise meanings of policies. These could serve as an inter
-mediate language between the output of lawyers and the technological 
control of processes and computer programs. The process of formulating 
them would likely reveal many anomalies, ranging from ambiguities to 
misinterpretations to inconsistencies. NSA reported that it had looked into 
deontic description logic for this purpose. To the extent that the ˜eld of 
computational law thrives, its results would be relevant. Projects around 
this area would seem to be an ideal unclassi˜ed research topic, appropri
-ate for an interdisciplinary team of experts in law, policy, and computer 
science.
Basing automation on formal de˜nitions has another advantage: if the 
rules must change, the automation will change as a direct consequence. 
Formal rule expressions will change, due to new laws, policies, and regu
-lations, or in order to adapt to emergencies. Of course, the rule expres
-sions and the process for changing them must be controlled carefully to 
ensure compliance with the governing documents.
Advances in this area might lead outside organizations to gain con
-˜dence that the rules for handling personal data are being followed. If 
these techniques are not being used today, how might they be applied to 
reassure overseers that what they see is a full report of what happened? 
Can zero-knowledge proofs be used in some way to reassure members 
of the public who wish to monitor operations? Are there general ways of 
scanning logs and reliably picking out transactions that need to be looked 
at? Cybersecurity defense tries to do this, but even with specialized logs, 
it is an incompletely solved problem.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE6.3.6
 Policy Research
Simpler or more understandable rules are desired, but it is not obvi
-ous how to create them, nor how to avoid the processes that produced 
the existing ones. This sort of research could be done independently of the 
Intelligence Community (IC), at the risk of irrelevance. Some kind of 
cooperative research leading to unclassi˜ed results would be best.
A seemingly simple, but fundamental, problem is the lack of a 
 common 
lexicon to de˜ne the technology relevant to intelligence as it is controlled 
by law, regulation, and policy directives. This de˜ciency came up in many 
discussions, both inside and outside the IC. The absence of such a consen
-sus on terminology may well explain some of the mis
 
understandings that 
exist between the IC, its overseers, and the public. If not addressed, it is 
likely that this confusion will continue and impede the effective develop
-ment of a policy and legal framework. More generally, without consensus 
on terminology, the development of effective regulation of technology will 
be a continuing problem that also impedes building the necessary public 
trust in the IC. An interdisciplinary effort to develop common terminology 
for modern and emerging technology would be worthwhile.
6.3.7
 Measuring Effectiveness of Intelligence 
Techniques and the Value of Data 
Policy decisions might be informed by quantifying the bene˜ts of 
various intelligence-gathering techniques as well as their risks. Anec
-dotal testimony that cites speci˜c events doubtless understates the value 
of intelligence and also gives the misleading impression that the value of 
intelligence is in ˜nding the single piece of evidence that thwarts an 
attack.
15
 More often, small bits of information from different sources con
-tribute to an actionable ˜nding.
The IT systems that produce and record intelligence, especially those 
used by analysts to bring together the bits and pieces gathered through
-out an investigation, can track the provenance of the information. Can 
investigations, once completed, be mined to estimate the value of different 
sources of intelligence? 
Statistical results and machine learning have a role to play. Statistical 
techniques allow one to estimate the value of different sources of data. 
Learning techniques potentially allow one to extract more information 
(better results) from collected data, or more con˜dently ignore data that 
15
 See, for example, Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, 
Report on the Telephone 
 
Records Program Conducted under Section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act and on the Opera
-tions of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
, January 23, 2014, http://www.pclob.gov/
 SiteAssets/Pages/default/PCLOB-Report-on-the-Telephone-Records-Program.pdf, p. 145 ff.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
 89do not have to be collected. As the number of data sources grows, espe
-cially from public information, it may become important to routinely 
assess the value of these sources. And such analysis would provide, at 
least in classi˜ed form to the IC, an answer to a question that Presidential 
Policy Directive 28,
16
 in effect, asks, ﬁHow valuable is bulk collection of 
domestic telephone metadata?ﬂ
6.4
 ENGAGEMENT WITH THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY
As the committee did its work, it noted an evolving relationship 
between NSA and the academic research community on problems such as 
those addressed in this report. For many years, NSA has formally funded 
unclassi˜ed, basic research in mathematics (algebra, number theory, dis
-crete mathematics, probability, and statistics) in the United States in its 
Mathematical Sciences Program.
17
 According to NSA, this program was 
initiated in response to a need to support mathematics research in the 
United States and recognizes the bene˜ts both to academia and NSA 
accruing through a vigorous relationship with the academic community.
Further developing a similarly vigorous and sustained relationship 
between NSA and the academic computer science community could have 
similar bene˜ts. Mechanisms would have to be found to translate classi
-˜ed problems into unclassi˜ed ones that researchers could tackle without 
being subject to security reviewŠdoing so would improve the coupling of 
the research mission with the operational mission. The IC has two mecha
-nisms that help bridge the classi˜cation ﬁchasm.ﬂ IARPA funds research 
relevant to the IC, some of which targets the future of SIGINT. Many of 
its research programs are predominantly unclassi˜ed, and it is working 
to develop unclassi˜ed ﬁproxiesﬂ for research problems of more direct 
applicability to the IC. The ˜rm In-Q-Tel acts somewhat like a venture 
fund for innovative technology potentially useful to the IC, supporting 
commercially viable technologies that might serve IC needs. Both appear 
to be effective, but their structures and policies are not primarily intended 
to build long-term and vigorous relationships with academic disciplines. 
Bridging the chasm would bene˜t both communities.
Even in a report that was intended to address primarily technical 
issues, the committee found it necessary to engage with a number of 
legal and policy issues. This point underscores the fact that it is often 
16
 The White House, Presidential Policy Directive/PPD-28, ﬁSignals Intelligence Activi
-ties,ﬂ Of˜ce of the Press Secretary, January 17, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/
default/˜les/docs/2014sigint_mem_ppd_rel.pdf. 
17
 National Security Agency, ﬁMathematical Sciences Program,ﬂ last modi˜ed August 30, 
2013, https://www.nsa.gov/research/math_research/.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEimportant for technical research to be conducted in an interdisciplinary 
manner cognizant of policy issues. But interdisciplinary work integrating 
technology, law, and policy remains the exception rather than the rule in 
academic research institutions. Much more of this type of collaboration is 
required if law and policy are to effectively manage the challenges being 
generated by rapidly changing technologies.
6.5
 CONCLUSION
The committee has identi˜ed a number of technical areas where 
advances could help the IC address privacy concerns about SIGINT data. 
None of these topics directly addresses ways to replace bulk collection 
with targeted collection; rather, they represent alternatives for better tar
-geting collection or better controls on usage after collection. Because 
determining the full set of research areas to explore was not the main 
focus of this report, this list is not meant to be complete, and it does not 
delve into most of the technologies that the IC uses for its IT capabilities. 
Nor are the topics necessarily new; research may be under way, the IC 
may already have implemented some of the capabilities, and the IC has 
research efforts under way in many of these areas as well. 
Conclusion 3. Research and development can help in developing 
software intended to (1) enhance the effectiveness of targeted col
-lection and (2) improve automated usage controls. 
Conclusion 3.1. The use of targeted collection can be improved by 
enriching and streamlining methods for determining and deploy
-ing new targets rapidly and using automated processing and/or 
streamlined approval procedures. 
Analytics, such as ﬁbig data analytics,ﬂ may help narrow collection, 
even if they are not suf˜ciently precise to identify individual targets. If 
the government is constrained by privacy concerns to collect less data, it 
may nevertheless be able to use the power of large private-sector data
-bases, analytics, and machine learning to shape the constraints to collect 
only data predicted to have high value. New uses by the government of 
private-sector databases would also raise new privacy and civil liberties 
questions.
Some of these methods may require a great deal of computing, so that 
˜lters should be cascaded to ˜rst apply cheap tests, followed by more 
expensive ˜lters only if earlier ˜lters warrant. For example, if metadata 
indicates a civilian telephone call to a military unit under surveillance, 
speech recognition and subsequent semantic analysis might be applied to 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
 91the voice signal, resulting in an ultimate collection decision. Richer target
-ing may require enhancing the ability of collection hardware and software 
to apply complex discriminants to real-time signals feeds.
Conclusion 3.2. More powerful automation could improve the 
precision, robustness, ef˜ciency, and transparency of the controls, 
while also reducing the burden of controls on analysts.
Some of the necessary technologies exist today, although they may 
need further development for use in intelligence applications; others will 
require research and development work. This approach and others for 
privacy protection of data held by the private sector can be exploited by 
the IC. Research could also advance the ability to systematically encode 
laws, regulations, and policies in a machine-processable form that would 
directly con˜gure the rule automation.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.95
The committee makes several clarifying observations about the charge 
it was given:



collection. In fact, the vast majority of applications interesting to the 
Intelligence Community demonstrate that bulk collection and targeted 
collection play complementary roles. Drawing a sharp line between bulk 
and targeted collection does not accurately re˚ect how these approaches 
are used in practice. Furthermore, and as discussed in Section 2.2, bulk 
and targeted collection exist along a continuum without a bright line to 
differentiate between them.













-sible. Although the committee™s report does discuss a number of use cases 
(Chapter 3), and these use cases helped it to understand how bulk collec
-tion functions as a part of the analytic process, in the end the committee 
did not ˜nd that these use cases were particularly helpful in identifying or 
explicating possible alternatives to bulk collection. The committee found 
it more useful to rely on general principles to reach its conclusions.








make a contribution to the missions of the intelligence community that 
is roughly comparable to the contribution that bulk collection makes. As 
noted above, the committee found that this was not the caseŠin many 
cases, bulk collection does in fact make unique contributions to the mis
-AObservations about the 
Charge to the Committee
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEsions of the intelligence community that other kinds of collection cannot 
provide. See Chapter 4.



 
metrics for comparing bulk collection to targeted collection. But the com
-mittee found that decisions about bulk versus targeted collectionŠand 
indeed about all manner of collection decisionsŠare driven by the con
-cerns of policy makers, which are themselves shaped by their perception 
of the threat environment. Thus, it is not at all obvious that metrics for 
comparing bulk collection to targeted collection are particularly relevant 
in the big picture. 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.97
CDR
 call detail records
CIA
 Central Intelligence Agency
FISA
 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act
FISC
 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
http
 Hypertext Transport Protocol 
IARPA
 Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity
IC
 Intelligence Community
IP
 Internet Protocol
ISP
 Internet Service Provider
IT
 information technology
MAC
 Message Authentication Code
NSA
 National Security Agency
ODNI
 Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence
PPD
 Presidential Policy Directive
RAS
 reasonable and articulable suspicion
BAcronyms
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCESIGINT
 signals intelligence
SMTP
 Simple Mail Transport Protocol
SPAR
 Security and Privacy Assurance Research
SQL
 Structured Query Language
TCB
 trusted computing base
TCP
 Transmission Control Protocol
USB
 Universal Serial Bus
USSID
 U.S. Signals Intelligence Directive
VoIP
 Voice over Internet Protocol
WMD
 weapons of mass destruction
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.99
COMMITTEE
ROBERT F. SPROULL, 
Chair,
 is an adjunct professor of computer science 
at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Dr. Sproull retired in 2011 
as vice president and director of Oracle Labs, an applied research group 
that originated at Sun Microsystems (acquired by Oracle in 2010). Before 
joining Sun in 1990, he was a principal with Sutherland, Sproull, and 
Associates; an associate professor at Carnegie Mellon University; and a 
member of the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. He has served as chair 
of the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) Computer Science and Tele
-communications Board (CSTB) since 2009. He is also on the Computing 
Community Consortium (CCC) Council. In June, Dr. Sproull completed 
a 6-year term on the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) Council. 
He is a member of the NAE and a fellow of the American Association for 
the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the American Academy of Arts 
and Sciences. Dr. Sproull received his M.S. and Ph.D. in computer science 
from Stanford University and an A.B. in physics from Harvard College.
FREDERICK R. CHANG is the director of the Darwin Deason Institute 
for Cyber Security, the Bobby B. Lyle Endowed Centennial Distinguished 
Chair in Cyber Security, and a professor in the Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering in Southern Methodist University™s (SMU™s) 
Lyle School of Engineering. Dr. Chang is also a senior fellow in the John 
Goodwin Tower Center for Political Studies in SMU™s Dedman College. 
He has been professor and AT&T Distinguished Chair in Infrastructure 
CBiographical Information for Committee 
Members, Consultants, and Staff 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEAssurance and Security at the University of Texas, San Antonio, and he 
was at the University of Texas, Austin, as an associate dean in the College 
of Natural Sciences and director of the Center for Information Assurance 
and Security. Dr. Chang is the former director of research at the National 
Security Agency (NSA). In the private sector, he was most recently the 
president and chief operating of˜cer of 21CT, Inc., an advanced intelli
-gence analytics solutions company. Earlier, he was with SBC Communica
-tions where he held a variety of executive positions, including President, 
Technology Strategy, SBC Communications; president and CEO, SBC 
Technology Resources, Inc.; and vice president, network engineering and 
planning, SBC Advanced Solutions, Inc. Dr. Chang began his professional 
career at Bell Laboratories. He has been awarded the NSA Director™s Dis
-tinguished Service Medal. He has served as a member of the Commission 
on Cyber Security for the 44th Presidency and as a member of the NRC™s 
CSTB. Dr. Chang is also a member of the Texas Cybersecurity, Educa
-tion, and Economic Development Council. He received his B.A. from the 
University of California, San Diego, and his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from 
the University of Oregon. He has also completed the Program for Senior 
Executives at the Sloan School of Management at the 
 Massachusetts Insti
-tute of Technology (MIT). Dr. Chang is the lead inventor on two U.S. 
patents (U.S. patent numbers 7272645 and 7633951). He has served as an 
expert witness for congressional hearings on cybersecurity research and 
development and the security of healthcare.gov. 
WILLIAM DuMOUCHEL is a chief statistical scientist for Oracle Health 
Sciences, at Oracle Data Sciences. His current research focuses on sta
-tistical computing and Bayesian hierarchical models, including appli
-cations to meta-analysis and data mining. He is the inventor of the 
empirical Bayesian data mining algorithm known as Gamma-Poisson 
Shrinker (GPS) and its successor MGPS, which have been applied to the 
detection of safety signals in databases of spontaneous adverse drug 
event reports. These methods are now used within the Food and Drug 
Administration and industry. From 1996 through 2004, he was a senior 
member of the data mining research group at AT&T Labs. Prior to 1996, 
he was chief statistical scientist at BBN Software Products, where he was 
lead statistical designer of software advisory systems for experimen
-tal design and data analysis called RS/Discover and RS/Explore. He 
has been on the faculties of the University of California, Berkeley, the 
University of Michigan, MIT, and, most recently, was professor of bio
-statistics and medical informatics at Columbia University (1994-1996). 
He has authored approximately 50 papers in peer-reviewed journals and 
has also been an associate editor of the 
Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, Statistics in Medicine, Statistics and Computing, and the Journal 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 101of Computational and Graphical Statistics. Dr. DuMouchel received a Ph.D. 
in statistics from Yale University.
MICHAEL KEARNS is a professor in the Computer and Information Sci
-ence Department at the University of Pennsylvania, where he holds the 
National Center Chair. Dr. Kearns™s research interests include topics in 
machine learning, algorithmic game theory, social networks, and com
-putational ˜nance. He is the faculty founder and co-director of Penn™s 
Warren Center for Network and Data Sciences and the faculty founder 
of Penn™s Network and Social Systems Engineering program. Dr. Kearns 
has secondary appointments in the statistics and operations and informa
-tion management departments of the Wharton School. Until July 2006, 
he was co-director of Penn™s interdisciplinary Institute for Research in 
Cognitive Science. He has consulted widely for many companies (˜nance, 
Internet technologies, etc.) and occasionally serves as an expert witness/
 consultant on technology-related legal and regulatory cases. During the 
1990s, Dr. Kearns worked in basic arti˜cial intelligence (AI) and machine 
learning research at Bell Labs and AT&T Labs, where he was head of the 
AI department. He has served on the editorial boards of well-known jour
-nals of computer science, machine learning, and game theory. He received 
his Ph.D. in computer science from Harvard University. 
BUTLER LAMPSON is a technical fellow at Microsoft Corporation and an 
adjunct professor at MIT. He has worked on computer architecture, local 
area networks, raster printers, page description languages, operating sys
-tems, remote procedure call, programming languages and their semantics, 
programming in the large, fault-tolerant computing, transaction process
-ing, computer security, WYSIWYG editors, and tablet computers. He 
was one of the designers of the SDS 940 time-sharing system, the Alto 
personal distributed computing system, the Xerox 9700 laser printer, two-
phase commit protocols, the Autonet LAN, the SPKI system for network 
security, the Microsoft Tablet PC software, the Microsoft Palladium high-
assurance stack, and several programming languages. He received the 
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Software Systems Award 
in 1984 for his work on the Alto, the IEEE Computer Pioneer award in 
1996, the von Neumann Medal in 2001, the Turing Award in 1992, and the 
NAE™s Draper Prize in 2004. He is a member of the National Academy of 
Sciences and the NAE and a fellow of the ACM and the American Acad
-emy of Arts and Sciences. 
SUSAN LANDAU is professor of cybersecurity policy in the Department 
of Social Science and Policy Studies at Worcester Polytechnic Institute. 
Dr. Landau has been a senior staff privacy analyst at Google, a distin
-Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEguished engineer at Sun Microsystems, a faculty member at the Univer
-sity of Massachusetts, Amherst, and at Wesleyan University. She has held 
visiting positions at Harvard University, Cornell University, and Yale 
University, and the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute. Dr. Landau 
is the author of Surveillance or Security? The Risks Posed by New Wire
 tapping 
Technologies
 (2011) and co-author, with Whit˜eld Dif˜e, of 
Privacy on the 
Line: The Politics of Wiretapping and Encryption
 (1998, rev. ed. 2007). She 
has written numerous computer science and public policy papers and 
op-eds on cybersecurity and encryption policy and testi˜ed in Congress 
on the security risks of wiretapping and on cybersecurity activities at the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology™s Information Technol
-ogy Laboratory. Dr. Landau currently serves on the NRC™s CSTB. A 2012 
Guggenheim fellow, she was a 2010-2011 fellow at the Radcliffe Institute 
for Advanced Study, the recipient of the 2008 Women of Vision Social 
Impact Award, and also a fellow of AAAS and ACM. She received her 
B.A. from Princeton University, her M.S. from Cornell University, and 
her Ph.D. from MIT.
MICHAEL E. LEITER is executive vice president for business develop
-ment, strategy, and mergers and acquisitions at Leidos. Prior to taking 
on his current role at Leidos, Mr. Leiter was a senior counselor at Palantir 
Technologies. Before that, he was the director of the National Counter
-terrorism Center (NCTC). He was sworn in as the Director of NCTC on 
June 12, 2008, upon his con˜rmation by the U.S. Senate and after serv
-ing as the acting director since November 2007. Before joining NCTC, 
Mr. Leiter served as the deputy chief of staff for the Of˜ce of the Director of 
National Intelligence (ODNI). In this role, he assisted in the establishment 
of the ODNI and coordinated all internal and external operations for the 
ODNI, to include relationships with the White House, the Departments 
of Defense, State, Justice, and Homeland Security, the Central Intelligence 
Agency, and the Congress. He was also involved in the development of 
national intelligence centers, including NCTC and the National Counter
-proliferation Center, and their integration into the larger Intelligence Com
-munity. In addition, Mr. Leiter served as an intelligence and policy advisor 
to the Director and the Principal Deputy Director of National Intelligence. 
Prior to his service with the ODNI, Mr. Leiter served as the deputy gen
-eral counsel and assistant director of the President™s Commission on the 
Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass 
Destruction (the ﬁRobb-Silberman Commissionﬂ). While with the Robb-
Silberman Commission, Mr. Leiter focused on reforms of the U.S. Intel
-ligence Community, in particular the development of what is now the 
National Security Branch of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. From 
2002 until 2005, he served with the Department of Justice as an Assistant 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 103United States Attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia. At the Justice 
Department, Mr. Leiter prosecuted a variety of federal crimes, including 
narcotics offenses, organized crime and racketeering, capital murder, and 
money laundering. Immediately prior to his Justice Department service, he 
served as a law clerk to Associate Justice Stephen G. Breyer of the Supreme 
Court of the United States and to Chief Judge Michael Boudin of the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. From 1991 until 1997, he served as a 
Naval Flight Of˜cer ˚ying EA-6B Prowlers in the U.S. Navy, participating 
in U.S., NATO, and United Nations operations in the former Yugoslavia 
and Iraq. Mr. Leiter received his J.D. from Harvard Law School, where he 
graduated magna cum laude and was president of the 
Harvard Law Review, and his B.A. from Columbia University.
ELIZABETH RINDSKOPF PARKER is dean emerita at the University of 
the Paci˜c, McGeorge School of Law. A noted expert on national security 
law and terrorism, Ms. Parker served 11 years in key federal government 
positions, most notably as general counsel for NSA; principal deputy 
legal adviser, Department of State; and general counsel for the Central 
Intelligence Agency. In private practice, she has advised clients on public 
policy and international trade issues, particularly in the areas of encryp
-tion and advanced technology. Ms. Parker began her career as a Reginald 
Heber Smith Fellow at Emory University School of Law and later served 
as the director, New Haven Legal Assistance Association, Inc. Early in her 
career, she was active in litigating civil rights and civil liberties matters, 
with two successful arguments before the U.S. Supreme Court while a 
cooperating attorney for the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund. 
Immediately before her arrival at McGeorge, Ms. Parker served as general 
counsel for the 26-campus University of Wisconsin System. She is a mem
-ber of the Security Advisory Group of the DNI, the board of directors of 
the MITRE Corporation, the American Bar Foundation, and the Council 
on Foreign Relations, and she is a frequent speaker and lecturer. Her aca
-demic background includes teaching at Paci˜c McGeorge, Case Western 
Reserve Law School, and Cleveland-Marshall State School of Law. From 
2006 to 2013, she held a presidential appointment to the Public Interest 
Declassi˜cation Board. Ms. Parker received her B.A. and J.D. from the 
University of Michigan.
PETER J. WEINBERGER has been a software engineer at Google, Inc., 
since 2003. After teaching mathematics at the University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, he moved to Bell Laboratories. At Bell Labs, he worked on 
Unix and did research on topics including operating systems, compilers, 
network ˜le systems, and security. He then moved into research manage
-ment, ending up as Information Sciences Research vice president, respon
-Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEsible for computer science research, math and statistics, and speech. His 
organization included productive new initiatives, one using all call detail 
to detect fraud and another doing applied software engineering research 
to support building software for the main electronic switching systems 
for central of˜ces. After Lucent and AT&T split, he moved to Renais
-sance Technologies, a technical trading hedge fund, as head of technol
-ogy, responsible for computing and security. He is a former member of 
the NRC™s CSTB, current co-chair of an NRC committee on cybersecurity 
research, and served on several other NRC studies. He serves in a variety 
of other advisory roles related to science, technology, and national secu
-rity. He has a Ph.D. in mathematics (number theory) from the University 
of California, Berkeley.
CONSULTANTS
M. ANTHONY FAINBERG became a research staff member at the Institute 
for Defense Analyses, where he focuses on risk assessment methodologies, 
countering nuclear terrorism, and nuclear non-prolieration issues, upon 
retiring from federal service after 20 years. At retirement, Dr. Fainberg 
was director of the Of˜ce of Transformational Research and Development 
of the Domestic Nuclear Detection Of˜ce of the Department of Homeland 
Security. Previously, he had been division chief at the Advanced Systems 
and Concepts Of˜ce, Defense Threat Reduction Agency, Department of 
Defense; before that, he directed the Of˜ce of Policy and Planning for Avia
-tion Security in the Federal Aviation Administration. He also is a senior sci
-enti˜c advisor to the Paci˜c Basin Development Council, an organization 
comprising the governors of the U.S. Paci˜c island territories and Hawaii. 
He holds a Ph.D. in physics. 
ALLAN FRIEDMAN is a research scientist at the Cyber Security Policy 
Research Institute (CSPRI) in the School of Engineering and Applied Sci
-ences at George Washington University, where he works on cybersecurity 
policy. Wearing the hats of both a technologist and a policy scholar, his 
work spans computer science, public policy, and the social sciences, and 
has addressed a wide range of policy issues, from privacy to telecommu
-nications. Dr. Friedman has over a decade of experience in cybersecurity 
research, with a particular focus on economic, market, and trade issues. 
He is the coauthor of 
Cybersecurity and Cyberwar: What Everyone Needs to 
Know
 (2014). Prior to joining CSPRI, Dr. Friedman was a fellow at the 
 
Brookings Institution and the research director for the Center for Technol
-ogy Innovation. Before moving to Washington, D.C., he was a post
 
doctoral 
fellow at the Harvard University Computer Science Department, where 
he worked on cybersecurity policy, privacy-enhancing technologies, and 
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 105the economics of information security. Dr. Friedman was also a fellow at 
the 
 Kennedy School™s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, 
where he worked on the Minerva Project for Cyber International Relations. 
He has also received fellowships from the Berkman Center for Internet 
and 
 Society and the Harvard Program on Networked Governance. He has 
a degree in computer science from Swarthmore College and a Ph.D. in 
public policy from Harvard University.
ALEX GLIKSMAN is principal of AGI Consulting, LLC, a ˜rm specializing 
in intelligence and other national security program development, congres
-sional relations, acquisition, and management strategies. Mr. Gliksman has 
played a central role in the development and evaluation of analytic tools, 
and mission planning and operational support systems used by the Armed 
Services and U.S. intelligence for counterproliferation, counterterrorism, 
special operations, and arms control. He also has extensive experience in 
South and Southwest Asia and Paci˜c Rim regional security matters and 
has advised Fortune 500 companies on business opportunities in these 
regions. He served on the senior staffs of the House Intelligence Commit
-tee and Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Mr. Gliksman™s clients have 
included the U.S. Congress, the Department of Defense, the Department 
of State, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Sandia National Labo
-ratories, Idaho National Laboratory, Northrop Grumman, the Analytic 
Sciences Corp., Booz-Allen & Hamilton, Science Applications International 
Corporation, the Boeing Company, and Computer Sciences Corporation. 
Mr. Gliksman has taught on the graduate faculty of the University of 
Southern California and at the University of Maryland. He studied at 
New York University and the University of Vienna and pursued doctoral 
 
studies in international relations at University College London.
STAFF
ALAN H. SHAW, 
Study Director
, has been at the NRC as deputy director 
of the Air Force Studies Board since January 2014 and has had several 
previous assignments at the NRC. Educated as a physicist (Yale, 1974), 
he has worked in various capacities for all three branches of the fed
-eral government, including as the director for international security and 
space at the congressional Of˜ce of Technology Assessment. He has also 
worked for the Congressional Budget Of˜ce, the U.S. Arms Control and 
Disarmament Agency, the Institute for Defense Analyses, the Center for 
Naval Analyses, SRA International, the Defense Threat Reduction Agency, 
and (as a consultant) Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and the 
federal judiciary.
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106 BULK COLLECTION OF SIGNALS INTELLIGENCEJON EISENBERG is the director of NRC™s CSTB where he oversees and 
directs studies and other activities related to computing, communications, 
and public policy. In 1995-1997 he was an AAAS Science, Engineering, 
and Diplomacy Fellow at the U.S. Agency for International Develop
-ment, where he worked on technology transfer and information and 
tele
 
communications policy issues. He received his Ph.D. in experimental 
high-energy physics from the University of Washington and a B.S. in 
physics with honors from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
HERBERT S. LIN was chief scientist at NRC™s CSTB until December 
2014 where he had served as study director of major projects on public 
policy and information technology. These studies included a 1996 study 
on national cryptography policy (
Cryptography™s Role in Securing the Infor
-mation Society), a 1991 study on the future of computer science (
Computing 
the Future
), a 1999 study of Defense Department systems for command, 
control, communications, computing, and intelligence (
Realizing the Poten-tial of C4I: Fundamental Challenges
), a 2000 study on workforce issues in 
high-technology (
Building a Workforce for the Information Economy
), a 2002 
study on protecting kids from Internet pornography and sexual exploita
-tion (
Youth, Pornography, and the Internet
), a 2004 study on aspects of the 
FBI™s information technology modernization program (
A Review of the 
FBI™s Trilogy IT Modernization Program
), a 2005 study on electronic 
 voting 
(Asking the Right Questions About Electronic Voting
), a 2005 study on com
-putational biology (Catalyzing Inquiry at the Interface of Computing and 
Biology
), a 2007 study on privacy and information technology (
Engaging 
Privacy and Information Technology in a Digital Age
), a 2007 study on cyber
-security research (
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace
), and a 2008 
study on health care information technology (
Computational Technology 
for Effective Health Care
). Prior to his NRC service, he was a professional 
staff member and staff scientist for the House Armed Services Commit
-tee (1986-1990), where his portfolio included defense policy and arms 
control issues. He received his doctorate in physics from MIT. Apart from 
his CSTB work, he is published in cognitive science, science education, 
biophysics, and arms control and defense policy. He also consults on K-12 
math and science education. 
ERIC WHITAKER is a senior program assistant at NRC™s CSTB. Prior to 
joining the CSTB, he was a realtor with Long and Foster Real Estate, Inc., 
in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. Before that, he spent several 
years with the Public Broadcasting Service in Alexandria, Virginia, as an 
associate in the Corporate Support Department. He has a B.A. in com
-munication from Hampton University.
