DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/19546International Developments in Computer Science: A Report111 pages | 8.5 x 10 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-32775-6 | DOI 10.17226/19546Standing Panel to Survey International Developments in Computer Science;Computer Science and Technology Board; Commission on Physical Sciences,Mathematics, and Resources; National Research CouncilInternational Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.;;:.----DR l -; : < ;c Service , 2? l'i I Order No. PB 7 7 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS IN COMPUTER SCIENCE A Report Prepared by the Standing Panel to Survey International Developments in Computer Science Computer Science and Technology Board Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Resources National Research Council NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS Washington, D.C. 1982 NAS·NAE JUN 0 11982 LIBRARY International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICB1 'l'be project that 1e the subject of thie report was approved by the Governing Board of the Rational Research Council, whose -..bare are drawn froa the councils of the National Acade.y of Sciences, the Rational Acade8J of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The of the eo .. ittee responsible for the report were chosen for their special co.petencea and with regard for appropriate balance. 'l'bie report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures approved by a Report Review eo..ittee consisting of of the National Acade.y of Sciences, the Rational Acade8J of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The National Research Council was established by the National Acade.y of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad of science and technology with the Acade8Y'Ł purposes of furthering knowledge and of advising the federal governaent. 'l'be Council operates in accordance with general policies deterained by the Acade.y under the authority of ita congressional charter of 1863, which establishes the Acade8f as a private, nonprofit, self-governing aellberahip corporation. 'l'be council baa becoae the principal operating agency of both the Rational Acadeay of Sciences and the National Acad88f of Engineering in the conduct of their services to the governaent, the public, and the scientific and engineering caa.unitiea. It is adainiatered jointly by both Acadeaiea and the Institute of Medicine. The National Acade.y of Engineering and the Institute of Medicine were established in 1964 and 1970, respectively, under the charter of the National Acade.y of Sciences. 'l'bia study was supported by the Office of Naval Research. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STANDING PANEL '1'0 SURVBY IM'l'BRNATIOMAL DBVBLOPMBR'l'S IM COMPUTBR SCIBMCB CARL BAMMBR, Chairman, Sperry Univac TANIA AMOCBABV, Control Data Corporation ALBBRT TRAYNHAM, Control Data Corporation ROBBRT DEWAR, Mew York University DAVID GRIES, Cornell University BISASBI KOBAYASHI, IBM T .J. Watson Research Center B.T. KUNG, carnegie-Mellon University GEORGE LIMDAMOOD, National Bureau of Standards TADAO MURATA, University of Illinois v. SADAGOPAN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center MORIBISA SUZUKI, Xerox Corporation VALENTIN TURCHIN, City University of New York iii International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COIIPU'1'Bk SCIIIICB ARD TBCIDIOLOGY BOUD JACOB T. SCBifARTZ, Chairun, New York University GORDON BBLL, Digital Corporation BOB O. BVANS, IBM JBRRIBR A. HADDAD, IBM MICBABL A. HARRISON, University of California, Berkeley MARCIAN B. BO!'P, Intel Corporation JOHN B. HOPCROrr, Cornell University B. DALB MARSTON,. Consultant SUSAN OMICII, Stanford University JACK M. SCAIILON, Bell Laboratories HAROLD S'l'ONB, University of Massachusetts WILLIS H. WARE, The Rand Corporation BBN WBGBRBIT, Convergent Technologies iv International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES, MATHEMATICS, AND RESOURCES HERBERT FRIEDMAN (CO-chairman), National Research COuncil ROBERT M. WHITE (Co-Chairman), University Corporation for Atmospheric Research STANLEY I. AUERBACH, Oak Ridge National Laboratory BLKAN R. BLOUT, Harvard Medical School WILLIAM BROWDER, Princeton University BERNARD F. BURKE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology HERMAN CHERNOFF, Massachusetts Institute of Technology WALTER R. ECKBLMANN, Exxon Corporation JOSEPH L. FISHER, Virginia Office of Human Resources JAMBS c. FLBTCHBR, University of Pittsburgh WILLIAM A. FOWLER, california Institute of Technology GERHART FRIEDLANDER, Brookhaven National Laboratory EDWARD A. FRIEMAN, Science Applications, Inc. EDWARD D. GOLDBERG, Scripps Institution of Oceanography KONRAD B. KRAUSKOPF, Stanford University CHARLES J. MANKIN, Oklahoma Geological Survey WALTER H. MONK, University of California, San Diego NORTON NELSON, New York University Medical Center DANIEL A. OKUN, University of North carolina GEORGE B. PAKE, Xerox Research Center DAVID PIMENTEL, Cornell University CHARLES K. RBBD, National Research COuncil HATTEN s. YODER, JR., carnegie Institution of Washington v International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COittBftS List of Tables and Pigures Preface 1 Develop.ents in Japan 2 Develop.ents in Western Burope 3 Develop.ents in Eastern Europe and the USSR 4 Develop.ents in Latin 5 Develop.ents in the People's Republic of China 6 The Role of the International Federation for Infor .. tion Processing in Infor .. tion Interchange in Science 7 Conclusions, and aeco..endations APPBMDIXBS viii ix xi 1 39 42 so 52 57 59 A Speakers and Titles of Lectures at the PGCS Conference 65 B Projects That MITI Plans to Pund During Fiscal Year 1982 67 C Organization and of the Fifth-Generation eo.puter eo .. ittee (1980) 69 D List of Papers in Research Reports in Japan--A Collection of Recent Research Reports Related to the RiD of the PGCS 73 B Analysis of 720 Articles in 11 Journals, by Author's Country 75 vi International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.F Analysis of 720 Articles in 11 Journals, by Source G Survey of Bight Western European Conference Proceedings H Pourteen USSR Ooaputer Science Journals I Analysis of Nine Latin American Periodicals J Bibliography on Coaputing in China vii 84 93 94 95 96 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LIST OF TABLES AND FIGURES TABLES 1-1 American Sources of Information on CoŁputing in Japan 1-2 Japanese Sources of Information on Computing in Japan 2-1 Sources of Information on Computing in Western Europe and 10 ll Other Countries 41 3-l Untranslated Journals from Eastern Europe and the USSR That are Future Candidates for Translation 48 FIGURES 3-l Citation from Electronics and Computers (BLOOM) FOund by Using SDC's International Search Service 3-2 Source Journal Cover 3-3 Translated Source Journal Cover viii 45 46 47 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRBFACB For several decades the United States has been the leader in electronic technology and computer science. Now many nations are mounting research efforts that challenge our technological supremacy. As the markets for products and services grow, the competition a.ong the leading postindustrial nations grows as each nation tries to stake its claia. The United States can no longer afford to ignore the fact that aany nations will sooner or later match or even surpass our expertise in ca.puter science. We need to become better informed about their activities so that we can remain coapetitive. Of course, scientists, acadeaic institutions, industrial organisations, and governaent agencies do .onitor pertinent developments individually. Nevertheless, there is a need for an interdisciplinary approach to the gathering of information on computer science that would consolidate uncoordinated and often replicated efforts under one roof. In May 1980 a ŁProposal for a Panel to Survey International Developments in Computer ScienceŁ was subaitted by the Computer Science and Technology Board of the National Research Council (NRC) to the Office of Naval Research (ONR). The panel was to make Łan inventory of information available in the United States about those countries believed to be leaders in computer science and technology.Ł The project was expected to take about six .onths and require a panel of 10 individuals Łselected on the basis of scientific and technical excellence and an appreciation of computer science activities in other countries.Ł This project, which we have called Phase I, received preliainary approval in September 1980. The Standing Panel to Survey International Developaents in Science was chartered to combine the talents and experience of a number of multilingual computer scientists froŁ industry, government, and academia. The panelists were reoo..ended by the Board and approved by the chairman of the NRC. They have experience with computer science developments in many countries and markets and joined with enthusiasm and dedication to prepare this initial study. The first panel meeting was held in Washington, D.C., on January 29, 1981. All panel members were present, as well as a number of visitors, including Marvin Denicoff and Robert Grafton of ONR. During this meeting, the panelists agreed that only a few carefully selected geographic areas could be examined in the allotted time. They chose ix International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.five and divided the panel into five sections to study thea. The responsibilities were assigned as followsa Japan--George Lindawood, Horihisa Suzuki, and Tadao Muratar Western Europe--David Gries and Robert Dewarr Eastern Europe and the USSR--Tania Aaochaev, Albert Traynhaa, Valentin Turchin, and Robert Dewarr Latin America--Bnrique Marban, who resigned fro. the panel in March 1981 because of growing business and was subsequently replaced by v. Sadagopanr and People's Republic of China--B.T. Kung and Horihisa Suzuki. In Phase I, the panelists were to .. ke an assessment of foreign language ca.puter science publications in terms of (1) their quality and quantity, (2) their ti .. ly availability, in the original or in Bnglish, and (3) their relevance and significance. The linguistic barriers encountered ranged from almost nonexistent, to Cyrillic script in Eastern Europe, to the formidable ideographs of the Par Bast. Large voluaes of abstracts, articles, conference proceedings, and source periodicals were exaainedr international directories and readable data bases were consultedr even translations .. de for use within companies did not escape the panel's attention. Por two months the panelists studied their respective areas, receiving occasional suggestions fro. the sponsor. Docuaents were collected and distributedr a variety of conceptual approaches to infor .. tion gathering were formulatedr and a significant infor .. tional data base began to develop. The second panel meeting took place on April 22-23, 1981, again in Washington, D.C. Progress reports were received from four of the five subca..ittees (Dr. Sadagopan had not yet been appointed to replace Mr. Marban). During the next two months, panel members continued to gather and exchange infor .. tion, data, and documentation in preparation for the third and final meeting, which was held at the National Academy of Sciences Conference Center at Woods Bole, Massachusetts, on June 25-26, 1981. B.T. Kung could not attend, but he sent in a precis of his report. Albert Traynham (Control Data Corporation) attended in place of Tania Amochaev. After giving brief status reports, the panel drafted sections of the final report, including summaries, conclusions, and recommendations for geographic areas. Their individual studies were prepared with the cooperation of other panel members, who suggested relevant materials and applicable research methodologies and supplied special documentation. During July and August 1981 the panel members wrote and edited their respective contributions to this final report. Throughout the project, the panel chairman, Carl Rammer, and the Computer Science and Technology Board's executive director, Jacob P. Blackburn, wrote monthly progress reports and meeting reports, which were sent to the panel members and ONR. The panel is grateful to the Computer Science and Technology Board for having taken the initiative and obtaining approval for this project from the NRC and to ONR for its sponsorship of this work. X International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Chapter 1 DEVELOPMENTS IN JAPAN BACKGROUND In computer science the Japanese have come from a position of essentially no activity to second place in the world in 20 years. They now have half as many computers as the United States, and their growth rate is double that of the United States. Virtually all Japanese computer firms are multinational companies. In Japan the computer industry is one of the strategic industries on which the Japanese hope to build their future. The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) has identified the furtherance of this industry as one of the Łnational projectsŁ to which special management attention and funds are to be devoted. A large-scale commitment has already been made for this purpose, and groups of corporations have been organized to work on the project. The main organizations concerned with the computer field are as follows: Ł The Ministry of International Trade and Industry, the executive entity of which is the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) Ł This agency possesses a number of laboratories1 one of them is the Electrotechnical Laboratory (ETL), which performs outstanding computer research, coordinated with national projects. Ł The Ministry of Posts and Telecommunication (MPT), which administers Nippon Telephone and Telegraph Public Corporation (NTT) as well as Kokusai Denshin Denwa (KDD), an international communication agency. NTT has its own laboratory (Electrical Communication Laboratories (ECL)), and KDD also has its own laboratory. ECL is quite similar in function to Bell Telephone Laboratories (BTL). The quality of R&D work being done in the computer field at ECL is roughly on a par with that at BTL, although not as fundamental in approach. Ł The Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture (MESC). As of 1979, 33 universities (27 national), including major schools such as Tokyo University, Kyoto University, Osaka University, Tohoku University, and Tokyo Institute of Technology, had computer science departments, with a total student population of about 16001 23 of these universities had graduate schools where most of the basic research in computer science was being done, all sponsored by the MESC. Computer centers 1 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 are usually operated in conjunction with these departments. Tbe largest of these centers, and perhaps the largest in the world of ita kind, is at TOkyo University. This center has eight Hitachi M-200H central processors with all necessary peripherals in operation, serving as .. ny as 750 re.ote terainals. Ł The Agency of Science and Technology, at the level. This agency has a number of laboratories, one of thea is the Institute of Physical and Cheaical Research, where soae related research is perforaed. Ł The following pri .. ry companies (those extensively engaged in the manufacture, sales, and service of ca.puting systeaa)a Fujitsu, Hitachi, Nippon Electric Corporation (NBC), TOshiba, Mitsubishi, and Oki. The following secondary coapanies (those in which the ca.puter business is a co.paratively small part of the total business)a Matsushita, Sony, Sharp, and Nippon Minicoaputer. Proa 1971 to 1980, the Pattern Infor .. tion Processing Systea (PIPS) has coamanded a lot of attention. The governaent's invest.ent of tlOO aillion has underwritten a number of interconnected PIPS systeasa Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł a printed-character recognition system (TOshiba), a handwritten-character recognition system (Fujitsu), a shaded-pattern recognition system (TOshiba), a color chart recognition system (Mitsubishi), an object pattern recognition system (Hitachi), and a voice pattern recognition system (NBC) Ł Although the quality of PIPS is somewhat in question, the prograa has developed a cadre of trained and experienced people spread throughout the Japanese industry. Their potential value in developing a fifth-generation computer is significant. Fujitsu Fujitsu made the earliest and most important commit.ent to ca.puters. It participated in all MITI projects. In addition, it built Japan's first digital relay computer in 1935 and the FACOM 100 Relay aachine in 1954, and announced the 230 Series of five compatible models in 1964. In December 1972, Fujitsu reached an agreement with Amdahl concerning technical infor .. tion exchange, and Fujitsu acquired 24 percent equity in Amdahl for $6.2 aillion. In August 1974 it was announced that the Amdahl 470 V/6 would be built in Japan. The Amdahl alliance gave creditability to Fujitsu. This is the first of the three elements needed for success according to the Japanese: creditability, profitability, and innovation. In June 1973, PARAPACOM, Ltd., was formed as a joint venture between Fujitsu and Matsushita. In 1973, Fujitsu Espana S.A. was International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3 founded jointly with the Credit Bank of Spain to import and comaunications equipment from Japan to Spain. In September 1973, Pujitsu and Hitachi for .. d Nippon Peripherals Ltd. (NPL) to perform jointly R6D, aanufacturing, and marketing. In Ho¥ember 1974, Pujitau and Hitachi came out with a joint line called the M-Seriea in response to IBM's announce .. nt of the 370 Syatea. They called it the 3.75 Generation. The M-190, announced in November 1974, was the first of the M-Seriea. Pujitau signed an Łother equipaent aanufacturerŁ (OEM) agreement with Sie .. na for ita M-200, M-180 II AD, and OS IV/F4 operating syatea. Pujitau is now aarketing their saaller ca.putera through TRW in the United States. Pujitsu and Amdahl have agreed that the M-190 will not be marketed in Burope but the M-180 and the M-200 will be. Pujitau ia .now the sixth largest computer company in the world in teras of revenue. Hitachi Hitachi ia a large conglomerate company that aakes railroad locomotives, industrial cranes, and home appliances as well as computers and coaponents. Hitachi first used parametron technology in its ca.puters but soon switched to transistors. In 1961, Hitachi signed a technology exchange agreement with RCA. In 1965, the HITAC 8000 Series was announced and was based on the RCA Spectra Series, which was also compatible with the IBM 360 Series. In 1966, Hitachi was made the prime contractor on MITI's super ca.puter. This led to the development of the HITAC 8700 and 8800. Many models of the M-Seriea have been announced since October 1971, including the M-180, M-170, M-160 II, and M-150. In September 1975, Hitachi revealed discussions with Control Data Corporation (CDC) to market the M-Seriea. In March 1976, Hitachi announced an OEM agreement under which the American company ITBL would provide AS/6 central processing units (CPUs). The agreement was later extended to the AS/7. The agree .. nt was renewed with the National Advanced Systems Corporation (NASCO) after ITBL'a demise. In September 1978, Hitachi announced the M-200B as the world's largest and fastest computer, at 12.8 millions of instructions per second (MIPS), which was about 10 percent faster than the Pujitau M-200 and 60 percent faster than the IBM 3033. The memory capacity ia 16 MB, using 16 K N-type metallic oxide semiconductor (NMOS) chips. The CPU uses emitter-coupled logic with 550 gates per chip and has 64-KB buffer memories using 16 K bipolar chips. It has an optional integrated array processor. Pujitsu also announced in September 1978 a aasa storage system ŁmediaŁ compatible with the IBM 3850. In 1979-1980, Hitachi aade marketing arrangements for its computer syateaa in Europe with BASF, Olivetti, and Saint Gobain. In 1980, Hitachi announced a disk equivalent to the IBM 3380 for delivery in 1982. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 Nippon Electric Corporation Nippon Electric Corporation (NBC) was established in 1899 as a subsidiary of Western Electric. Today NBC is a producer for Satellite Business Systems of the United States. It is Japan's largest manufacturer of communications equipment. It produces and markets 14,000 products in 100 countries and is the world's largest producer of satellite communications, earth stations, and microwave communications systems. NBC announced a transistorized computer at the Paris World Exposition in 1959. The NBAC 1201, which used parametron technology, was announced in 1961. Until 1965, NEC was Japan's largest computer manufacturer. It eventually lost its lead to Fujitsu and Hitachi because of reduced R&D efforts in computers and increased emphasis on communications. Since 1971, NEC has established a joint line with Toshiba. NBC is responsible for the ACOS 200, 300, 400, and 500, and Toshiba is responsible for the ACOS 600, 700, 800 I and II, and 900 I and II. The 800 and 900 were joint developments. In September 1980, NBC announced the ACOS System 1000 as the world's largest. Model 1 is rated at 15 MIPS, and model 2 at 29 MIPS. Production is estimated at 80 units over a five-year period. The first shipment will be made in October 1981. Toshiba In 1952, Toshiba collaborated with Tokyo University on a vacuum tube computer. It was installed in 1954. Toshiba announced its first commercial computer, the TOSBAC 4200, in December 1961, and in 1964 the TOSBAC 3400 was announced. Also in 1964 a technical agreement was signed with General Electric (GE). The TOSBAC 5400 was based on the GE 400, and the TOSBAC 5600 was based on the GE 600. In 1978 came Japan's first 32-bit minicomputer, the TOSBAC series 7, model 70. Mitsubishi Mitsubishi was the last of the six primary companies to begin working in computers. Their earliest computer was similar to the Bendix G 15, a scientific machine. But after IBM announced the 1401, a commercial machine, Mitsubishi ordered over 30 of them, thus indicating their interest in commercial as well as scientific computers. MITI suggested holding down imports, and so in 1962 Mitsubishi made an agreement with TRW to use the TRW 53 as a basis for a new computer called the MELCOM 1530. The MELCOM 3100 and MELCOM 9100 followed in 1966. In 1968, the MELCOM 80 super minicomputer series came out, and it has sold well in Japan. After TRW's withdrawal from data processing (DP), Mitsubishi signed an agreement with Xerox Data Systems. The MELCOM 6500 and 7700 followed. In 1971, Mitsubishi and Oki teamed up to produce the COSMO Series. In 1975, Mitsubishi teamed with Fujitsu and Hitachi for very large scale integration (VLSI) development. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 Mitsubishi announced in August 1978 that in 1979 it would begin development of a line of computers that would be compatible with those of IBM. There was some delay in completion of the COSMO 900 II, announced in December 1979. In January 1980, Mitsubishi announced plans to market a plug-compatible machine (PCM) system by 1983. Oki Oki is the third largest communications equipment manufacturer, after NEC and Fujitsu. Oki produced a transistorized computer in 1959. In September 1963, Oki Univac KAISHA (OUK), Ltd., was formed. The OUK Series is based on the UNIVAC 90 Series. Oki's financial position has weakened since the oil crisis of 1973. Oki Electronics of America was formed in 1972, and Oki Data Corporation in 1973. Oki has similar operations in Germany and Brazil. Nippon Telephone and Telegraph Nippon Telephone and Telegraph (NTT) is the second largest phone company in the world (after ATT). It designs equipment to be manufactured by Japanese manufacturers on license. NTT spends about 2 percent of its revenue on R&D. NTT, KDD, and Tokyo University built Japan's first parametron computer in 1953-1957. Beginning in 1968, NTT developed the Dendenkosha Information Processing System (DIPS). Beginning in early 1971, Fujitsu, Hitachi, and NEC cooperated in developing the DIPS I, which followed the experimental DIPS O. DIPS II consisted of the models 10, 20, and 30, developed by Hitachi, NEC, and Fujitsu, respectively. As of 1978, 26 DIPS I CPUs had been installed. Installation of DIPS II machines began in 1977. A second DIPS II development program began in 1978. Prototypes were due in 1981. NTT has a Data Communications Network Architecture, which was developed in 1977 with Hitachi and Oki but is not yet in operation. Japanese Government Efforts In 1954, when the first American computer was exported to Japan, Japanese companies expressed concern about future American dominance in this industry. In 1955, a budget of $2200 was established to organize a Computer Research Committee. The committee recommended encouraging development activities, introducing foreign technology through technical assistance and licensing, and limiting imports of foreign computers. By 1961 the value of domestically produced computers in Japan was $13 million, and foreign machines held 70 percent of the market. A 1966 report of the Electronics Industry Deliberation Council set the following objectives for the computer industry: International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ł Ł Ł 6 independent technological excellence, increased domestic market share, and gradual rise in domestic manufacturing and in profits Ł In 1971 the ŁLaw for Extraordinary Measures for Specific Electronic and Machinery IndustriesŁ was enacted. Six Japanese companies were paired off to form Nippon Peripherals, Ltd. (NPL), NEe-Toshiba Information Systems (NTIS), and FACOM-Hitachi, and $350 million was committed to a VLSI effort for the period 1976-1979. Support for software houses was confirmed by the government in 1978. In July 1979, the Electronic Computer Basic Software Technology Research Association (ECSTRA) was established to develop the basic technology of the next generation of computers. A budget of approximately $260 million over 1980-1984 was established. Among the trends MITI sees developing in the 1980s are the following: Ł Increased market conflict and instability arising from energy problems and nationalism. Ł A decline in u.s. hegemony and intensified multipolarity. Ł A more assertive global leadership role for Japan commensurate with its economic status as a Łgreat power.Ł Ł A shift from improving imported technologies to developing indigenous ones. Ł An upgrading of energy and computer technology. During this period, Japan's priorities include survival under the threat posed by energy problems and trade protectionism, and stable growth of its industry. THE SITUATION TODAY As indicated in the previous section, in the late 1960s Japan adopted as a national goal the development of a strong indigenous computer industry. Their accomplishments have been impressive: Japanese semiconductor technology rivals that of the United States as the world's finest, and, although the Japanese still admit a comparative deficiency in software, their computer systems are highly respected for performance and reliability. All this has served to heighten worldwide interest in Japanese computer science and technology, but this interest has been dampened somewhat by the language barrier. Not only does written Japanese involve Kanji ideograms as well as two (Kana) alphabets of 50 characters each, the Japanese language itself denotes a cultural outlook much different from our own. The language barrier is moderated somewhat by the fact that English is used extensively as a second language in Japan. In the public schools, students routinely learn to read English and virtually all top Japanese scholars, businessmen, and government officials are able to write and converse easily in English. This, coupled with what appears to be a Japanese cultural propensity to International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7 collect data and publish reports on all aspects of their society, means that a considerable amount of information on Japanese computer science and technology is available in English. Nevertheless, few u.s. computer scientists are well informed about Japanese activities. About 75 percent of all Japanese scientific papers and 86 percent of Japanese engineering papers are published only in Japanese. Moreover, some of the English-language publications are not widely known in the United States, and some of the available ones are rather expensive. Although many top Japanese computer scientists seek worldwide recognition through publication in English, many of their papers are first published in Japanese and only later submitted in English to overseas journals. In addition, many first-rate Japanese computer scientists are not active internationally: they choose to publish only in Japanese and to participate only in intra-Japan professional activities. The most respected Japanese publications in computer science and technology are The Transactions of the Institute of Electronics and Communication Engineers (IECE) of Japan (Denshi Tsushin Gakkai Ronbunshi)J Joho Shori Gakkai and the Proceedings of the Information Processing Society of Japan (IPSJ). The first of these is concerned with electronics, communications, and computers; the other two are oriented more toward software and applications. For u.s. computer scientists, Sections C, o, and E of the Transactions of the IECE are of primary interest: Section C contains articles on integrated circuits' Section o contains articles on computers; and Section E contains articles written in English. However, other sections may contain articles of interest on audio and TV technology, solid-state physics, and robotics. Both Joho Shori Gakkai Ronbunshi and the Proceedings of the IPSJ are published by IPSJ, the former in Japanese and the latter in English. Although the two journals are more or less equal in scope and prestige, they do not, as a rule, contain the same papers. Both Joho Shori Gakkai Ronbunshi and the Transactions of the IECE contain English-language abstracts provided by the authors of the articles published. In addition, translations of selected papers from the latter are published in Electronics and Communications in Japan, by Scripta Publishing Company of Silver Spring, Maryland. However, Scripta may discontinue this activity because of financial difficulties. (The National Science Foundation terminated its financial support of this activity in 1970.) Industrial research and development activity in Japan also yields a number of technical papers of high quality. Japanese industrial computer scientists often present these papers at the annual conferences of the IPSJ or the semiannual conferences of the IECE. The proceedings of these conferences are published in Japanese. Other specialized papers are presented at the monthly meetings of the various special interest groups (SIGs) of the IPSJ and the IECE and are published in Japanese in the proceedings of those SIGs. Japanese authors who publish in English for international audiences tend to use the Proceedings and various Transactions of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the various publications International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 of the Association for eo.puting Machinery (ACM), and Acta Infor .. tica, all of which are published in the United States. Japanese tion is also strong at the (U.S.) National Computer Conferences held annually and at the triennial conferences of the International Federation of Inforaation Processing (IFIP). Because of the considerable Japanese industrial research activity in co.puter science and technology, the publications of Japanese companies and the Łtrade pressŁ aay also contain infor .. tion of interest to the practicing ca.puter scientist. the for.er are the Fujitsu Science and Technical Journal, Hitachi Review, NBC Research and Develof!!nt, and the (NTT) Review of Electrical eo.aunications Laboratories. The NBC publication is an Bnglish-language newsletterr the others are published in both Bnglish and Japanese, the Japanese edition appearing earlier and being more complete. Trade press publications of interest include the Co!puter White Paper, published annually in Japanese and Bnglish by the Japan Inforaation Processing Development Center (JIPDBC), and the JIPDBC Report, published quarterly in Bnglish. JIPDBC was established in 1967 with the support of both the govern.ent and private industries. It is a nonprofit organization whose function is to promote research and development in co.puter applications. In addition to its publishing activities, the organization plans conferences. Ninety percent of the funds come froa the governaent (as part of the profits froa bicycle race gambling), and ten percent come from private industries. on the other hand, the Inforaation Technology Promotion Agency (IPA), which was established in 1971, is a quasi-govern.ent organization supported priaarily by the govern.ent. Other Bnglish-language publications include the following: Japan Co!puter News, a monthly newsletter from the Japan Electronic eo.puting Company (JBCC}J Japan Fact Book, published annually by DBMPA Publications using data collected by the Japan Electronics Industry Developaent Association (JBIDA), a trade association for ca.puter aanufacturersr BDP Japan Report, published at least once a month by International Data Corporation (IDC) Japan, a subsidiary of the u.s. firm IDCJ and Asian Co!puter Monthly, published in Hong Kong by Computer Publications, Ltd. In addition to the publications in Japanese that we have already mentioned, others that merit attention are as followsc Joho Shori, a monthly publication on tutorialsr JBCC Computer Note, published annually by JBCC, a leasing company for computers founded by Japan Development Bank (government owned)J Joho Sangyo Benran, a biannual report on the information industry, published by Joho Sangyo Shiabunr Nihon Joho Shimbun, a daily newspaper giving news of Łinforaation industries and marketsŁr Gekkan Qomputer Digest, a monthly clipping service covering the top 10 Japanese newspapersr and Nihon Keizai Shimbun, a daily economics journal published in TOkyo. In addition to these sources, most Japanese coaputer firms and trade associations produce brochures and press releases about their products and activities. Although some view such iteas as little aore than propaganda, they do provide an indication of Japanese interests. Many of the press releases are reported regularly in the u.s. industrial International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9 and trade press, e.g., in Business Week, Computer Business News, Computer World, Datamation, Electronic News, Electronics, Lambda, and the Wall Street Journal. The u.s. government also collects and disseminates sa.e inforaation on computer-related developments in Japan. The Smithsonian Scientific Inforaation Exchange (SSIE) maintains an on-line data base on research and development. The Joint Publication Research Service (JPRS) prepares translations for various federal agencies and publishes the JPRS Japan Report. Some of the translations are available to the general public through the National Technical Information Service, in Springfield, Virginia. The Office of Naval Research (ORR) maintains a liaison office in the u.s. Embassy in TOkyo and publishes items of interest in the ORR Technical Report. The main sources of information on ca.puting in Japan are summarized in Tables 1-1 and 1-2. According to the Scripta Publishing Company, which has done some translations for the Transactions of the IBCE, Łonder optimal conditions, the time lag between publication of a Japanese journal and its English equivalent should be no more than six aonths.Ł However, during the trip to Japan by Murata and Kobayashi, discussed in the following section, several Japanese authors stated that the time was about two years for them. JAPAN'S VIEW OP !'tJTORB DEVELOPMENT Substantial insight into Japan's plans for future development is to be found in the computer research plan outlined at the International Conference on Fifth-Generation Computer Systems held in TOkyo during October 1981. Hisashi Kobayashi of the IBM Research center, Tadao Murata of the University of Illinois, and Robert B.K. Dewar of New York University were among those attending that conference, and their reports are given below. It is evident from·the report by KObayashi and Murata that the Japanese plan is innovative and ambitious. In addition to describing the plan, Kobayashi and Murata give an account of their visits to research laboratories and universities in Japan. Dewar, in his report, gives an assessment of the Japanese plan. Kobayashi and Murata's Report on the International Conference on Fifth-Generation Computer Systems PGCS Conference The first International Conference on Fifth-Generation Computer Syste .. (PGCS) was held in TOkyo, on October 19-22, 1981. The conference was organized by JIPDBC and supported by MITI. There were 325 participants from 16 countries. Among them, about 100 were from abroad: 45 from the United States, 12 from the Federal Republic of Germany (PRG), 11 from the United Kingdom (UK), 7 from Prance, 7 from Italy, 4 from India, 3 from the People's Republic of China, 2 from canada, 2 from International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 TABLB 1-1 Aaerican Sources of Inforaation on Coaputing in Japan Professional Journals CO..unications of the Association for Coaputing Machinery (ACII) Computer eo.puting Reviews Computing Surveys Institute of Blectrical and Blectronics Engineers (IBBB) Spectrua IBBB Transactions on Coaputers IBBB Transactions on Software Engineering Journal of the ACII Proceedings of the IBBB General Publications Business Week (special issue 12/14/81) Science The Wall Street Journal Consulting Firas The Gartner Group, Stanford Connecticut International Data Corporation, Waltham, Massachusetts Arthur D. Little, Inc., ca.br idge, Massachusetts Quantua Sciences Corporation Newspapers and Other Publications, Specific Computer Business Hews Coaputer world Datamation BDP Industry Report BDP Japan Report Blectronic Engineering Ti .. s Blectronic Hews Blectronics Governmental Sources Central Intelligence Agency Defense Intelligence Agency Joint Publication Research Service (JPRS) National Technical Information Service Office of Naval Research u.s. Depart..nt of eo-.rce u.s. Depart..nt of State u.s. Babassy in Japan Mexico, and 1 each from Belgium, Bulgaria, the Netherlands, Sweden, Czechoslovakia, and the Philippines. All speakers, except for six invited lecturers and several invited panelists, were Japanese and gave their presentations in Japanese, using slides written in Bnglish. Simultaneous interpretations from Japanese to English or English to Japanese were provided throughout the conference. A major purpose of the conference was to present the preliminary planning studies that have been prepared by the PGCS comaittee and working groups (approximately 100 people) in the past two and a half years. The research goals and plans of the PGCS project were presented by 12 speakers (6 from MITI's BTL, 3 from the University of Tokyo, and 1 each from Keio University, NTT Laboratory, and Matsushita) who were all chairmen or key members of various study groups within the PGCS comaittee: First, 'l'ohru Moto-oka, chairman of the committee, gave an International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11 TABLE 1-2 Japanese Sources of Information on Computing in Japan Publications in English Computer Conferences Computer White Paper JIPDEC Report Journal of Information Processing Look Japan Proceedings of USA--Japan Yearbooks, Japan Annual Reviews in Electronics, Computers and Telecommunications (to be published by OBMSHA, TOkyo, and Elsevier/North Bolland, New York) Publications in Japanese Gekkan Computer Digest JECC Computer Note Joho Sangyo Benran Joho Sangyo Shimbun Joho Shori Joho Shori Gakkai Ronbunshi Nihon Joho Shimbun Nihon Keiaai Shimbun Proceedings of the Information Processing Society of Japan (IPSJ) Transactions of the Institute of Electronics and Communication Engineers (IECE) Organizations Dempa Publications Japan Electronic Computer Company (JECC) Joint Information Processing Development Center (JIPDBC), TOkyo Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), TOkyo introductory summary of the project in the keynote speech. Then three subcommittee chairmen reported overviews of their subcommittee's work: Bajime Karatau of Matsushita Communication Industry on Łsystemization TechnologyŁ (social needs and impacts), Kasuhiro Puchi of ETL on Łsaaic Theory and Software Aspects,Ł and Bideo Aiso of Keio University on Łeomputer Architectures.Ł Finally, these research plans were presented in more detail by four speakers on each of the two main topics: theory and architecture. The speakers and titles of these lectures are shown in Appendix A, and the written version of each lecture is found in the proceedings of the conference, which was published by JIPDBC. The remaining program of the conference consisted of six invited lectures given by foreign speakers and three panel discussions. The first invited lecture was given by E.A. Feigenbaum of Stanford University. He characterized fifth-generation systems as artificial intelligence (AI) machines or expert systems and stressed that the critical issues are software, not hardware, and acquisition and representation of knowledge, not logic itself. This lecture was an International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 interesting contrast to the following two invited lectures, which were logic-orienteds Łt.ogical Prograa SynthesisŁ by w. Bibel of the Technical University of Munich (FRG) and ŁThe Scope of Syabolic CoaputationŁ by G. Kahn of IHRIA (Prance). The remaining three invited lectures were on architectures B.B. McCormick of the University of Illinois spoke on a cognitive computer architecture based on biological .adels and VLSI hardwarer P.C. Treleaven of the University of Rewcastle-Opon-Tyne (UK) analyzed advantages and disadvantages of control flow, data flow, and reduction prograa organizationsr and J. Allen of MIT spoke on algorithms, architecture, and VLSI technology. Background of the PGCS Project The PGCS project is the third information-processing-related Łlarge projectŁ in which MITI's BTL has played a central role as planner and coordinator. The two previous ones were the High-Performance project (1969-1970) and the Pattern Information Processing System (PIPS) project (1971-1980). These previous projects have more or less achieved their original targets, although there seem to exist differences of opinion aaong foreign observers as to whether PIPS was a success or not. Unlike these two previous projects and the VLSI project (which were also sponsored by MITI and which ended in 1980), the PGCS project seems to worry sa.e Japanese industry executives because they see the project as grandiose and futuristic. The PGCS project envisions computers with features to meet the various social needs expected in the 1990s. More specifically, the fifth-generation computerŁ are referred to as knowledge information processing systems (KIPS) possessing such features as the followings l. Facilities for natural language processing, picture and image processing, and speech understanding. 2. Intelligence capable of learning, associating, and inferring. 3. Multilingual translation. 4. Very high performance logical inference capabilities with a machine speed that is 102 to 104 tiaes faster than today's super computers. 5. capability to retrieve a knowledge base within a few seconds on main storage for 100 to 1000 GB. The project will last for 10 years, which will be divided into three stagess the initial stage of three years, the intermediate stage of four years, and the final stage of three years. They plan to complete a prototype of the fifth-generation computer by 1990. The budget requested for 1982 is about $2.5 million, and the budget estimated for the first phase (1982-1984) will be $46 million. (According to some sources, including a recent article in Business Week (December 14, 1981, pp. 39-120), the total budget for PGCS over the period of 10 years is projected as high as $400 million.) However, it should be noted that a majority of people who engage in the project are government employees whose salaries are not counted in the budget since International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13 they are paid from the regular budget. Mr. Okamatsu stated in a panel discussion session that they were negotiating with the Ministry of Finance for additional funds. As of this writing, Japan's Ministry of Finance has yet to approve any funding, and some committee aembers we met at the conference were concerned that the recent pressure to reduce the governaent spending might adversely affect the FGCS project. It should be noted that the FGCS program is just one of several MITI-sponsored projects (see Appendix B). others are (1) basic technology development of the next generation (fourth generation) computerŁ with emphasis on software technology and peripherals' (2) R'D for high-speed scientific computers (the so-called Łsuper computer projectŁ), and (3) the optoelectronic integrated circuit project. Major computer manufacturers seem much more involved in these projects than in the PGCS, because of their near-term impact. POr instance, Fujitsu, Hitachi, and NBC are all working on a Super-cray machine that will be ready in 1983-1984. The ultimate target of the high-speed scientific computer project is 10 billion floating point operations (BFLOPS) according to the information we obtained at Hitachi, but this target, like that of FGCS, sounds overly ambitious. (See the section on the Hitachi Central Research Laboratory below.) As for the FGCS project, the industry executives we met at Fujitsu and Hitachi said that they had not figured out specifically how to participate in the program, but their intention to cooperate in the project is unquestionable. The overall organization of the FGCS project, its members, and their affiliations are shown in Appendix c. Also, at the end of the FGCS conference proceedings, about 100 major contributors to the preliminary studies of the project are listed. Among them, the largest group of 15 researchers is from MITI's BTL, and one half of the FGCS lectures were delivered by people from BTL. There are also contributors from Japanese computer manufacturers such as Fujitsu, Hitachi, NBC, Toshida, Mitsubishi, Oki, Matsushita, and Sharp, as well as from NTT, JIPDBC, and various universities. Research Themes of FGCS Project The technical details of the PGCS project can be found in two publications given to the attendees at the conference: the proceedings of the FGCS conference and Research Reports in Japan--A Collection of Recent Research Reports Related to the R'D of the FGCS (both of which were published by JIPDBC), whose tables of contents are shown in Appendixes A and D, respectively. In addition to these publications written in English, the FGCS committee had earlier published seven volumes of reports in Japanese (2276 pages). They have made very thorough surveys of the state of the art of FGCS-related technologies (VLSI, new programming languages, data flow machines, relational data base, natural language understanding, machine translation, speech and image recognition, and so on). Many people, including us, doubt that in 10 years they can develop their dream system, which will be composed of Łseeing, hearing, and speakingŁ computers equipped with common sense that will enable the systems to judge from memory (knowledge base) and solve new problems (inference and problem-solving capabilities). International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 To present an overall picture of this huge project, we will summarize below the proposed research and development theaes. The PGCS committee has proposed 26 themes on which research and development will be carried out in the next several years. The themes are grouped into the following seven areas: (1) basic application systems, (2) basic software systems, (3) new advanced architecture, (4) distributed function architecture, (5) VLSI technology, (6) systematization technology, and (7) development supporting technology. As basic application systems, they propose to develop the following six systems: (1-1) machine translation system, with 90 percent accuracy, (1-2) question-answering system, to be used for intelligent robots, (1-3) applied speech-understanding systems, such as a phonetic typewriter' (1-4) picture and image data storage and retrieval system, and (1-5) applied problem-solving system, having the ability to play the GO-game at the level of amateur grade 1. As basic software systems, they propose to develop the following three systems: (2-1) knowledge base management system, with storage and retrieval of 20,000 rules and 108 data items (100 GB)J (2-2) inference machine, which performs 102 to 103 megalogical inferences per second (note that one logical inference per second (LIPS) corresponds to 100 to 1000 instructions per second according to their estimate)' and (2-3) intelligent inference system, to communicate with unspecified speakers in terminology used in one branch of science. In the area of new advanced architecture, they propose to investigate the following six machines: (3-1) logic-programming machines, using PROLOG as a starting point1 (3-2) functional machine (based on LISP, reduction, and data flow function machines), suitable for symbol manipulation and list processing, (3-3) relational algebra machine, to support the relational data base system, using 100 parallel processors' (3-4) abstract-data-type support machine, to modularize the vast and complex software' (3-5) data flow machine, to perform parallel processing using 103 to 104 processors and 10-GB memory, and with the final target performance, 10 billion instructions per second (BIPS)J and (3-6) innovative von Neumann machine, using VLSI with 10 million transistors per chip. Note that in the above research topics, (3-1), (3-2), (3-4), and (3-5) are all closely related. The area of distributed function architecture includes the following investigations and developments: (4-1) network architectures' (4-2) data base machine, with 1000-GB capacity and 104 transactions per second performance: (4-3) high-speed numerical computation machine, using 1000 processor elements to achieve 1 BFLOPS performance' and (4-4) high-level man-machine communication system, to handle about 4000 Chinese characters, 1000 words, and 104 x 10t dots for picture and image processing. The area of VLSI technology includes investigation of the following types: (5-l) VLSI architecture, to make full use of VLSI with 10 million transistors per chip, which is expected to be available around 19901 and (5-2) intelligent VLSI computer-aided design (CAD) system, capable of storing architecture data base and design knowhow data base. The area of systematization technology includes development of the following systems: (6-1) intelligent programming system, which is International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15 capable of fetching subprograms from an algorithm bank (knowledge base) by user requirements, synthesizing a program, and verifying whether it meets the specified requirements in an optimum manner by a process of inferenceJ and (6-2) data base and distributed data base systems. As a developing support system, they propose to build a hardware environment called System SG on which VLSI-cAD systems will run. The CAD systems will eventually become intelligent CAD systems that will acquire design knowhow and perform automatic design of VLSI chips. System SG will consist of super inference machines and SG communication networks. System SG can be accessed through SG personal computers (very high intelligence terminals) for VLSI-cAD and software development necessary for the FGCS project. System SG is to be used for developing the FGCS, including inference machines. But System SG needs super inference machines. This would seem to be a vicious circle, unless a Łsuper inference machineŁ (part of the FGCS) can be built without the use of System SG. PROLOG Versus LISP in the FGCS Project ŁPROLOGŁ and Łnata FlowŁ are the technical terms that we heard most frequently during the presentations of the FGCS project. The word PROLOG is short for Łprogramming in Logic,Ł and it was originally proposed by K. Kowalski at the 1974 International Federation of Information Processing (IFIP) Congress. It is a high-level programming language that seems suited to the representation and manipulation of knowledge. Most of the u.s. participants (except for language specialists) had barely heard of PROLOG prior to the conference. LISP is more or less a standard language for people working on artificial intelligence (AI) in the United States. Thus one question raised by many u.s. participants was ŁWhy PROLOG, not LISP?Ł or Łwhy a logic programming language, not a conventional programming language?Ł Ko-ichi Furukawa of BTL answered this question as follows: PROLOG has all the features that pure LISP has, except for a lambda function. In addition, nondeterministic procedures are possible in PROLOG. Formal treatment and verification are easier in a logic programming language such as PROLOG. A logic language forces us to develop well-structured programs so that readability and modifiability should improve. However, it may be difficult to do intelligent optimizations so as to produce efficient programs on 
a logic programming language. On the other hand, logic expressions can contain a lot of parallelisms and thus may be suitable for data flow machines. It seems that there is a natural relation between PROLOG and data-flow computation. (See ŁPROLOG and Data-Flow Computation Mechanism,Ł by T. Yokoi of BTL, in JIPDEC's Research Reports in Japan--A Collection of Recent Research Reports Related to the R'D of the FGCS.) International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 Kazuhiro Fuchi of BTL stated that, ŁPROLOG is chosen as the starting point because PROLOG systeas are considered capable of integrating all the good features of LISP systems, and since PROLOG is a programming language based on basic inference operations, PROLOG machines could represent the first step toward inference aachines.Ł According to inforaation presented at the conference, research in· PROLOG has been primarily pursued in Europe, especially at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, and at Marseilles University, France. J.F. Sowa of IBM Systems Research Institute (SRI) in New York City is also active in the field. A tiaely tutorial article by Ron Ferguson entitled ŁPROLOG--A Step Toward the Ultiaate Ca.puter Language,Ł was recently published in the BYTE Magazine (November 1981, pp. 384-399). Observations and Assessaents of the FGCS Project As was pointed out by Tohru Moto-oka and Hajime Karatau in their lectures, there will be many impacts if the FGCS project is Łsuccessful.Ł For example, the following changes are expected: 1. Computers that can be operated by natural languages will be much easier to use than today's ca.puters. This will significantly broaden application areas. Therefore the number of people using computers will increase explosively. 2. Such computers be helpful in enhancing productivity in the currently low-productivity sectors such as retail industries, public services, medical services, offices of white-collar workers, agriculture, fishery, and forestry. 3. The use of intelligent robots will spread over various manufacturing plants. 4. Multilingual translation machines will reduce the language barrier of the Japanese. This together with satellite ca.munication and optical fiber techniques will help internationalization of Japan. s. Japan has an opportunity to fulfill its international duty expected as an economic power by investing and taking a leadership role in a large-scale scientific project such as the PGCS. The subject of international cooperation was brought up from time to time during the conference. For example, B.A. Feigenbaum, of Stanford University, said, Łsignificant international collaboration will be possible and useful in the development of fifth-generation systems. Ł Ł Ł A truly international effort will be necessary and a major international economic and social benefit will result.Ł We gather from various discussions that the following statements from the proceedings of the PGCS conference represent the PGCS committee's position: For a number of reasons, it is difficult to make this an international project. Instead, it is desirable to execute it as a national project with Japan having the liberty to decide International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17 its course. It aust be noted, however, that the project includes research on aechanical translation, mechanical interpretation, etc. which must be carried out hand-in-hand with other countries. In these fields, therefore, it will be found expedient to link the projects with similar projects abroad or arrange for joint studies. During the panel discussions, two opposite views were expressed on the PGCS project: one view was that the scope of the project is too broad and the other view was that it is too narrow. The for .. r opinion is expressed in state .. nts such as, ŁThe project must confront the reality and aust focus on smaller topics. We cannot work on so .any aspects. We do not have enough computer scientists. Being realistic is Proponents of the latter view point out that Łthere are neglected areas such as ca.plexity theory, algorithm design, semantics, and biological approach.Ł B.B. McCormick, of Stanford University, viewed the FGCS's proposal as being aade up of three principal subprojects, the SG personal computer, SG super computer, and SG cognitive computer, and he said, In 25 years in the computer field, I have observed many super computer projects Ł Ł Ł Ł None of these projects remotely achieved its stated goalsr all the syste .. they built were not commercially successful. Nonetheless, projects such as these built the early American supremacy of the computer industry ŁŁŁŁ I see the FGCS as a project to develop the technological base underlying knowledge systems. Our observation is sa.ewhat in line with McCormick's. Clearly, the goals set by the PGCS project are overly aabitious and optiaistic. AS a long-range national project, however, it is necessary and appropriate to set goals so high that no single coapany can afford working alone. If a project is so conservative that success is in sight, there is no need for a national project: it can be carried out within a coapany. In the PGCS project, so.e will succeed, soŁ may fail. It is doubtful that they will produce ooamercially successful AI .. chines within 10 years. But that is not their purpose. The significance of the project will be the scientific by-products, or the basic technologies that .. Y result from the nationwide efforts to make the project as successful as possible. These by-products will be helpful for improving productivity in aany fields and will strengthen Japanese industry as a whole. These accomplish-.nts would certainly increase Japan's oo.petitive position in a nuaber of hardware and software products in future office auta.ation, personal computer, distributed systems, and so on. An accurate assessment of the FGCS project will be to view it as a part of ŁJapan's strategy for the ŁeosŁ as described in a recent article in Business Week 14, 1981). Japanese scientists and engineers seea determined to prove themselves as innovators and to surpass the United States in this knowledge-intensive industry. The PGCS project together with other MITI-sponsored research prograas (see Appendix B) will help young researchers in Japan gain confidence to become more innovative in the computer field. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 Report on Visits to Research Laboratories and Universities in Japan Introduction and Summary. In this section, we report on noteworthy findings froa our postconference visits, which were arranged by the National Research Council through the ORR office in Tokyo. 'l"be first author had visited these institutions in 1971 and 1976 and was impressed this ti .. by the changes that have been made and the progress that our Japanese colleagues have achieved since then. In 1970 and 1971, aajor universities in Japan were opening new depart.ents called Łinforaation engineeringŁ or Łinforaation scienceŁ that were separate froa the traditional electrical and electronics engineering depart.ents. The university computer centers were primarily oriented, and there were a relatively small nuaber of terainals for tiae-sharing service. The curriculua at that tiae was doainated by infor.ation sciences (such as information and coding theory, signal processing, and pattern recognition), and very few courses were given on architecture, operating systems, software, artificial intelligence, and so on. The situation has changed significantly in the past 5 to 10 years. The university curricula seem coaparable to those of many u.s. universities, although they do not aatch such aajor universities as Stanford and MIT in breadth of subjects offered. At Tokyo, Kyoto, and Osaka universities, however, we found that aany laboratories were well equipped with computing facilities, ainioomputers and microco.puters. Bxperiaental data flow machines have been impleDMtnted in several places, and there is an increasing level of activity in sophisticated pattern recognition, speech recognition, and language translation. Artificial intelligence is gaining popularity, although we did not see in Japan Łexpert systeaaŁ like those developed at Stanford university. We met several students working on topics related to LISP and PROLOG. The industrial and government laboratories we visited were MITI's BTL, HTT's Yokosuka Laboratory, and the research laboratories of Hitachi, Pujitsu, and NBC. All these sites except for Hitachi's Central Research Laboratory are relatively new. Ten years ago, BTL was in a shabby building in downtown Tokyo and was about to launch the PIPS project. Row it occupies an building in a serene environaent of Tsukuba City, equipped with powerful computing facilties. HTT's Yokosuka Laboratory was established in 1972, and its .adern gigantic building is as striking as that of Bell Laboratories in Boladel or of the IBM Research Center in Yorktown, although it is smaller that these u.s. laboratories (it houses only 1000 eaployees). At Pujitsu, Hitachi, and NBC, our Japanese colleagues were quite open in discussing their latest high-end machines such as PAOOM M-380/382 and HITAC M-280H, which is under development. All three companies are working on Super-cray computers, which will be ready in two to three years. Hitachi is working on a vector processor called HP-1 whose speed will be 250 MPLOPS. The MITI-sponsored super coaputer project is substantially more aggressive and is aiming at 10 BPLOPS. Pujitsu is proud of its successful development of a new arsenide-(GaAs)-based transistor, BBMT (high electron .ability International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19 transistor). There are several to a dozen people working on the Josephson junction in each of these laboratories as well as at BTL and Nft. Personal computers are booming among computer hobbiests and small businesses. We heard that many short courses on personal computers are commercially available. Both MITI and Japanese computer manufacturers are placing significant emphasis on software development. At both Fujitsu and NEC we heard about their efforts on software design and management tools. Electrotechnical Laboratory. The Electrotechnical Laboratory (BTL) is the largest national research organization in Japan specializing in electricity and electronics. Since its establishment in 1891, BTL has undergone a series of expansions and reorganizations to cope with the needs of rapid technological innovation. In 1948 it gave birth to the Electrical Communication Laboratory (Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation), and the BTL became a part of the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), which is under MITI. BTL has 729 employees, of whom 566 are research staff. It is one of the nine research organizations (of 16) that have in recent years moved to Tsukuba to form the Tsukuba Research Center of AIST. Tsukuba is a new scientific and educational city located approximately 60 km (37 miles) from the center of Tokyo to the northeast and about 40 km northeast of the New Tokyo International Airport. First we visited their impressive computer center. The new Research Information Processing system (RIPS), which was installed and became operational in December 1980, offers advanced computing services to the Tsukuba Research Center of AIST. It contains the following four subsystems: 1. Boat computer, which is a FACOM M-200 (11.8 MIPS) with 16-MB main memory, 64-KB buffer, and 38-GB mass storage system. 2. Center work stations, which provide high-performance input-output devices. The work stations include batch and time-sharing system (TSS) work stations, Kanji displays (Fujitsu 6652A), high-performance and high-resolution graphic displays, computer-aided design (CAD) work stations, and so on. 3. Remote work stations and laboratory automation facilities. 4. Optical fiber communication network. It consists of three types of subnetworks: (a) looped data highways operating at 16.89 Mbits/sJ (b) starlike dedicated network with the maximum data transmission rate of 1.5 MB/sJ (c) video network, which allows remote access of a video film library. More than 500 data terminals are accommodated by the data highway, and approximately 50 minicomputers are planned to join the network. The three optical communication networks have an overall length of 360 km. We then visited the Information Science Division, which has approximately 50 people and consists of six sections: bionics, pattern processing, speech processing, mathematical engineering, computer International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 vision, and .. chine inference. Kasuhiro Puchi is the general .. nager of the Infor .. tion Science Division. Be alao serves as chair-.n of the on Basic Theory for the PGCS project. R. Hakajt.a of the Pattern Processing Section showed us their work on synthetic speech and speech recognition, which is a continuation of the PIPS project that MITI sponaored in the 1970s. ror speech recognition they use a vocal code .adel to be represented by 17 par ... ters. The systea can recognise 23 pboneaes and 80 to 90 syllables. Their goal is to have a dictionary of 3000 to 5000 words. In the Seaiconductor Device Section (which is in the Electronic Device Division), B. Hayashi explained their efforts to develop future elements of VLSI. As for the a..ory chip, their target is a nonvolatile aeaory chip of 10 Mbits, which .. Y become an alternative to the .. gnetic bubble. As for logic eleaents, they are looking into the high-apeed liaits of metallic oxide seaiconductor large-scale integration (MOSLSI). Hayashi said that 10 people were working in the Seaiconductor Device Section. In addition, five to six people are working in GaAa research, and six people on the Josephson junction within BTL. Bosuai Tanaka, who is .. nager of the Machine Inference Section and gave a presentation on ŁIntelligent Man-Machine Interface Mechani ... Ł at the PGCS conference, described their efforts in natural language understanding. The effort is directly related to aachine translation and question-answering syste... Be said that their effort to iapleaent a syntactic parser was already five years old. A syntactic analysis parsing tree was created by using LINGOL of MIT, and the iaple-.ntation language is standardised LISP, i.e., Utah's LISP. Our overall impressions of BTL were as follows& The building and facilities (especially the computing center), as well as the serene surroundings, were quite impressive. The levels of technical expertise of the BTL people appear very high, although relatively few of thea hold Ph.D.'s and they rarely publish papers in international journals. The number of researchers who are actually involved in the PGCS at BTL is 20 to 25. Unless they inti .. tely coordinate their basic research efforts with those at universities and industries, they will not be able to attack all the important theoretical proble.. that are required for the development of FGCS. Yokosuka Electrical eo .. unication Laboratory of NTT. The Electrical Oomaunication Laboratories (BCL) is the research ara of Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corporation (NTT) and consists of the R6D Bureau, Musashino BCL (1800 people), Yokusuka BCL (1000 people), and Ibaraki BCL (200 people). Yokosuka BCL was established in 1972, and its activities include the following& Ł data communication (data communication network, computer, and text processing), Ł transmission (digital network, optical fiber, satellite communications, and mobile communication), Ł video communication (facsimile, video conferencing, and video processing), and International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21 Ł input-output equipment (telephone sets and input-output equipment for data, character, and speech). The Data Communication Department under Iwao Toda developed NTT's network architecture DCNA, which resembles IBM's SNA. Toda was also the head of the DIPS project, which developed high-performance computers (DIPS I, DIPS II model 5, DIPS II model 25, and so on), software, and the data base for NTT's nationwide data communication system. In his department is a communicating word processor (CWP) that can perform functions such as drafting of documents, editing of image pattern input through a facsimile terminal, document storage, and text communication. Also under study are Kana-Kanji code conversion, Japanese text-editing processing, and Kanji-processing software. Research and development efforts on optical fiber communication systems are being pursued by the ECL's three laboratories: Musashino is responsible for devices (optical source and detector)J Ibaraki is responsible for fiber and cable, and Yokosuka is drawing up a total system. In the mid-October, NTT sent out a press release concerning a semiconductor laser for a 1.5-p oscillator, where 1.5 p is the wavelength with least propagation loss. As for satellite communication, they are working on the development of domestic satellite communication systems using the 30/20 GBZ band and DA-TDMA (demand assigned-time division multiple access) systems. CAPTAIN is NTT's Viewdata, a video information service providing a text-editing system that is unique to Japanese markets. It is a facsimile-based text editing for handwritten documents: by adding special marks to the original documents by hand and inputting them into the facsimile terminal, a user can obtain an edited output as a facsimile output. Speech recognition technology is applied to such areas as mail sorting at the post office and information and inquiry service in the banking business. As for speech synthesis, NTT bas a patent dispute with Texas Instruments (TI) because PARCOR (partical correlation technique), which was developed by Dr. Itakura and others of ECL is used by TI in its product Łspeak and Spell.Ł (A number of Japanese companies including Hitachi, Mitsubisbi, NEC, SANYO, Oki, General Instrument, and Matsushita are producing large-scale integration (LSI) implementation of ItakuraŁs voice synthesis method.) An optical character reader (OCR) terminal has been developed by which handwritten alphanumerical, ŁKatakana,Ł and special symbols can be read accurately. Recognition of Kanji (printed and handwritten) is still in the research stage. A new portable Kanji printer that prints at the speed of 15 characters per second has been developed, using the thermal printing method and an LSI mask-ROM (1 Mbit) for the generation of 3400 Kanji characters. The Musashino ECL, which has a staff of about 1800, includes a division called the Fundamental Research Division. Dr. Yamashita from its Information Processing Research Department gave us a brief account of their activities. Activities include machine translation (eight people), data flow machine (nine people), data base machine (two people), LISP machine (two people), programming theory, data base International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 theory, and cryptography. In the machine translation group, a prototype system is under way baaed on the transfer method. It uses DBC 2020/TOPS using MATRIX language. According to Yamashita, similar efforts exist at Fujitsu, Kyoto University (Professor Makoto Nagao), and Kyusbu University (Professor Tamacbi). The data flow machine group started two years ago and is building a LISP machine. They are not considering the use of PROLOG yet. A data flow processor array syetea, EDDY, is being developed, which consists of 4 x 4 processing ele.ente (two Z8001 each) and two broadcast line control units. This is used for analyzing the operational characteristics of the data-driven processor array system. As for research on data flow machines, saae efforts exist at Oki, Gunma University (Professor Sowa), as well as at BTL, ECL, and the University of Tokyo. The HTT group has quite a few entries in Research Reports in Japan--A Collection of Recent Research Reports Related to the R&D of the Fifth-Generation Computer Systems (see Appendix D). Dr. Banada, the head of the Software Engineering Department in the Data Processing Development Division at Yokosuka ECL, described the design methodology used in DIPS (DIPS is HTT's standard information processing system). A documentation chart called BCD (hierarchical and compact description chart) bas been developed by extending the BIPO flow chart of IBM. It is used for developing control programs, data base software, and language processors. University of Tokyo Electrical Engineering and Electronics Departments: Professor Hiroshi Miyakawa, a well-known information and coding theorist, gave us an overview of the Electrical Engineering (BE) Department, which has 10 chairs, and the Electronics Department, which has 6 chairs. Each chair consists of one professor, one associate professor, and two assistants. The two departments occupy the same building (the Electronics Department branched out from the BE Department in 1960), and for all practical purposes they are not distinguishable. There are 95 juniors and 95 seniors for the two departments combined. Their master's course (a two-year program) has the capacity of 48 students per year. The doctoral course (a program of three or more additional years after the master's course) has the capacity of 28, but the actual number of enrolled Ph.D. candidates is around 20 each year. About 25 to 30 percent of Ph.D. graduates will find university positions, and the rest will go to industrial and government laboratories. There are a number of research projects related to data flow computation. Professor Minoru Akiyama and Mr. Yamashita (a second-year Ph.D. student) discussed the application of data flow computation to the telephone exchange system. They showed us their small prototype implementation called DATAFLEX-1. The hardware of the control section of DATAFLEX-1 is similar to ŁBASIC DFMŁ of MIT. ZILOG 80A and Intel 8086 are used as processor elements. Associate Professor Tadao Saito, who is under Professor Hiroshi Inose (currently at Caltech as a visiting professor), gave us a International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23 presentation on three topicsz (1) oo.puter (packet switching, protocol validation, and protocol atandardization)J (2) oo.puter architecture (data flow .. chine)J and (3) on-line library ayatea. The last subject is sponsored by the Ministry of Education, and Inoae is chair .. n of the oo.mittee of this project, called the ŁScientific Infor .. tion Center Project.Ł It will connect 10 to 15 libraries (primarily science and literature) under the Ministry of Education using the ŁN-1 Network,Ł which is a network that connects .. jor national universities. The network protocol is similar to that of Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) (unlike ayateaa network analysis (SNA)) in the sense that it has distributed control. Optical laser disks (10,000 pages per disk) will be used as a data base, and the system will become operational in three years. The data flow .. chine project of the Inoae-Saito laboratory started four years ago, and it is called the distributed data driven oo.puter (D3C). They use LST 11/2 as processing units and arbitration network. Saito says the arbitration network is a bottleneck of the architecture. Three graduate students are working on the implementation, and their objective is to achieve a data flow of 100 Mbita/a. Profeaaor Tohru Moto-oka and Associate Profeaaor Ridehiko Tanaka specialize primarily in computer architectures. Moto-oka is the chairman of the PGCS organizing committee, and Tanaka is alao a key aeaber and gave a presentation on Łpreliminary Research on Data Flow Machines and Data Base Machines as the Basic Architecture of Generation Coaputer Syate .. Ł at the conference. We saw a prototype impl ... ntation of a procedure level data flow .. chine called TOPSTAR. The systea hardware is co.poaed of two kinds of aoduleaz PM (processing aodule) and CM module). PM and CM correspond to a ŁtransitionŁ and a ŁplaceŁ in a Petri net, respectively, and they are both constructed with a z-80 aicroproceaaor, 16-IB ..-ory, and peripheral LSia such as interrupt controller (i 8259) and DMA controller (i 8257). In their current version, TOPSTAR-II, there are 16 PM8 and 8 CMa. Bach PM is connected to several (ranging from 5 to 8) CMa. They are currently working on several applications of this data flow machine, such as parallel merge-sort, simulation of logic circuits, and fault simulation. Moto-oka and Tanaka have also developed a multimodule associative processor called DREAM-II. It is a special-purpose processor for pattern processing, which is connected to the host caaputer through a DMA channel. DREAM-II is a single instruction multiple data (SIMD) type processing of microprogram control and consists of four modules. Bach aodule includes two-dimensional access me.ory, bit .. nipulation logic, and a high-speed aicroproceaaor (AM 2901, a bit-alice aicroprocessor of Aaerican Micro Devices, Inc.). They are evaluating this associative processing ayatea in several applications, such as hand-printed Kanji recognition and LSI .. sk-pattern testing. They are alao developing a relational data base machine baaed on hash and sort, which allows efficient execution of relational algebra operations such as JOIN and PROJECTION and set operations. Professor Riroya Fujiaaki's laboratory has 10 people. Seven people are working on speech, and three on language (translation). In the International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 speech area, the group ia studying apeecb production (generation), speech syntbeais, and speech perception. Speech perception is esaentially what we call speech recognition, but Pujiaaki aaya that recognition should be investigated by understanding the buaan paycbology. In this reapect, his approach ae ... different fro. the statistical approach taken by P. Jelinek et al. at IBM in Yorktown. Pujiaaki'a apeecb recognition effort concentrates on acoustic proceaaing and phonetic recognition. Fujiaaki said that the sounds Łb,Ł Łd,Ł and ŁgŁ are difficult to distinguish. His recent method, which aakea uae of Łtransition rateŁ par ... tera, can recognise tbea with 95 percent accuracy, wbereaa no other groups have ever achieved accuracy greater than 90 percent. Another approach to speech recognition uses syllable recognition. Japanese is aoaewbat easier to work with than Bngliab in this reapect because it bas only 200 or so syllables whereas English bas about 1000 (partial) syllables. Pujiaaki thinks that speech recognition in Bngliab will not be practical for another 10 yeara. Information Science Departmentz This department is a spinoff of the Physics Depart.ent and belongs to the Faculty of Science. There are four chairs, and we met Professors Yamada, Kunii, and Gotob. The department produces 4 Ph.D.'s, 8 M.S.'s, and 15 B.S.'s per year. Profeaaor Biaao Yamada described his efforts on a Kanji-input technique. In his scheme, each Kanji character is addressed by two strokes, and he claims that his .. chine is not aucb .are difficult to learn than an Bngliab typewriter. A 400-bour training will allow a person to input 150 characters per ainute, whereas any Kana-Kanji conversion technique will not do better than 100 characters per minute according to Yamada. Be is very much interested in having the keyboard developed by Dick Hirsch, of the Bu111m Factor Center of IBM San Joae. Professor Tosbiyasu Kunii is interested in data base and aoftware engineering. Be is no longer a aember of the FGCS committee and is rather critical about the PGCS project on two counts. First, be aaya, ŁThe FGCS effort conaina nothing new. They are aggregating existing ideas and bundling thea.Ł Second, be points out that Łthey do not place much emphasis on software, and I believe that software product engineering is important.Ł Professor Biicbi Gotob, who earned his fame as the inventor of parametron 25 years ago or so, is now heavily involved in LISP. Ria group wrote a LISP interpreter and compiler. His conclusion is Łaever sort, but do bashing in aain memory.Ł He claims that &LISP, the LISP compiler that be developed, runs faster than that of the University of Utah. His machine is called PLATS (FORTRAN-LISP associative bashing set), and it was built, interestingly enough, by Mitsui Engineering and Shipbuilding Oo. The work 
was presented at the Sixth IEEE Annual Symposium on Computer Architecture in 1979. Gotob baa also worked on electron lithography. RIKER and Japan Electronic Optics .. de his electron lithography machine, and ECL of NTT bas bought one. Co!lputer Center of the University of Tokyoz The iiiiPressive Computer Center serves over 4000 researchers from .. ny universities International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25 located around the TOkyo area through the interuniversity coaputer network. The systea consists of four lcosely coupled subsyste .. , each of which is a tightly coupled dual processor of BITAC M-200B (10 MIPS per processor) with 16-MB storage, and thus the system contains a total of 8 units of N-200B and 64-MB main storage. There are 8 drums (16 MB each, 120MB in total), for the TSS system, 96 spindles of 300-MB disks, and 32 spindles of 200-MB disks. Thus the total disk capacity is 36,880 MB. In addition, a MSS (mass storage system) with 706 magnetic tape cartridges (50 MB each, 35,000 MB in total) and 12 spindles of 200-MB staging disks are attached. Five data communication control processors, and three network processors allow 500 simultaneous terminal (TSS and re110te job entry (RJB)) connections. At the center, batch processing service is provided on a Łdo-it-yourselfŁ basis, and the scheme is called advanced open-batch processing. Many color CRT displays are deployed for this purpose, and the following input-output equipaent is provided: 7 card readersJ 13 line printers, each with automatic paper cutterJ 12 magnetic tape transportsJ 1 Kanji laser-beaa printer/plotter (720 lines per minute cut sheeta)J and 1 floppy disk. Aa for picture-and image-processing systems, there are five graphic displays (one high-resolution display, three storage-scope displays, and one color graphic display), five Kanji displays and keyboards, three ink-jet Kanji printers, and six XY plotters. A VAX-11/780 is also installed as a subsystem at the center. The operating system is UNIX (rather than VAX/VMS of Digital Bquipaent Corporation (DBC)), and this systea is used for the research of software such as OS (the operating system of IBM), compiler, and editor. This VAX-11/780 subsystem can also operate as a re110te batch station on TSS terminals of the BITAC M-200B main system. · FORTRAN 77 is the language used by more than 90 percent of the users, so the center baa a large FORTRAN support software. other available languages are BASIC, PASCAL, PL/I COBOL, APL, LISP, RBDUCB (a foraula aanipulator), ALGOL 68, and RPG. This LISP COJIIPiler, called BLISP as developed by Gotoh's group, is one of the fastest LISP coapilers employing hash techniques. The REDUCE runs under the BLISP. In addition, they have text editor and text-formulating editor. An inforaation retrieval system called TOOL-IR on ORION is also available, and several data bases (primarily literature abstracts and indices) are accessible via TSS terainals. This huge computer center is operated by 41 people, and there are 13 people (including two associate professors) for research and development tasks. According to Gotoh, Hitachi is expected to deliver a Super-cray aachine to this oo.puting center by 1983. Kyoto University DepartMnt of Information Science: 'l'he departŁnt was founded in 1970 and consists of six chairs: inforaation science fundamentals (Professor TOshiyuki Sakai)J logic circuits and automata (Professor International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 Shuzo Yajima, Associate Professor Yahiko Kambayashi)J co.qputer systeas (Professor Hiroshi Bagiwara, Associate Professor Shinji Tomita)J computer software (Professor Takao Tsuda, Associate Professor Masaahi Shimasaki)J information systems engineering (Professor Yutaka Ohno). Each year 40 students are admitted to the undergraduate program, 18 students to the master's program, and several to the doctoral program. Professor Sakai's laboratory has approximately 20 people including two assistants (Ph.D.'s), 2 Ph.D. students, 9 M.s. students, and 5 visiting researchers. The laboratory is divided into three groups: (1) automatic speech processing, (2) picture processing and image understanding, and (3) document understanding. Yasuo Ariki, an assistant, described a spoken word recognizer (implemented by Matsushita) that can recognize isolated Japanese words spoken by unspecified speakers. The recognition algorithm is baaed on two-step recognition: phoneme recognition (using reference patterns) followed by word recognition (using a word dictionary). It operates satisfactorily in real time for 10 numerals and 32 city names. In experiments the system achieved 94.3 percent recognition rate for 5 males and 93.3 percent for 5 females according to their report. This prototype system was exhibited at ŁpoRTOPIAŁ held at Kobe this summer. Michihiko Minou, a Ph.D. student, demonstrated their storage and retrieval systea for Japanese documents. This specific system is designed to handle digitized visiting cards. Retrieval of a visiting card is requested either by the character code or by handwritten characters. In both cases, key parameters are extracted from these patterns, and the most likely visiting card is selected by the pattern matching method. The correct retrieval rate is 78 percent in their experiments involving 615 visiting cards stored, when an inquiry is done in character codes, which are then translated into character patterns. Kosaka Inagaki, an assistant, showed us a parallel processing sytem MACSYM for fast document processing. The system contains 4 (expandable up to 17) Z8001 16-bit microprocessors with 128-KB local memory and shared memory of 8 Mbits (maximum 14 Mbits). A newspaper layout understanding system is built on MACSYM. A newspaper image is fed into the system via a digital facsimile (COPIX 9700 by Toshiba). A news item designated by location is then extracted by using the newspaper layout rule1 the headline is normalized in size1 background patterns are suppressed7 and the text is reconstructed line by line. The processed image is suited for further editing or information retrieval by matching keywords in headlines. Professor Yutaka Ohno's group is working on (1) concurrent LISP, which is a concurrent programming language based on LISP, and a multi-microprocessor for it7 (2) a multi-microprocessor system for three-dimensional color graphics, and (3) a data base management system (DBMS) for a composite type of distributed data base. He is also investigating functional programming language from the standpoint of software design. Ohno will be the general chairman of the Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering to be held in Tokyo in September 1982. (Dr. Koji Kobayashi, the chairman of NEC, is the honorary chairman of the conference.) Professor Hiroshi Hagiwara and Associate Professor Shinji Tomita work on computer systems and architecture. A microprogrammable International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27 cc.puter, GA-l, has four hollogeneous arithŁtic and logical units (ALUs), suitable for low-level parallel processing and for such applications as luge processing, real tiŁ aniMtion, and language processing (BASIC, APL, LISP, and PASCAL). The next version, GA-2, is under development (by 10 people for two years) and will be operational in March 1982. It is a user-.icroprogr .... ble computer, and its processing power and aicroprograa productivity will be an order of Łagnitude higher than those of GA-l. Its software will be in PL/I. Professor Shuji Doshita's group works on (1) complexity theory related to Born set&J (2) aachine translation, and (3) a knowledge base. approach to document retrieval. The first subject is concerned with whether the unsatisfiability for a Born set in the propositional logic can be decided by unit or input resolution in deterministic polynoaial tiae. The second subject is concerned with their attempt to construct an English-Japanese machine translation system via formal semantic representation based on Montague Gr .... r. (Montague Gr .... r is a linguistic theory originated by Richard Montague in 1974.) Toyoaki Nishidera, a Ph.D. student and assistant, showed us their prototype of a machine translation systeŁ based on PARAFAOOM 0200. The program is written in LISP. Dosbita and his group, although they are not officially affiliated with the PGCS co.aittee, were quite faailiar with PROLOG as well. OVerall, we were quite iapressed by the depth and breadth of the work being done in this laboratory. CoafUting Center of Kyoto University1 The computing center bas four CPUs of PACON M200, with main storage of 48 MB. The operating system is aultiple virtual storage (MVS). The center is connected through the N-1 network (a packet switching network of NTT) to Tokyo and six other ujor national universities. More than 1500 batch jobs per day are handled here, and 180 TSS users are serviced. About 30 percent of the workload is froa nearby universities and colleges that are connected to this center. Bagiwara said that PACON M382 will ooae here in 1982 or 1983. Other Departmental In parallel with the Department of Information Science discussed above, there is the School of Electrical Engineering, which consists of three departmental the Department of Electrical Engineering (which has been in existence since 1898), the Department of Electronics (since 1954), and the Department of Electrical Engineering II (since 1961). they admit 120 undergraduate students each year and 85 aaster's students. Professor Makoto Nagao, who is a ooa.ittee member of PGCS, belongs to the Department of Electrical Engineering II. Unfortunately, he was out of town, but we met his assistant professor, Takashi Matsuyama, and Jun-ichi Nak..ura, a Ph.D. student. Their current research topics include (1) pattern recognition and picture processing, and (2) aechanical processing of natural languages (i.e., uchine translation). They have iapl ... nted two ucbine translation syste... One is for translating from English to Japanese the titles of scientific and technical articles, and it is written in PL/I. The systeŁ has been transferred to BTL of Tsukuba. The other syst .. , currently under developaent, will translate computer manuals written in Japanese into Bnglisb. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 Profeaaor TOahiharu Baaegawa is in the Department of Applied Matheaatica and Physica and holda the chair in logic ayate... Ria current research areaŁ encoapaaa (1) on-board proceaaing and scheduling in ca..unication aatellitea, (2) ayatea theoretic approaches to tranaporation ayateaa, (3) queueing network theory and ita application to ca..unication networks. The aatellite project is a joint reaearch with IDD and is aiaing at on-board processing satellites, which will beoo.e available in the 1990s. Profeaaor Hasegawa is involved in the traffic control project, which uses fiber optics of 35 ka between Osaka and Kobe. Oaaka University, T9Jonaka C&!fUB Department of Information and Computer Sciences: The department was established in 1970, and there are six chairs: fund ... ntala of information and computer sciences (Professor Kokichi Tanaka, Associate Professor Shin-ichi Taaura)J logic design and autoaation theory (Professor Tadao Kaaaai, Associate Professor Ken-ichi Taniguchi)J computer languages (Professor Hobuki TOkura, Assistant Profeaaor TOahio Araki)J infor .. tion processing .. chines (Professor Makoto Kizawa, Aaaociate Professor Jun-ich TOyoda)J analysis of information systems (Professor TOahio Fujiaawa, Associate Professor Suauau Matoba)J and computer organization (Professor Kenauke Takaahi .. , Associate Professor Rideaki Miyahara). The department adaits 40 undergraduate students every year. Professor Tanaka's laboratory covers pattern recognition, artificial intelligence, and knowledge engineering, and we were given de.anstrationa of several prototype impl ... ntationas (1) an processing ayatem for medical applications, such aa (a) diaenaional display based on aerial taaograaa and (b) auta.atic aaaeably of eye fundus photographs using blood vessel structures' (2) i .. ge input and output devices using a two-diaenaional charge-coupled device (CCD). Image processing such as filtering is done by Intel 8085. In the area of artificial intelligence, Professor Tanaka's group is working on a data structure for knowledge representation, called p-factor, and is applying the ache .. to question-answering ayateaa and i .. ge interpretation systems. A LISP version of p-factor was created for implementation on PACOM 230/45.5 (256 KB). They are also working on a Kanji input-output system for Japanese word-processing applications. Professor Tadao Kasaai, who is internationally known for his earlier work on algebraic coding theory, is now interested in cryptography aa well as in aultiuaer coding theory. Ria associate professor, Ken-ichi Taniguchi, will soon be visiting the University of California at Berkeley to work with Professor Michael Harrison. Mr. Sugiyama, an assistant, is interested in an algebraic specification language and ita applications. Another assistant, Nr. Ito, ia interested in theoretical problema of relational data bases and is investigating how to handle dependency between attributes. Be aeeaa familiar with the work of Ron Fagin of IBM's San Jose Laboratory. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29 According to Kasaai, there were no activities related to languages for data flow .achines. Sa.e students are using the interpreter for the simple functional prograaming language that was designed by John Backus. Professor TOshio Pujisawa, a well-known network theorist, is now interested in the computational complexity aspect of layout problems (for PCB, LSI) and placement and wiring. Be is also working on the problem of analyzing a large analog circuit that involves a linear equation AX Ł y, where A is a larger sparse aatrix. Be is faailiar with the work of Bob Brayton of IBM Yorktown. TOshio Matsuura, an assistant, is using multi-microsystema for software-related work. One is PARAPACOM PFL-16A, for which he and his student designed and i.ple .. nted a floppy disk controller and color CRT interface. The OS is a single-user version of control program for microprocessor (CP/M), and Unix-type file structure is used. Professor Kensuke Takashima was recently appointed professora he was previously a depart.ental director of NTT's Yokosuka Laboratory. Takashima is planning to start a data base aachine project, but he has not acquired a staff yet. Associate Professor Miyahara recently joined the department from Kyoto University. Be is implementing a microprocessor for simulating queueing network models. Z80s are used to represent nodes, and Fujitsu 1400 for statistical analysis. Be is also planning to develop a local network of the Ethernet type using fiber optics (a similar effort exists at Taukuba, called GAMMA NET, for which Professor Ebihara of Tsukuba University is the principal investigator). In order to provide Łmulti-access and broadcast channelŁ characteristics, a device called a star-coupler will be used. The idea is to provide cross-talks between optical fibers that are coupled by this device. According to Miyahara, NBC has developed a product that couples 8 fibers, and TOshiba is developing a star-coupler for 100 fibers. Department of Control Engineeringa Professor Saburo Tsuji came to the university from ETL about 10 years ago and is well known for his long-term involvement in robotics. Tsuji says that robotics research in Japan has been quite successful in technology transfer in the past 10 years. The use of welding robots is an example. The recent robotic research is concerned with the developaent of robots and robots with vision inspection capability. The latter will be used for seaiconductor production (vision for wire-bonding, inspection of regular patterns on masks and wafers) and inspection of PCB in computer aanufacturing. Aa for robot languages, Tsuji thinks that the United States is .ore advanced than Japan. Examples are Stanford R and MIT Assembly analysis. According to Tsuji, the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory of NITI in Tsukuba City is working on robots that assist handicapped people, such as a robot that raises a patient's bed. Tsuji is actively involved in vision-related research. Be referred us to an article on ŁIndustrial Computer Vision in JapanŁ that appeared in Computer (published by IEEE), May 1980, pp. 50-62. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 Pu1itsu Laboratories, Lt4. Hiroshi Yaa4a, the director, was our host. Tatsuo Miyakawa, the manager of the Information Processing Laboratory, and Kenicbi Miura, a senior engineer in the Development Division, provided Bnglisb translations of Yaaada's talk. Y ... da gave us a brief introduction to Pujitsu and its laboratories. Pujitsu bas now established several joint ventures and subsidiaries in the United States including Corp., TRN-Pujitsu, Inc. (established in May 1980), Aaerican Teleco.aunications, Inc., at Anaheim, and Pujitsu Microelectronics, Inc., in San Diego (established in 1979). The ca.pany's overall productivity has doubled betwen 1977 and 1981. One of Pujitsu's achievements during the past year was the introduction of the world's first bigb-electron-.obility transistor (BBMT), which is a new type of transistor based on GaAa technology. They have achieved the switching delay time of 17 ps (picoseconds) per gate, wbicb coapares favorably with the top speeds of the Josephson junction. It is approxiaately 30 times faster than a conventional metallic oxide seaiconductor field effect transistor (MOSPBT). Pujitsu Laboratories, Ltd., is a wholly owned subsidiary of Pujitsu Limited. It bas 850 employees and eight divisions: research, integrated ca.unications, COIIPUter systeŁ, semiconductors, ca.ponent technology, aaterials, medical engineering, and Kansai center. Several AI-related activities exist: aachine translation (using a seaantic network as the interaediate representation), a handwritten character recognition aethod (an algoritha called Łstroke position matrix aetbodŁ) J and a speaker-independent isolated word recognition system (which accepts telephone quality speed input, based on phonetic analysis and pattern matching). Bubble memories, plasma displays, BBMT, Josephson junction, and optical devices were mentioned as research issues. Dr. Yaaada then expressed his personal opinion about the PGCS project. MITI's plan on PGCS is not definite yet, and Fujitsu has not yet decided on bow to deal with the FGCS project. In Yaada's view, the objectives are vague, whereas MITI-sponsored projects in the past bad clear targets, such as MIPS figures. Although MITI officials are asking for international cooperation, they do not seem to know how to handle it because they have had no previous experience. Despite all these uncertainties, it is certain that Fujitsu will participate in FGCS, but specific details had not yet been deterained. During the 1990s, the biggest problem will be software, but the PGCS plan does not provide a clear view of this problem, Yaaada says. Fujitsu is interested in artificial intelligence because a solution to the software bottleneck problem may be found there. Their emphasis is on aachine translation and intelligent robots. (There is a small effort in data flow machines at Fujitsu, related to control of robots.) Pujitsu does not have enough experience to aake any coaaents on LISP versus PROLOG and on whether data flow machines are proper hardware or not. We then took a tour of the plant where FACOM M-380/382, Fujitsu's largest machine, is assembled. It was announced in May 1981, and its first customer shipment will be in early 1982. The M-380 uses speed LSI logic chips (400 and 1300 logic gates per chip and 350-ps International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31 gate propagation delay, as co.pared with 1 na (nanosecond) for the IBM high-speed RAM (3081) with access ti .. of 5.5 na). High-density multichip carriers (MCC) and their horizontal stacking design improve the M-380'a internal speed. An approximately one-foot-square MCC can acca.odate up to 121 LSI logic and RAM chips. The power conawaption is 28 kVA, and air cooling is used. It has three levels of storage hierarchys 64-MB local buffer, 256-KB global buffer storage, and 64-MB main storage. Ita clock time is 16 na, and they claim that the M-380 is SO percent faster than the IBM 3081. Ita multiprocessor version M-382 can have a 128-MB aain me.ory. Several technical presentations were given by research staff memberas Maaayaahi Tezuka of the Advanced Software Section discussed their relational data base system called RDB/VI, which consists of an interactive subsystem for relational query (ISRQ), a data storage and control subsystem (DSCS), and an application subsystem. Ita query language RDB/QL is similar to SQL. A software called PLAHHBR has been developed on RDB/VI by incorporating a geographical inforaation subsystem (giving the population of different age groups, and so on). A demonstration of PLANNBR on FACOM M-200 was later given to us. It bas color graphic display support, and a Japanese language support is planned. s. Uchida talked about the aachine translation system called ATLAS/U. They adopted the transfer approach rather than the pivot approach. The key strategies of ATLAS/U are (1) to adopt a conceptual network as a representation of the intermediate level, (2) to .-phaaize seaantic analysis, (3) to select syntax and words by pattern matching and expression rules, and (4) to learn by examples. Five people worked for two years on ATLAS/U. The ATLAS/U is used for c011puter manual translation from Japanese to Bngliah. It uses Kana-Kanji conversion for the Japanese input, and ita limitation is the size of the dictionary. The current version contains 10,000 Japanese words and 40,000 Bnglish words. We also saw their speech recognition system. It requires a 0.6-a pause between phrases and handles 1000 words (256 B per word). A handwritten character recognition system uses feature extraction techniques by projecting patterns to different directions, line densities, and so on. Other noteworthy items discussed or shown in the exhibit room were as followss a GaAs field effect transistor (PET) amplifier (5.9 to 6.4 GBz) was developed to replace the traveling wave tube (TWT). A large-capacity disk drive called Eagle I (F6421), which baa 446-MB capacity and 1.859-Mbit/s data rate and is comparable to the IBM 3380. Its first cuato.er is in 1983. Ita enhanced version, Eagle II (F6425), will be available in 1984. Magnetic bubble me.ary for 1-Mbit devices is under A bubble microco.puter is being considered. As for very high speed switching devices, Josephson GaAa and RBMT are being pursued by five to six people in each area. Pujitau established in 1973 the International Institute for Advanced Study of Social Information Science (liAS-SIS) with Kitagawa (professor e.eritua of applied mathematics at Kyuahu University) as ita director. In April 1980, it .aved from laaata, TOkyo, to a new independent building inside the Humazu OOaplex of International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 Fujitsu. It appears to be a very academic group of 30 people or so and ia divided into six groupaa fund ... ntal informatica, information science, ca.puter science, system science, mathematical science, and physical science. They appointed Professor R. Bellaan (matheaatics), Professor B.R. Caianiello (environ.ental science), and aany other foreign scholars aa visiting fellows. According to their brochure, Professor Raymond Yeh, of the University of Maryland, also serves as a counselor. We did not visit the institute, but Kan ... Kobayashi, of this institute, gave a presentation, Łprograa Design Transformation,Ł which discussed the specification language, design language, and iaplementation language froa the knowledge engineering viewpoint. Lastly, M. Sugi110to of the Engineering DepartJient, Development Division, gave a talk, ŁSoftware Diagraa Increase Software Productivity.Ł The staff of liAS-SIS developed a software design tool called the Fujitsu essential software diagraa description (FBSDD) as a Mans for software docwaentation (for both design specification and isplemental specification) and as tools for supporting the top-down design and iapleŁntation. Be touched on PROLOG, although it aeeaa to have no direct bearing on FBSDD. Hitachi Central Research Laboratory. The Hitachi Central Research Laboratory, situated in the peaceful surroundings of Kokubunji, a suburb of Tokyo, was founded in 1942. It has 800 research ..-bare, 160 of whoa have doctorates, and 350 support people. It is one of six corporate laboratories. The others are Hitachi Research Laboratory (1260 people), Mechanical Research Laboratory (550), Engineering Research Laboratory (250), Production Research Laboratory (420), and System Laboratory (280). In addition, there are division labor a tor lea (Conswaer Product Research Center, Design Center, and Device Center). Of the 74,000 Hitachi employees, 8,000 are in RŁD (5,000 in plants and divisions and 3,000 in the laboratories). RiD expenditures for Hitachi are $600 million per year (5.9 percent of sales), and expenditures for the Central Research Laboratory are 860 million per year. Of the research budget, 45.3 percent ia for Łindependent researchŁ and the remaining 54.7 percent is for Łsponsored researchŁ (45.7 percent from plants and business groups, 8 percent froa subsidiary coapanies, and 4 percent from the govern.nt). Bisashi Borikoahi, manager of the Eighth DepartJient, was our boat. Be told us that computer manufacturers do not have much involveMnt in FGCS, although K. Torii of Hitachi is on the Architecture Subcommittee. Hitachi does not have many PGCS-related activities yet, although a language translation effort exists. However, another MITI project, the super computer project under Dr. Kashiwagi of BTL, involves heavily the six major computer companies (Fujitsu, Hitachi, NBC, Mitsubishi, TOshiba, and Oki). The major research target of the super computer project is technologies such as GaAs and Josephson junction, and Hitachi, Fujitsu, and NBC as well as BTL are working on these technologies. We were then taken to various laboratories. Mr. Suzuki discussed their efforts on magnetic bubbles. A 1-Mbit chip has now been International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33 transferred to the product division (16-to 64-lbit chips have already been used for NTT'a BSS). This 1-Mbit chip will be used for nuaerical control (NC). A 4-Mbit bubble card is now planned as the next project. Ita potential applications include point of sale, processing computer, office computers, acoustic and portable systems. In the robotics laboratory, Mr. Bjiri gave us a brief account of the history of Hitachi robots& a prototype intelligent robot called Bivip Mrk 1 (1970)r a coapact packaging robot, BI-T-Band Mrk 2 (1972)r a precision inserting robot, Bi-T-Band Bxpert-2 (1973), an electro-.otor aaaellbly robot, Expert-S (1975), and so on. Be also showed us a vacuua cleaner aasellbler robot and a nuclear reactor inspection robot. About 50 industrial robots are sold per month. Hitachi's competitors are Kawaaki-Juko (strong in large robots) and Tateiahi Ooapany. Aa for the robotics in Japan, Bjiri referred us to a survey paper written by s. Tsuji of Osaka University that appeared in Co!puter (see the section on Osaka University). We were also shown a d..anstration of a TSS-baaed docu.ent-editing system, called TPS/II. An A4-aize sheet (typically 1000 characters) requires 2 hours for Kana input, and 30 minutes for lana-Kanji conversion. (Professor Yamada's system at the University of Tokyo will operate 2 to 3 ti .. s faster after operators are trained.) The system seeaa too slow for any practical use and has the homonym problem in the lana-Kanji conversion. A sentence in the da.onstration had the word ŁahocboŁ as the subject of the sentence, which is supposed to mean Łhead of institute (or research center).Ł But the Kanji that appeared on the screen after Kana-Kanji conversion was a homonym, Łbead of police (or fire) station.Ł The operator rejected this word, hit a key, and got another homonym, Łfirst aenatruation.Ł She proaptly hit the key again and finally got the right word, Łhead of institute.Ł A ca.puter network (BINET) that connects the Central Research Laboratory and Musashino Laboratory (1.2 km away) is using fiber optics with a data rate of 20 Mbits/s. In VLSI design, they are working on co.ple .. ntary .. tallic oxide seaiconductor (CMOS) chips with 20 K gates with autoaatic place .. nt and wiring. They use hierarchical structure, where a block (basic unit of logic) contains 500 to 1000 gates. They are also working on a verification prograa for physical checking. They also talked about a CMOS master slice with 6 K gates, where an autoaatic placement and wiring program (maze-running algoritha) is used. They then told us about a high-end machine, the BITAC M-2808. It will have 12 to 17 MIPS and use pipelining and buffer LSI (4 Kbita, 5.5 na), logic LSI (1500 gates, 0.5 ns), and aain ae.ary LSI (65 KB, access time 150 na). As for the vector processor and vector compiler, they discussed BAP-1 (Hitachi array processor, type 1). Its speed is 250 MPLOPS, as co.pared with Cray-1 (170 MPLOPS), FACOM 23/75 AP (25 MPLOPS), and BIT.AC M-2808-IAP (integrated array processor) (35 MPLOPS). They said that MITI'a national project baa the goal of 10 BFLOPS. MITI plana to deliver its super machine in 1988, whereas BAP-1 will be delivered in 1983. They started the HAP project two years ago with five or six International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 people, and now about 40 people are engaged in this development effort. Of these, 20 are logic designers (about 10 experienced designers and 10 new people), and the remaining 20 include assistants (for drawing), secretaries, and so on. Packaging is designed by another group. HEC (Rippon Electric Company) Central Research Laboratories. The R'D organization of HEC underwent an extensive reorganization in July 1980 and divided to form the Research and Development Group and the Production Engineering Development Group. The former handles basic technology research, and the latter, production technology and productivity. The Research and Group consists of the Basic Technology Research Laboratory (300 people), the C.C Systems Research Laboratories (200 people), the Optoelectronics Research Laboratory (70 people), the Software Product Engineering Laboratory (50 people), and the Resources and Environment Protection Laboratory (40 people). The phrase Łc.cŁ was coined by HEC to signify their commitment to the integration of Łcomputer and communications.Ł The CiC Systems Research Laboratories include the Communication Research Laboratory, the Coaputer Systems Research Laboratory, the Application System Research Laboratory, the Peripheral Equipment Research Laboratory, and the Boae Electronics Research Laboratory. Our hosts were Yukio Mizuno, the associate senior vice president, Koji Hezu, the assistant general manager, and Sohei Misaki and Shuji Hakada, all of the Software Product Engineering Laboratory. According to them, HEC has approximately 10,000 people engaged in software development: the number includes those at software companies that are HEC's subsidiaries. They briefly discussed their software development maintenance system (SDMS). It is an integrated software development system and has been used at several departments within HEC. SDMS has five subsystems: the project management subsystem, the design subsystem, the programming subsystem, the test subsystem, and the product management subsystem. They then talked about a new system construction model that unifies control-flow-based modularization techniques (a la H. Wirth and D. Parnas) and data-flow-based modularization techniques (a la M.A. Jackson and J.P. Morrison). The modularization is intended to allow stepwise comprehension of the complex system and the development of the modules to proceed in parallel. The new model combines baaed techniques (in which modules are connected by module call relations) and data-flow-based techniques (in which modules are connected by their input-output data streams). The design methodology and tools based on this model are incorporated in a subsystem of SDMS, and have been used extensively by 10 projects. COBOL and FORTRAN do not have features to realize the structure defined by the model; therefore a tool has been developed to add these features to COBOL and FORTRAN. They presented the work at COMPCOH 81, held in Washington, D.C., on September 15-17, 1981. A discussion of software quality control (SWQC) followed. Software quality features include functionality, acceptability, performance, International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35 modifiability, and reliability. The prime vehicle of SWQC is the Łoc circle,Ł where programmers expose their mistakes to their colleagues, with no management involved. Specific tools of SWQC are data sorting-stratification, control chart, Pareto's chart, and cause and effect diagram. After these technical presentations, we were taken to an exhibit room where we saw, among other things, their speech recognition device, DP-100. It can recognize spoken words of limited vocabulary. Applications of such a primitive speech recognition system include baggage or parcel sorting, simulation for air traffic control, and voice-assisted input for CAD. Another interesting prototype in the exhibit room was a fingerprint viewer. At the end of our visit we had a luncheon meeting with Michiyuki Uenohara, the senior vice president and director of research. Uenohara used to be on the technical staff of Bell Laboratories, where he was involved in research on parametric amplifiers. Unlike some of the other executives we met at Fujitsu and Hitachi, Uenohara was quite positive and supportive about the objective and significance of the FGCS project. Dewar's Report on Trip to Japan I arrived in Japan the week before the FGCS conference and so was able to attend the meeting of the Information Processing Society of Japan (IPSJ) at the University of Tokyo and to meet informally with some Japanese computer scientists, many of whom were involved in the FGCS work. Since nearly all university faculty and students were at the IPSJ meeting, I was able to meet, briefly at least, with many university professors. More extensive meetings were arranged with the followinga Professor E. Goto, chairman of the Information Science Department at the University of Tokyo (the inventor of parametron), now working on the FLATS (LISP baaed) machine and not directly involved in PGCS work; Professor Akinori Yonezawa, Tokyo Institute of Technology (who received his Ph.D. from MIT with Professor Hewitt), working on specification of the data base management system (DBMS); Professor Katayama, Tokyo Institute of Technology, working on hierarchical functional programming (BFP), a language baaed on attribute grammars; Professor Izumi Kimura, Tokyo Institute of Technology, working in the area of software engineering and text editing (the latter being a much more significant field in Japan due to character set and language problema); Koichi Furukawa, Electrotechnical Laboratory (ETL), one of the main workers in the PROLOG aspect of PGCS; and Reiji Nakajima, University of Kyoto, working on the IOTA language. In addition, I met with Professors Yoneda and Wada from the University of Tokyo, who are colleagues in the International Federation of Information Processing (IFIP) working group 2.1 (the programming languages working group, of which I am chairman). As requested by the Computer Science and Technology Board, I discussed the issue of translation of Japanese technical materials with the university people I met. At least among the academic contacts, International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 there was remarkably agre ... nt that there were no Łateriala of academic interest beyond those published in the major journals of IPSJ and of the Institute of Electronics and Ca.aunication Engineers {IECE). Furthermore, both societies publish part of their work in English. Por example, Goto'a last three papers have been published in the English-language version of the Proceedings of the IPSJ journal, which appears quarterly and carries, in addition to papers from Japanese computer scientists {one must be an IPSJ member to publish), English-language abstracts of all papers recently published in the society's Japanese-language journals. Interestingly, although several hundred ACM members in Japan receive Ca.aunications of the Association for CO!puting Machinery {ACM) and other ACM journals, fewer than 20 u.s. scientists, including Japanese residents, are IPSJ members receiving IPSJ journals. Even including library subscriptions, fever than 80 copies of the English-language Proceedings of the IPSJ journal are received in the United States. The single moat important step that could be taken to increase knowledge of Japanese work would be to promote and encourage access to this journal in the United States. The papers in it represent a useful cross section of current work, and the translated abstracts provide thorough coverage. Of course, as is the case in the United States, the acad .. ic journals do not fully cover the hardware manufacturing field, but nevertheless it is significant that the Japanese computer scientists I talked to believed it would be a waste of time to look beyond the major journals. Unlike some major industrial concerns in Japan, the academic community is eager to have ita work better known in the United States, so I take these judgments at face value. I should note that not all articles are from universities. In one sample copy I received, there was a long article by workers at Hitachi, on VM iapla.entation, which clearly reflected ongoing work of commercial relevance, and which I found to be most informative. Since I had heard that there had been discussions between ACM and IPSJ on joint membership plana, I arranged a meeting with Masumi Sakamoto, the secretary general of IPSJ. It seems that both sides are favorably disposed to the idea, but bureaucratic problems, particularly on the Japanese aide, where the directorship changes each year, have so far delayed any real progress. Such an arrangement would be highly desirable, and ways to encourage ACM to pursue this possibility should be investigated. I also visited the University of Tokyo Computer Center. This is an impressive installation, built around eight top-of-the-line Hitachi models {approximately 200 MIPS of general purpose computing power) with 128 MB of fast main memory and an amazing array of peripherals. This machine is freely available for use by academic computer scientists, in contrast to the situation at most u.s. universities, where meaningful efforts to provide high-capability computing have generally been abandoned. This discrepancy is helping Japan to close what might be called the Łsoftware gap.Ł With very few exceptions, the computing environments at u.s. universities tend to be hostile to major software projects. The commitment to avoid this situation in Japan is evident. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37 I was quite disappointed with the PGCS conference itself on two counts. Pirst, the project seems to be grounded in the uncritical acceptance of a number of pragmatically dubious, avant-garde computer science concepts, including functional programming in general and PROLOG in particular, data flow machines, object-based architectures, relational data base machines, and advanced AI concepts. Of course, all these areas represent challenging research fields, which are in fact quite well represented in u.s. universities. However, it is my opinion, and one that I found to be shared by nearly all the Western computer scientists present, that the MITI commitment to this risky research line for a high-technology, industry-based project is premature and that what is needed instead is a great deal of fundamental research, in which Japan has not been as successful as in pure technology. This concern is shared by a number of Japanese academic computer scientists, who, although no doubt more enthusiastic than I concerning the technical directions that Japan has chosen to emphasize, are nevertheless concerned that there is no good mechanism for causing MITI funds to flow into advanced university research. In his address, Professor B.A. Feigenbaum of Stanford University, although naturally enthusiastic over the basic AI direction, warned that this had to be regarded as an area requiring substantial basic research and, within the bounds of decorum, ridiculed the premature commitment to PROLOG as the central language. The second aspect of my disappointment was that the presentations were glossy, general talks complete with fancy slides, no doubt well suited for discussions with high-level funding agents, but remarkably devoid of technical content. All attempts to obtain specific information by direct questions were deflected. Either the project is even more vague than it appears, or there is a definite desire to avoid specific technical information interchange. Computer scientists with whom I spoke directly, however, seemed open and eager to exchange information. I do not believe that the software and systems aspects of this MITI project are destined to be successful unless major changes of direction occur, which currently seems unlikely. However, it should be noted that the hardware aspect (e.g., building super personal computers) will almost certainly succeed. To the extent that MITI PGCS funds are ca.mitted in this direction, Japan's enormous potential in this area will be further increased as will the competition they provide to u.s. industry. CONCLUSIONS 1. u.s. computer scientists need more information on computer science and technology in Japan. 2. Much information on Japanese computer science and technology is available in English, but it is not readily accessible to most u.s. coaputer scientists. 3. Some translation of Japanese papers in computer science is needed on a continuing, albeit selected, basis. Of highest priority is International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 the translation of Joho Shori Gakkai Ronbunshi and Section D of the Transactions of the Institute of Electronics and Com.unication Engineers (about lSO pages per .onth). Of next priority is section c of the Transactions (about SO pages per month) and the proceedings of the conferences of the IPSJ and the IECE (600-900 pages per year). Of lower priority, but still worth continuing, is the translation of the special interest group newsletters (800-1600 pages per month). A possible alternative to translation might be the annual publication of a directory of Japanese ca.puter science researchers and research projects. RECOMMENDATIONS 1. Continued translation of selected Japanese journals, theses, and books should be established under u.s. government sponsorship. Titles and abstracts of translated aaterials should be published in Computing Reviews (or an equivalent journal). These translations should be economically viable after a few years of government sponsorship. 2. A prograa should be established to send selected speaking ca.puter scientists in this country to Japan as guest workers. An intensive language program for a few specialists who do not speak Japanese could be included. Such a program could be funded by some existing private organization such as the American Federation of Information Processing Scientists or the Association for Computing Machinery, or it could be funded by the u.s. government. 3. Acadeaic centers of expertise on Japanese computing should be established in the United States or in Japan. u.s. government funding should be provided to support these centers in the continuing review and analysis of Japanese activities and (possibly) in the activities recommended above. These centers should be encouraged to interact with Japanese organizations such as the Japan Information Processing Development Center (JIPDEC), the Information Technology Promotion Agency (IPA), MITI 's Electrotechnical Laboratory (BTL), and various other governmental and industrial centers of ca.puter expertise. The existence of these centers should be advertised in u.s. computer journals, and American ca.puter scientists should be encouraged to use the facilities. Institutions that are known to have strong programs in both ca.puter science and East Asian studies and that therefore would be well-suited to host such centers include Stanford University, Harvard University, and the University of Hawaii. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Chapter 2 DEVELOPMENTS IN WESTERN EUROPE The situation in the Western European countries with respect to the availability of computer science information is different from that in Japan in two significant ways. First, there is generally good cation between American and Western European computer scientists, and, second, the American scientist can read most of the important research results in English. In the past, there has always been good communication between American and Western European computer scientists. For example, Algol 60 was developed in the early 1960s by an international committee of thirteen that included three or four Americans, as well as people from Prance, Germany, England, Switzerland, and the Netherlands. Many American computer scientists have close ties with European scientists and institutions and have spent a year or two in Europe. Further, a fair number of Europeans have American Ph.D.'s and tend to maintain their ties to the United States. The better u.s. universities and research laboratories usually have at least one European visitor in computer sciences each year, and often more. The American conferences on theory of computation, principles of programming languages, and so on, are well attended by Europeans. In addition, the major research journals, such as the Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), SIAM Journal on Computing, Software Practice and Experience, and Acta Informatica, have international editorial boards. The International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) provides a formal means for fostering communication, as explained in Chapter 6. The working group meetings and conferences promote national understanding, encourage joint research, and disseminate research ideas before they reach the publication stage. A number of international workshops in Europe, some sponsored by NATO, have also stimulated communication. Personal contact is one of the best ways to make research ideas more widely known. However, effective cooperation necessitates direct contact and travel. Support of such travel by appropriate funding agencies is critical to maintain and improve the ability of American computer scientists to benefit from European resources. Of course, not every computer scientist has close ties to Europe, and to some extent all scientists must rely on the literature to discover what is happening elsewhere. Fortunately, English is close to 39 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 being the language of publication and caa.unication for European ca.puter scientists, perhaps partly to foster ca.aunication aaong themselves. A majority of thea have traveled in the United States or England and can converse fluently in English, and al.Jiost all can read and write English. English is the official language of many European ca.puter science conferences. Further, publishers such as North Bolland, Springer, and Prentice Ball are international and publish many works of European authors in English. This is not to say that all work is done in English. sa.e results go unnoticed because they are not in English. But, by and large, tbe important work finds its way into English, and, if it does not, at least it is in one of the European languages, which are more understandable to u.s. scientists than, say, Russian or Japanese. SURVEY OP IMPORTANT JOURNALS As a first attempt at producing quantitative information on research available in English, a list was made of all articles published in eleven journals (see Table 2-1 for a list of the journals) and in the Springer Verlag Lecture Notes Series. The list included the title of the article, the author(s), and his or her country. An article with two authors from different countries was listed twice. This list is given by author's country in Appendix E and by source in Appendix P. This is a representative set of journals, ranging in areas covered froa theoretical ca.puter science to practical software to hardware. It contains American journals (e.g., Ca..unications of the ACM) as well as those published in foreign countries (e.g., Acta Inforaatica and Information Processing Letters). Of about 720 articles appearing in these journals in 1980, about 325 of these were written by people in countries other than the United States. Only seven articles were written in a foreign language. Thirty-three countries, including .oat of the Western European countries, are represented. The countries represented most heavily are the United States (393), England (48), Canada (47), Germany (47), France (27), the Netherlands (25), Israel (20), Japan (19), and Italy (15). Such statistics tend to confirm our opinion that, in general, the Western European ca.puter scientists do want to publish in English, and in the well-known, respected journals. SURVEY OP SC»>B EUROPEAN COHFBRBHCES As in the United States, a nuaber of conferences, workshops, and advanced courses are held in western Europe each year. To determine the extent of American participation in these conferences and the availability of the research, the proceedings of eight conferences held in 1980 were surveyed. All these proceedings appeared in the Springer Verlag Lecture Note Series (Springer Verlag is primarily a German publisher). Appendix G contains a list of the conferences surveyed. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41 TABLE 2-1 Sources of Information on Computing in Western Europe and Other Countries Acta Informatica Comaunications of the Association for Computing Machinery Information Processing Letters Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery Mathematics and Computers in Simulation SIAM Journal on Computing Software Practice and Experience Theoretical Computer Science Transactions on Programming Languages (TOPLAS) Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Transactions on Computers Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Transactions on Software Engineering The conference topics ranged from data bases to programming to semantics to computer-aided design. They were held in five different countries (Italy, Prance, Germany, the Netherlands, and Denmark). About one third of the papers were given by Americans (61 of 198), and only three papers were not given in English. Thus it seems that in order to promote communication among themselves, Europeans turn to English. CONCLUSIONS 1. Since most Western European computer scientists speak English fluently and tend to publish in English, no new translation facilities are necessary. 2. Personal contacts between American and Western European computer scientists are very important in the dissemination of research ideas, and should be stimulated. RECOMMENDATIONS 1. No extra translation facilities are needed. 2. A formal survey, organized by scientific area and covering important work in all Western European countries, would help to make existing materials more accessible and more widely known. The possible role of IFIP working groups in this endeavor should be explored. Personal contacts and travel should be stimulated by increasing and making more readily available foreign travel funds. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Chapter 3 DEVELOPMENTS IN EASTERN EUROPE AND THE USSR The literature review made to assess developments in Eastern Europe and the USSR involved the following countries: Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland, Rumania, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). These countries are part of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, usually abbreviated as COMECON, CMEA, or CEMA in the Western literature. The other COMECON member nations, Cuba and Outer Mongolia, were not included here. The primary objective of the review was to search for publications that cover developments relating to computer science within these countries. The review focuses almost entirely on the USSR due to its dominance in the field. The majority of the theoretical articles from Russia and Eastern Europe come from journals published by the academic community. These are sent to the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). The ACM publishes the monthly Computing Reviews, which contains abstracts from approximately 420 periodicals. Fourteen of these are Soviet journals in, or closely related to, computer science and are included as cover-to-cover translations into English. These fourteen publications include the most important Soviet computer science literature (see Appendix H). The Soviets' knowledge that these periodicals are translated encourages the Soviet academic community to make them their first choice for publishing papers. The time that passes from the publication of the Russian original until the publication of the English translation is about eight months on the average, and varies from six months to one year. This should be regarded as good service, since the delays in the publication of the original are often greater. In these periodicals there are few articles by authors living outside the soviet Union. Eastern European authors tend to publish in the journals of their own country. If an article is published outside the native country, there seems to be a greater effort to publish in a Western journal, in English, than to publish in a Soviet journal. In addition to identifying the Soviet journals received by Computing Reviews, we scanned available material since 1975 through the System Development Corporation's (SOC) search service. Many of the 475 resulting abstracts deal with typical developmental problems, rather than theoretical discussions. It is not known what percentage of these abstracts might also appear in translated journals listed in Appendix H. 42 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43 A simple test was devised to identify and quantify the number of references to COMECON authors in Western computer science and mathematical papers. It was assuaed that the number of COMECON authors cited in various papers would provide an indication of the degree to which their material is being read. For this purpose, twelve issues of the Communications of the ACM from the period 1979 to 1981 were selected. No Soviet or Eastern European authors were among the 1203 references in these issues. It would be ineffective at this tt.e to translate more journals from the COMECON countries, since the material already being translated into English is not being used by Western computer scientists. In the field of mathematics, the Soviets have an excellent reputation, and American authors make far better use of their work. An issue of the Transactions of the American Mathematical Society (volume 261, 1980) was taken as a sample. Of ita 30 papers, 9 referenced one or more Soviet papers. Of the total of 473 references, 11 were to Soviet papers. If it is not the language barrier that prevents Westerners from being acquainted with the work of the Soviet and Eastern European computer scientists, what is it? The general political condition in the Soviet Union, and in the Eastern European countries to a lesser extent, prevents technical people from attending conferences and seminars. This restriction inhibits the development of personal which is essential for a successful exchange of ideas. Other reasons might also be suggested for the lack of references to Soviet work. For example, there may be too much emphasis on theory to be of interest to Westerners, or the mass of available Western material may be considered higher-priority reading. In any case, the American computer science community needs to become more aware of the material that is available, instead of increasing the amount of translation at this time. One problem experienced in this literature search was how to determine what was available when no prior knowledge of a specific article or journal existed. That is why the general electronic scan of material was made through a library that used the System Development Corporation's search service. This service maintains approximately SO different data bases, which cover all areas of science and technology, social science, and business. A search used the following criteria: (1) COMECON countries and China, (2) material since 1975, (3) any language, and (4) abstract keys such as computer science, data processing, hardware, and software. The search was conducted on four data bases with the following results: For the NTIS data base, the number of hits was 256J for COMPBNDEX, 44J for ELCOM, 39J and for INSPBC, 136J for a total of 475. These abstracts fill 295 pagesJ the total search-and-print cost averaged per abstract. No attempt was made to determine the percentage of duplication or of 
irrelevant articles located due to an inappropriate selection of search keys. The search costs are reasonable and allow one to identify material quickly from many sources that is unavailable in the printed library indexes. If the data bases were greatly expanded to encompass the computer science citations of International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 foreign countries, a significant part of the literature search problem would be solved. It is encouraging to report that there may be an automated retrieval system in the Soviet Union. Frank Columbus, of Plenua Publishing Company, provided some interesting information regarding document translation, the availability of material, and the aarket potential of translated journals. Plenum currently translates .ore than 30 Soviet books and more than 90 Soviet journals annually. It was emphasized that availability of information is not a problem and that a Russian data base with technical citations exists. The greatest problem is the lack of demand for the translated product. Recent budget constraints have caused cutbacks in the funds allocated to public, corporate, and academic libraries. The first thing libraries cut back on or eliminate is foreign subscriptions and translations. The two main factors they consider are cost, which is significantly higher for translated material, and usage. The advantage of locating material by using an automated search is that specific articles can be located easily without the library's having to purchase the books or journals. In addition, the search software system usually maintains informative statistics on the nature of the inquiries and selection counts for the citations. By not translating the articles, or by translating only an abstract, a more current and extensive file of citations can be maintained. The problea of translating still exists, but the volume of translation can be significantly reduced. Only articles that met the search criteria of the inquirer and had abstracts confirming that interest would need to be translated. It is recommended that additional discussions be held with Plenum Publishing Company, other interested publishers, and library search services to gain aore information about the possibilities of obtaining access to foreign literature data files. A qualified organization could describe the process of verifying the availability of foreign search services, obtaining the data files, integrating them into existing search services, obtaining citation updates and maintenance, and obtaining the source material. The cost and time frame involved with the above tasks could thus be identified. Among the abstracts obtained from SOC's search service, a reference was found to a cooperative effort among the COMECON members regarding a scientific and technical information system. The citation is included as Figure 3-1. Abstract creation and translation are easier when tables of contents for foreign journals are given both in Russian and in English, as in Figures 3-2 and 3-3. All other parts of this particular journal are in Russian. In some cases, the table of contents may serve as a substitute for an abstract if the titles are sufficiently descriptive. Implementation of a system of automated search and selective translation would greatly help in deciding which material would be translated first, since the final user would make that evaluation. Sources of translators include Agrew Tech-Tran, Inc., 21050 Erwin Street, P.O. Box 789, Woodland Hills, California 913651 and Linguistic Systems, 116 Bishop Richard Allen Drive, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.-3e-ACCESSION NUMBER TITLE AUTHORS ORGANIZATIONAL SOURCE SOURCE LANGUAGE ABSTRACT 45 1teseec Methods and Prospects tor Developina an Information 11atea in the Poliah People's Republic in 1976-1980 Derentovich, M. Polish People's Republic NAUCHNO-TEKNICH. INFO., SER. 1, MOSCOW, No. 4, 1177, pp. 22-26. Russian In this article are discussed the tuture extension ot the Polish Information Service and the formation ot a Scientific, Technical, and Oraan1zational Information Sfstea (SNTOI) with a view toward incorporation ot this system in the International Sfstem ot Scientific and Technical Information (MSNTI) in cooperation with member countries or CEMA, includinl the USSR, GDR, CSSR, and the Hunaarian People's Republic. Emphasis is on the tfPe or documents and information the system will handle and on the need tor computer hardware, speciticallf YeS-series computers, and microtilmina equipment. FIGURE 3-1 Citation from Electronics and Computers (ELCOM) found by using SOC's international search service. The estiaated charges for traaslating Russian and East European text are from to per English word (all words), depending on the language and volume involved. This could result in a cost of approximately $40 per page. The American Mathematical Society (AMS) and commercial publishers have lists of free-lance translators, who charge significantly less, the AMS has obtained translations for $9 per page. Another source is the Aaerican Council for Immigrants and Professionals in New York. It must be emphasized that professional knowledge of the coaputer industry is necessary in addition to basic translating skills. Although additional translation appears unnecessary over the short term, the journals listed in Table 3-1 may be future candidates. The computer science content of these journals is estimated at 20 percent or less. Entry 6 is interesting because it is a special issue on the Ryad lOSSM. It is difficult to determine the status of the coaputer science industry in countries where .est aaterial is very general or theoretical, as it is in Eastern Europe and the USSR. Detailed manuals regarding hardware and software products are not available. There could be a significant difference between what is written and what actually exists, especially if readers interpret foreign materials in ter .. of American computer systeas background. Therefore one aust monitor ca.aercial developments in order to gain a more accurate view International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 ŁŁŁ ,. Ł ...., HAn ceo ............... »KOHOMMICO.MAtiMAYM'fiCICMM MHC1NTn 3KOHOMHKA M MATEMATH"'ECKHE METOAbl OcHoaeH Ł t 965 rOAY 8 .. 1XOAMT 6 pe3 8 rOA ToŁ XIV, BwnycK 6 MOCKBA HOI&Pb-AEKA&Pb, t971 Ł aroa:zŁŁM lap ... 1). 8. I CKUMe IL'IUONI'O ,apuaeaŁ COJlQDeTntarOi Ro-aoaKol . . . . 
Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł . Ł t ClZI Koe1ac T. B .. 1fep ... eua B. lt.. Uena a arctewe aouaaTuti Ł t031 8JDŁ D. r. 0 CTpyJrrJpl ZOUiCTHDHOfO MeSID3Q pa3111T0f0 f0 olllltc1'N Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł toti .......... B. 11 .. PcmpŁ B. D. 06 o,pow Ł upo6atMe cta6anaaQIIW ao-ao ... ecaoro pocra Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł tOll . .. oŁoŁ.wŁoaoŁ DJD ... B. Ł· 0 coaepmeaenoaaDil KBOfOCTJDD' .. TOi CIICTIMY aepcaeunllilX ŁŁpo;uroxoJIIiienenwx a.,.ŁoŁ Ł . Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł l)alopoa C. B. AaaaManc:x .. nyxe1'}'De ... uu Clleft .. ounn11qaa uaawz DJraŁoŁ Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł MaT ... B. C. C.c>JlJIH wo.-e.u. a Cllctewt IIOJlUti ........,ro u ... po .... a Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł a.r Ł ,.., llpearaŁ Jl. C. Huuebwe Ł .. pŁUTDII oun .. ._. ,....,... Ł pu-ŁŁŁ.... . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . 
. . . . 
. . . . 
..... ..JDapo .. B. II. 0 aporpaKKao-autaoar aporaoapo ..... uyuo-TtU..tcllOI'O aporpec:ca a aauuta:tŁaoar eTponteJIIlC'Iae Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł ...... B. .... 1\apa .. uo H. r .. 1\0paiOK r. D. 3a:zna cnmnnraaqaa ..,...,_ cni aepcaeKTBaaow aaupoauu Ł MtTOJl " peme... Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł tCISZ toet uaa uta U21 Ł llrE;lllrŁŁrŁŁŁŁ ltuqeau C. A., )lucnlloa 10. B. I\ouueJCc wo,.uei oCS1olllao-IWitJIAipŁoro DMŁ .-poŁaŁu we.w.xoeapaillwz lrpOIUIOACD Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł ttfl ea:oŁoŁ .. ŁtJaŁz B. r. aco.-en a oCSMeŁa (11C080 .... tcJCaa IIPtflltBŁ Ł apatepuuJoBWe aoapoew) Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł UIO 0 BaUftaa.cftO ŁJbJNŁ, ŁŁŁŁ " .... ,....,... ...... tO,IIIe, ..... FIGURE 3-2 Source journal cover. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47 .ssa ACADIMY Of SCIIMCU GMtiAL ICOMOMIC MAtHEMAtiCAL IMSTITUYI ECONOMICS AND MATHEMATICAL METHODS Founded in t 965 Yeerly 61ssues Volume XIV, Issue 6 Moscow NOWEMBER-DECEMBER, t971 CONTENTS rŁ .. 1aoŁz.ŁŁŁ ..,.. Ia. Y. Prices ID Soeialiet Economy Plauecl llanarement System Ł Ł Ł Kaitela T. Tdaermaskaya I. lt.. Price in Economic Jndeses System Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł .._ltda P. G. On l\alioaal Economic Mec:.haniam Structnn of Denlopecl Sodalil\ ... ia.; .o.ar v. · L Ł Aia to tJ.; ·or· ltaltlliatioD Ł Ł Ł ŁŁ Ł Ł Ł ŁŁŁŁŁ.ŁŁ Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł ŁoŁŁz.z.rŁŁ tOll torr tCMI tOM .... Y. F. On lmpnmnr of UultiJeql Optimizatioa System for Elaboration of PenpeetiŁe National Economy Plan Ł Ł Ł . Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł t012 CrUoroY S. Y. Dyuaic Two-level System of PtrspectiŁt National Economy Plan Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł f .. t .. diD L S. Synthetic National Economy UodtJ 1D Optimal PtnpediŁe Plannial 11att.1 IP&em Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł ttex& "Ł eŁ 1.. I. Non-IJM&r and Variut Optimizatioa Problem of DeŁelopmeat and Allctci,U. Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł t 'tl ...,.... B. II. On Goal aDd Program Forecutiq of Scientific-Teduaololfcal ID C:l:!:l Coastruetioa . Ł Ł . Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł . Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł U27 Wfe Y. M., IClrit b N. G .. Konyuk G. P. Optimization of New Ca_pacities Cout.nacUoa Penpectin Planninr and a Metllod for Solviar this Problem U38 S. A.. Kablmn Ju. B. Model Com pies for VoJumetrical-Calendar Pluuaiac of Small-Serial Production Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł U" o, ŁcolfOlllO ŁoŁŁz.Ł lleUibkJ T. C. GtMnl Model of ProducUoD aad Eldaanre (EcoDomic I.Dterpn-ta&ioD ... Crit.erioal) Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł ttiO feiJal B. T .. Skob. V. A. Sauaree Sum MiDimum Problems Soh'inr Ł Ł Ł Ł !'llpkla Ja. Z., lt.. 5. Stable Adaptive Alrorithmes of Vectorial Opti-ailatioa Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł Ł FIGURE 3-3 Translated source journal cover. U73 Ult International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 TABLE 3-1 Untranslated Journals froa Eastern Europe and the USSR That are Future Candidates for Translation Journal 1. 2. 3. 4. s. 6. Łnoklady Akademii Nauk SSSR, seriya Kibernetika i Teoriya RegulirovaniaŁ (Proceedings of the Acade.y of Sciences of the USSR, section Cybernetics and Control Theory), Izdatel'stvo ŁNauka,Ł Moskow ŁProble.y Upravlenia i Teoriyi InformatsiiŁ (Problems of Control and Information Theory), Academies of Sciences of USSR, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia ŁIzvestia Akademii Nauk SSSR, seriya kaya KibernetikaŁ nical Cybernetics), Izdatel'stvo ŁNauka,Ł Moskow ŁIskuatvennii Intellekt i RobotiŁ (Artificial Intelligence and Robots) ŁTeoriya Avtomatov i Vitchislitel'nie SystemiŁ (Autoaata Theory and Computers) Łaechentechnik DatenverarbeitungŁ {Computer Technology Data Processing) Verlag die Wirtschaft, Berlin Comments There is no translation of this section. Not every issue of the ŁnokladyŁ contains this section. Some articles are given in English or with the English translation. Distributed by Pergamon Preas. Country USSR USSR USSR USSR USSR GDR of what is actually available. It is recommended that representatives of the Aaerican computer science community attend the Leipzig and Bruno Trade Fairs to identify new products and trends. In addition, it is reca..ended that a more extensive effort be made to evaluate in depth the state of computer science in the COMECON countries and to forecast more accurately what will happen over the next five years. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49 CONCLUSIONS 1. Translations of Russian materials in coaputer science are adequate, but the translated material is apparently ignored. 2. No additional effort to translate Soviet periodicals is necessary at this time. 3. The materials available from the Soviet Union reflect the progress in theory rather than advances in application and hardware. 4. Eastern Europe and the USSR will continue to show interest in representative technology from the Western computer industry. s. Standardization of u.s. federal input-output specifications aay increase compatability with Eastern European peripherals. 6. Attendance at Eastern European trade fairs is necessary to observe trends. RECOMMENDATIONS 1. American scientists should be alerted to the fact that they probably underuse Soviet computer science material available in English. 2. The review of present computer science material from the USSR and the identification of the most promising or interesting articles 1114Y be useful. 3. Attendance at the Leipzig and the Bruno Trade Fairs, as well as at those in Hannover and Moscow, should be encouraged, to identify new products and trends in Eastern Europe. 4. The status of the USSR automated data base of technical literature and the feasibility of transferring this data base to some u.s. library search system should be examined. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Chapter 4 DEVELOPMENTS IN LATIN AMERICA The state of computer science research and the quality of technical publications in 15 Latin American countries (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela) were reviewed. Personal contacts as well as Ulrich's International Periodicals Directory (published by R.R. Bowker, 19th edition, 1980) were used as the priaary information sources. Discussions with key foreign technologists were helpful in refining the data further. The search identified nine technical publications related to computer science. Colombia and Brazil have three each1 Cuba, Mexico, and Peru have one each. The titles of the individual publications and related details are given in Appendix I. These nine publications focus on four subject areasz (l) systems engineering with an emphasis on local user group interests1 (2) industry news1 (3) review of industry trends, including translations of English-language articles from Datamationr and (4) journalistic (low technical content) reportage on national projects. None of the publications seems to have a tradition of attracting seainal papers of significant interest to the u.s. scholarly community. Serious Latin American researchers prefer to publish in English, in u.s. journals, to reach more of their peers. A second type of significant technical literature is the proceedings of international conferences taking place in Latin America. They are usually published in English and are widely available to the u.s. scholarly community. A selected list of centers of competence in computing in Brazil follows a 1. Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (systems engineering, operations/research, computational complexity, microelectronics), 2. Catholic Pontifical University, Rio de Janeiro (data base, electrical engineering, automation theory)J 3. UNICAMP, Sao Paulo (laser technology, software engineering), 4. Pure and Applied Mathematics Instituter s. Econometrics (EMBRAPA) Instituter 6. IBICIT (Brazilian Institute of Technical Information). so International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51 CONCLUSIONS 1. Much of the research reflects the fact that the RŁD are in a build-up phase. 2. There are several centers of excellence in coaputer science. 3. Major progress in computer science is not expected for the next three to five years. 4. Matheaatical programming and operations research expertise are acre prevalent that traditional computer sciences, reflecting the close relationship to European inforaatics. RBCOMMBNDATIONS 1. The current quality of the Latin American computer science-engineering literature warrants merely an ad hoc translation effort. 2. There are emerging centers of competence in computer science, particularly in Brazil, whose technical output might merit translation in three to five years. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Chapter 5 DBVBLOPMBNTS IN TBB PBOPLB' S REPUBLIC OP CHINA The purposes of the study on developments in the People's Republic of China are as follows& (l) to identify sources of information on co.puter science in the People's Republic of China that are available to the United Statesr (2) to determine the adequacy of these tion sources, in teras of their capabilities to provide ti .. ly and valuable informationr and (3) to make recommendations regarding ways to improve our understanding of China's computer science. More than 100 articles and books, most of them published after 1977, were consulted in the course of preparing this chapter. However, the subject area is so vast that we have probably succeeded in accessing only a small portion of the total relevant information. Thus we do not claim that the following is a complete picture of co.puter science developments in Cbinar it is merely a first step toward a systematic study of the topic. We have identified 11 information sources that collectively provide an excellent picture of Chinese computer science developments. l. China. Ł Ł Several national organizations are involved in exchanges with They are as follows& The Committee on Scholarly Communication with the People's Republic of China (CSCPRC) , a 
focal point for academic and scholarly exchanges with China since 1972. The committee is sponsored by the American Council of Learned Societies, the National Academy of Sciences, and the Social Science Research Council. It coordinates U.S.-Cbina scholar exchange prograas and publishes the China Exchange Newsletter, which contains timely information on exchange activities, academic activities in China, a bibliography on China, and so on. It also keeps a small but interesting library of references on China. The National Council for u.S.-Cbina Trade. The trade council produces a bimonthly publication titled The China Business Review and various reports that often contain valuable information on China's computer science education, research,. and industry (for example, see reference (13) in Appendix J). The directory of research institutes in China (36) published in 1978 is particularly useful for general background on 52 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ł 53 China's scientific research and on their computer science before 1978. A useful companion to the directory is another publication of the trade council, this one on China's professional societies (8) Ł The National Committee on u.s.-china Relations (NCUSCR). In addition to conducting exchange programs, the committee provides a wide range of information and advisory services on exchanges with China. The committee also publishes a letter, Notes from the National Committee. The sponsored delegates publish trip reports. For additional information, see (29). 2. Information on Chinese computer science is available from several u.s. government agencies: Ł Joint Publications Research Service (JPRS). JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign newspapers, periodicals, and books as well as information from news agency transmissions and broadcasts. One of the JPRS journals, China Report: Science and Technology, includes up-to-date tion on China's computer science and technology, as well as on Chinese scientists and scientific organizations. Ł National Technical Information Service. NTIS distributes JPRS publications and People's Republic of China Scientific Abstracts in agriculture; economic affairs; plant and installation data; political, sociological, and military affairs; and science and technology. Ł National Foreign Assessment Center, Central Intelligence Agency. The center publishes reports and directories Ł concerning China, such as (14). Science attaches at u.s. missions in China. Science attaches will respond to specific requests for information and/or assistance. 3. One of the most effective ways to gather information is through the use of computer-readable on-line data base retrieval systems, which are now accessible by almost all major libraries. Much of the tion for this chapter was obtained from the data base systems DIALOG and PTS PREDALERT. 4. Many American libraries have extensive Chinese collections (40) including useful directories (for example, (35)) and Chinese journals. Through journal exchange programs, some of these libraries, such as the Stanford Hoover Library, are able to acquire journals published by various Chinese universities and research organizations that are usually not available outside China. s. University centers for Asian studies are another source of information. At Stanford University, the Northeast Asia-United States Forum on International Policy carries out multidisciplinary research on such topics as the interface between the social sciences and technology. As an example, one student in the program is currently doing research on the impact of computers on the Chinese society of the future. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 6. Published·and unpublished trip reports by individualŁ and delegations who have visited China are an important source of tion about China. The CSCPRC library houses many such reports. In addition, Columbia University has a collection of trip reports in its China Documentation Center. In the area of coaputer science, there have been a number of informative trip reports, including (1), (2), 
(3) 1 (11) 1 (17) 1 (19) 1 (21) 1 (22) 1 (30) 1 (34) o 7. Coaputer coapanies and translating services also can provide information on Chinaa Ł Chinese Science and TechnologY (CST). This journal contains unabridged translations of documents froa China on its Ł contemporary developments in science and technology. China Translation Printing Services (CTPS). ThiŁ business firm, appointed by Chinese authorities, provides translation and publishing services in science and technology. It publishes us-china Electronics, a docwaent produced in ChineH by the Chinese Pourth Ministry of Machine Building. Ł Asian Computer Monthly, published by Computer Publication, Ltd. 8. Journals, magazines, and newspapers in computers and electronics often cover news on China's computer science and technology. Relevant items can routinely be found in publications such as Electronic Business, Electronics Weekly, Computerworld, Electronic News, Computer weekly, Electronics, Mini-Micro SystemŁ, Coaputer Data, and CO!puting. 9. Many American computer companies do business with China, and their marketing divisions can be very knowledgeable on China's computer industry. Companies that have done substantial business with China include IBM, Honeywell, Wang, Hewlett-Packard, and Sperry Univac. A new bimonthly magazine, China Computerworld, covers the People's Republic of China's growing computer market. 10. More than 5000 Chinese students and scholars are now in the United StatesJ it has been estimated that 10 to 15 percent of them specialize in computer-science-related subjects. Chinese delegationŁ also attend most of the major computer conferences abroad, although at this time only a small percentage of them deliver papers. 11. Research organizations in foreign countries are still another source of information on Chinese computer sciencea Ł Research Policy Institute on SCience and Development in Ł Ł Ł Developing Countries, University of Lund, Sweden. International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, Canada Ł Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OICD) Centre, Paris. Science Policy Research Unit, University of Sussex, England Ł Unfortunately, these information sources have some serious 1 imi ta tiona a 1. None of the sources is specific enough to give details about China's computer technology and research. Most results cited are too International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.55 superficial to be useful to a computer scientist who is interested in technical information. 2. Chinese computer articles and technical reports are not being translated into English. Only a small percentage of abstracts are being translated by JPRS. In addition, the Chinese almost never publish articles in foreign journals. 3. Important computer conferences in China are not being reported. For example, the following two conferences held recently in China appear to have been significant, but we have little information about them: The National Conference on Exchange of Minicomputer Techniques was held in Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, in November 1979. Some 40 papers were delivered at the meeting, and more than 60 products were displayed, illustrating China's initial achievements in minicomputer circuitry. The National Conference on Integrated Circuits and Silicon Materials was held during January 1980, in Fuzhou, Pujian Province. Some 500 scientists and specialists attended the conference, where 209 papers were read. The participants also discussed possible solutions to problems of low production, poor reliability, and high prices of China's integrated circuits. Currently, China's computer industry is capable of producing a 5 
million operation per second computer and 8-bit single-chip microprocessors. It is estimated that they have about 2000 computers of more than 30 different types. If the current rate of growth continues, 5000 computers could be operational by the end of 1985. Most large systems are imported: the two most popular domestic minicomputers are comparable to Digital Equipment Corporation's PDP 11 and Data General's Nova. It is generally believed that China is about 10 years behind the United States in processing speed and semiconductor technology, and about 15 years behind in software and peripheral equipment. China is, however, making a concerted effort to catch up. At China's first National Science Conference, held in March 1978, computer science and technology was selected, along with other important areas such as energy and agriculture, to be one of the eight sectors that would receive China's major attention in the eight-year national plan for the development of science. In particular, the solution of scientific and technical problems in the production of large-scale and very large scale integrated circuits is given heavy emphasis. The plan calls for China to turn out giant computers and build a fair-sized modern computer industry by 1985. Within the next several years, rapid advances are expected in research on computer science, including computer software and applied mathematics. The emphasis on catching up quickly in the computer field rather than on becoming profitable has meant that there are incentives for trying innovative schemes. In fact, it has been common among Chinese universities and research institutions to build computers for their own use, resulting in many different types of computers. Therefore there is a good chance that Chinese computer scientists may discover and experience techniques that have not been tried in the United States. It is important for us to watch the developments closely, International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 perhaps by forming a Chinese computer science clearinghouŁe organization under the auspices of one of the organizationŁ mentioned above. Such a clearinghouse could serve as a center for the collection and translation of detailed information on Chinese computer science, and for the convenient dissemination of this information to u.s. coaputer scientists. The importance of creating such an organization will grow rapidly aŁ Chinese computer scientists begin to catch up with the West. CONCLUSIONS 1. Interactions between Chinese and American computer scientists are limited in number, involving sabbatical visits or excursiona. 2. The Cultural Revolution set back computer science in China from 10 to 20 years. 3. Almost no scientific papers by Chinese authors have appeared in publications outside of China. 4. Chinese computer scientists are extensively studying foreign computer science, and u.s. literature is readily available to them. 5. Chinese computer scientists are capable of doing original and first-rate work, as exemplified by studies on semantics and programaing languages. 6. The Chinese have strong motivations to advance computer science because it can positively contribute to export and balance of trade. 7. Considering the developments that have taken place in the laŁt few years, China is expected to make significant progress in this decade. RBCOMMBNDATIONS 1. Little of the current literature appears worthy of complete translation. 2. u.s. coaputer scientists should be kept informed by title or abstract about existing and future publications, whether in ChineŁe or English. 3. Systematic publication of abstracts and reviews of Chinese technical journals is recommended. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Chapter 6 THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION FOR INFORMATION PROCESSING IN INFORMATION INTERCHANGE IN CCIIPUTBR SCIENCE The International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) is an organization dedicated to the interchange of information among member countries in the general areas of data processing, informatics, and computer science. The membership of IFIP includes countries from all five geographic areas examined in this report (the People's Republic of China recently became a full member of IFIP) Ł The activities of IFIP provide an important means for computer scientists in the United States to interact with their counterparts in other countries. As has been noted in other chapters of this report, the availability of English-language material, though vitally necessary, is not by itself sufficient. A high level of direct interaction, including personal contacts, is important, particularly because the field is moving so rapidly that much published material is out of date when it finally appears in print, a phenomenon even more true for translated material. The scientific activities of IFIP fall into three categories: 1. Working group (WG) meetings. The working groups of IFIP are small groups (10 to 30 members) of international experts in specific fields. For example, WG 2.1 is concerned with programming languages, and NG 2.3 with programming methodology. These groups hold semiannual or annual meetings in member countries, which are attended by members and possibly some observers. Current work in progress is discussed. Sometimes, but not always, the work lends itself to cooperative research projects, and those outputs may be released as IFIP products. The WG membership elects new members on the basis of interest, geographical distribution, and demonstrated capability. Since much of the work of the WGs is highly informal and interactive, no formal papers are given and no formal proceedings of WG meetings are published. 2. Working conferences. Working conferences, typically organized by one or more WGs, are small technical conferences on specific subjects. The attendance is by invitation only; the typical size is 100 attendees. Formal papers are given, although intensive informal discussion is encouraged. Proceedings of these conferences are published (usually entirely in English) by North Bolland. 57 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 3. IFIP congresses. These large, open conferences, which take place every three years, are organized in a manner similar to the National Computer Conference (NCC) meetings in the United States. Papers are solicited and refereed in the usual manner, there are many invited speakers to promote interest, and proceedings are published and widely available. IFIP 1977 was held in Toronto, IFIP 1980 was held in Japan and Australia, and IFIP 1983 will meet in Paris. All IFIP proceedings (both formal publications and informal discussion) are in English, thus there is no language barrier for u.s. participants. The United States currently has a fairly high level of participation in many IFIP activities, yet its level of participation is below that of several European countries. Continued and increased participation in IFIP activities would be one effective way of providing opportunities for the direct personal contact that is necessary to the effort to make technical materials more accessible. In this respect, WG meetings are probably the most valuable form of contact. They affect a small but significant group of computer scientists. IFIP congresses can potentially involve a much larger segment of the community, but like any large conference, they are less effective environments for the interchange of ideas. Working conferences fall between these two extremes. The major need for support of IFIP activities is travel funding for u.s. participants. Several European countries, for example the Federal Republic of Germany, provide funding in a special category for support of travel to IFIP meetings. A relatively small expenditure can make a significant difference in levels of participation. In the United States, it is difficult to obtain funding for foreign travel in general. In some cases, eminent computer scientists have had considerable difficulty in obtaining NSF funding to attend WG meetings. In view of the importance of IFIP activities in providing a vital forum for the interchange of ideas and for keeping u.s. computer scientists aware of activities in other countries, a significant increase in appropriate travel subsidies supporting IFIP activities is strongly recommended. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Chapter 7 SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Computer science has emerged as a major international activity of considerable consequence. It is being supported extensively and intensively in all countries, whether undeveloped, underdeveloped, industrial, or postindustrial. Electronic machines and systems are being applied pervasively to the solution of many problems. Many believe that electronic systems can raise the productivity of our industrial work force to its uppermost limits while transforming society into a population of those who work with their minds. American computer scientists generally make good use of materials published in English but have difficulties keeping abreast of rapid advancements published in a foreign language, especially if that language is not part of our ethnic and cultural heritage. With computerized language translation still in its infancy and voice recognition-response systems barely off the drawing boards, existing language barriers between nations and scientists alike remain the most formidable obstacle to the free and effective exchange of ideas necessary to develop these technologies further. The panelists' five sets of conclusions, one set for each of the five geographical areas, are functionally dependent upon specific socioeconomic and linguistic constraints inherent in the five regions, and their recommendations are equally specific. Yet these findings and suggested courses of action do contain some common threads, some fundamental principles. We have condensed these below into sets of general conclusions and general recommendations, but we suggest strongly that the reader pay heed to the more specific conclusions and recommendations contained in Chapters 1 through 5. GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 1. A considerable amount of information on worldwide computer science developments is available in documented form, but it is not always readily accessible to the u.s. computer science community. 2. Personal contacts between u.s. and foreign computer scientists have created a powerful and effective international infrastructure 59 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 within which research results are disseminated freely, albeit with saae delays. 3. Monitoring of foreign computer science publications greatly enhances our understanding of foreign science policy and its implementation. 4. Currently, translation into English often introduces serious delays before important developments abroad caae to the attention of scientists in the United States. s. Several countries are in the process of emerging fraa their underdeveloped status, and we can expect their scientific prograas to accelerate markedly during the caaing decades. GBNBRAL RECOMMENDATIONS 1. A second phase of the work of this panel should be begun. Phase II would be a pilot effort designed to show the feasibility and utility of its work, which could subsequently be taken over by an existing private organization, such as the American Federation of Information Processing Societies or the Association for Computing Machinery. The plan for Phase II would be as followsa (a) Through a limited number of carefully planned visits to countries where significant work is being done (primarily Japan), panel members would obtain firsthand knowledge of research work in foreign universities and industrial laboratories. In addition to making and/or maintaining personal contacts, they could provide answers to such questions as thesea (1) Is the best and most important work being published' if so, in what language? (2) What is the time lag between the coapletion of work and its publication? (3) Is it feasible to establish channels of communication to get prepublication information? (b) A staff expert retained for the purpose would develop an annotated bibliography of published material annually, which would include a qualitative assessment of the material. This bibliography would provide the basis for a summary of major developments in computer science in the areas considered, which would be published annually. Financial support fro. industry and/or government for saae aspects of this work will be essential. The panel should determine whether some existing publication is already filling this function. For example, OBMSBA Publishing Company, Tokyo, is about to begin publishing ŁYearbooks, Japan Annual Reviews in Electronics, Computers and TelecommunicationsŁ in English. (c) The panel would investigate and make recommendations on whether centers of expertise for various overseas areas should be established. Such centers might be established in the country of interest rather than in the United States. (d) The panel, together with a staff expert retained for the purpose, would select the best of the literature published in Japanese in each year of the panel's work and translate it into International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.61 English. In addition, the panel would recommend a procedure for carrying out the necessary translations on a continuing basis. Specific articles and books would be recommended as additional candidates for translation. The panel should identify strong researchers in Japan and closely follow their research results and papers to determine still other candidates for tranŁlation. The establishment and use of centralized data base systems to collect all the commercially and privately translated materials should be given high priority. {e) During the second year of ita activity, the panel would endeavor to negotiate an arrangement for some existing organization to continue the panel's work. 2. A funded program should be established under which select foreign publications with significant stature in computer science are abstracted in English, facilitating subsidized publication of titles, abstracts, and papers in a reputable u.s. journal. 3. A funded computer sciences foreign exchange program should be established to provide both language training and select work opportunities in the most advanced countries. 4. A policy position should be developed and a program funded, chartered to support senior computer scientists participating in select international activities of approved organizations such as the International Federation for Information Processing (IPIP) and the International Council for Computer Communication (ICCC). 5. Guidelines and mechanisms should be developed to provide greater visibility for and improved accessibility to foreign-language computer science literature now abstracted or translated into English. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXES International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A SPEAKERS AND TITLES OF Lm=TURES AT THE PGCS CONFERENCE Keynote Speech Challenge for Knowledge Information Processing Systems (Preliminary Report on Fifth-Generation Computer Systems) T. Moto-oka, University of Tokyo OVerview Report What is Required of the Fifth-Generation Computer--Social Needs and Its Impact H. Karatau, Technology Consultant Aiming for Knowledge Information Processing Systems It. Puchi, ETL Fifth-Generation Computer Architecture H. Aiso, Keio University Knowledge Information Processing Research Plan Problem Solving and Inference Mechanisms K. Kurukawa, ETL Knowledge Base Mechanisms M. Suwa, ETL Intelligent Man-Machine Interface Ho. Tanaka, ETL Logic Programming and a Dedicated High-Performance Personal Computer T. Yokoi, ETL Architecture Research Plan New Architectures for Inference Mechanisms S. Uchida, ETL New Architecture for Knowledge Base Mechanisms M. Amamiya, NTT VLSI and System Architecture--The Development of System SG K. Sakamura, University of Tokyo Preliminary Research on Data Plow Machines and Data Base Machines as the Basic Architecture of Fifth-Generation Computer Systems Hi. Tanaka, University of Tokyo 65 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 Invited Lectures--Knowledge Inforaation Processing Innovation in Symbol Manipulation in the Fifth-Generation Ca.puter Systeu B.A. Feigenbaum, Stanford University (USA) Logical Program Synthesis w. Bibel, Technical University, Munich (FRG) The Scope of Symbolic Ca.putation G. Kahn, INRIA (France) Invited Lectures--Architecture A Cognitive Architecture for Computer Vision B.B. MoCoraick, University of Illinois (USA) Fifth-Generation Ca.puter Architecture Analysis P.C. Treleaven, University of Newcastle-Upon-Tyne (UK) Algorithms, Architecture, and Technology J. Allen, MIT (USA) Panel Discussion Is Knowledge Information Processing Chairman, K. Fuchi, BTL (Japan)J panelists& B.A. Feigenbaum, Stanford University (USA), w. Bibel, Technical University, Munich (FRG), G. Kahn, INRIA (France), M. Nagao, Kyoto University (Japan), s. Osuga, University of Tokyo (Japan), and K. Furukawa, BTL (Japan) Panel Discussion IIs Fifth-Generation Computer Architecture Chairman, B. Also, Keio University (Japan)J panelistss B.B. McCoraick, University of Illinois (USA), P.C. Treleaven, University of Newcastle-Upon-Tyne (UK), J. Allen, MIT (USA), B. Goto, University of Tokyo (Japan), s. Uchida, BTL (Japan), and T. Uraki, Hitachi (Japan) Panel Discussion Ills I!Pact of the Fifth-Generation Computer System Chairman, T. Moto-oka, University of Tokyo (Japan)J panelistsa J.-L. Lions, INRIA (France), c. Read, Inter-Bank Research Organization (UK), P.J. Riganati, NBS (USA), S. Okamatsu, MITI (Japan), I. Toda, Electrical Communication Laboratory, NTT (Japan), and N. Szyperski, GMD (SOCiety for Mathematics and Data Processing) (FRG) International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B GOVERNMENT-SUPPORTED PROJECTS THAT MITI PLANS TO FUND DURING FISCAL YEAR 1982 Basic TechnologY Development for the Next Generation (Fourth-Generation) Computers This is a continuing five-year project that started in 1979 with on software technology (e.g., operating systems) and computer peripherals. Budget for 1981: Y6.2 billion (827 million) Budget request for 1982: Y5.785 billion ($24.6 million) Development of Fundamental Technologies for Computer System (R'D of FGCS) In order to develop revolutionary and user-friendly computer systems that would be required in the 1990s, the project will start in 1982 research and development of basic theories and technologies such as inference structure based on data flow machines and knowledge base systems. Budget for 1981: Yl5 million (865,000) Budget request for 1982: Y509 million ($2.2 million) R'D for High-Speed Scientific Computers The project will start research and development of a high-speed computation system that will be required for plasma simulation (of the nuclear fusion) and image processing of weather-forecasting satellites, and so on. Budget for 1981: Y30 million (8130,000) Budget request for 1982: Y825 million ($3.5 million) Development of Software-Related Technologies 1. The Information Processing Promotion Association opened the ŁGijutsu (Technology) Center,Ł which invites researchers from 67 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 information-processing companies and users to develop new application software. 2. It will strengthen the ŁEntrusted DevelopmentŁ (Itaku-Kaihatsu) System to promote development and effective dissemination of general purpose programs by means of Łpackaged programs.Ł National and state universities and research institutions are encouraged to participate in this ŁnationalizationŁ of programs. 3. The software maintenance technology development program that began in 1981 will be continued to tackle the increasing software maintenance costs. Budget for 1981: Y2.658 billion ($11.5 million) Budget request for 1982: Y2.66 billion ($11.5 million) OEIC (Qptoelectronic Integrated Circuit) OEIC is a monolithic array of laser diodes, driving circuits, and photodetectors integrated on GaAs substrates. The Yl8 billion ($78 million) project, begun in 1979, is scheduled for completion by 1986, and involves 14 companies in all, along with ETL of MITI. This project aims to make Japan the leader in optical electronics technology and is viewed as an Łoptical versionŁ of the MITI-sponsored VLSI project that ended in 1980. The laboratory will be staffed by 30 engineers in 1981. Another 20 engineers will be added in 1982 (see Electronics News, March 14, 1981). International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C ORGANIZATION AND MBMBBRS OF 'l'BE !'I!"l'B-GENERATION COMPUTER COMMITTEE (1980) The organizaton of the Fifth-Generation Computer Committee (1980) is as follows: MaiD committee for the ftlth IID'fttloll campu ter the ftftb IID'ftdoa computer _t ' Sub<CIIIIIIIittee for SubocommittŁ for Subocomadttee for systematizatioa ttc:hnolOCY blaic theory computer lrCbitec:ture ! 16 wortma Łoup I IŁ wortma IJOUP I Organizer Electronics Policy Division, Machinery and Information Industry Bureau, Ministry of International Trade and Industry Secretariat Fifth-Generation Computer Project Group, Japan Information Processing Development Center, 3-5-8, Shibakoen, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105 Japan Main Committee for the Fifth-Generation Computer Tohru Moto-oka (chairman), professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Tokyo Bajime Karatau, managing director, Matsushita Communication Industry Co., Ltd. 69 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 Hideo Aiso, professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, Keio University Kazuhiro Fuchi, general manager, Information Sciences Division, Electrotechnical Laboratory Hidehiko Aya, deputy general manager, Systems Headquarters, Mitsui Engineering and Shipbuilding Co., Ltd. Yoshinobu Anraku, director, Oki Electric Industry Co., Ltd. Osamu Ishii, general manager, Computer Sciences Division, Electrotechnical Laboratory Sumio Ishizaki, district manager, The Puji Bank, Ltd. Tadahiko Kamijo, director, Development and Promotion Department, Information Technology Promotion Agency Toshiyasu Kunii, professor, Department of Information Science, University of Tokyo Shohei Kurita, senior manager, Corporate Planning, Japan Electronic Computer Co., Ltd. Kiyotake Sakaki, deputy general manager, Computer Marketing Division, Mitsubishi Electric Co., Ltd. Makoto Nagao, professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, Kyoto University Hirotake Nobukuni, senior staff engineer, Data Processing Division, Engineering Bureau, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Public Corp. (N'l"l') Tsuneo Uraki, 9eneral mana9er, Computer Product Planning Department, Kana9awa Works, Hitachi, Ltd. Ken Hirose, professor, Department of Mathematics, waseda University Konomu Matsui, manager, Research Division, Institute for the Future Technology Yukio Mizuno, associate senior vice president and director, Nippon Electric Co., Ltd. Eiichi Wada, professor, Department of Mathematical Engineering and Instrumentation Physics, University of Tokyo Kinko Yamamoto, 9eneral mana9er, Development Department, Japan Information Processin9 Development Center Hiroshi Yamada, director, Fujitsu Laboratory Eiichi Yoneda, vice chief engineer, Computer Division, Toshiba Corp. Task Group for the Fifth-Generation Computer Tohru Moto-oka, professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Tokyo Kazuhiro Fuchi, 9eneral mana9er, Information Sciences Division, Electrotechnical Laboratory Hajime Karatau, mana9in9 director, Matsushita Communication Industry Co., Ltd. Hideo Aiso, professor, Department Electrical Engineering, Keio University Ken Sakamura, Department of Information Science, University of Tokyo Kiyonori Konishi, assistant chief, Data Communication System Section, Yokosuka Electric Communication Laboratory, NTT International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71 Shun lshizaki, Speech Processing Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Shun-ichi Uchida, Information Systems Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Ko-ichi Furukawa, senior researcher, Information Systems Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Toshio Yokoi, senior researcher, Machine Inference Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Subcommittee for Systematization Technology Hajime Karatau (chairman), managing director, Matsushita Communication Industry Co., Ltd. Hidehiko Aya, manager, System Division, Mitsui Engineering and Shipbuilding Co., Ltd. Sumio Ishizaki, district manager, The Fuji Bank, Ltd. Hirochika Inoue, associate professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Tokyo Tadahiko Kamijo, director, Development and Proaotion Department, Information Technology Promotion Agency Toshiyasu Kunii, professor, Department of Information Science, University of Tokyo Kiyonori Konishi, assistant chief, Data Communication Section, Yokosuka Electric Communication Laboratory, NTT Kohji Torii, chief, Language Processing Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Ko-ichi Furukawa, senior researcher, Information Systems Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Shohei Kurita (observer), senior manager, Corporate Planning, Japan Electronic Computer Co., Ltd. Subcommittee for Basic Theory Kazuhiro Fuchi (chairman), general manager, Information Sciences Division, Electrotechnical Laboratory Takayasu Ito, professor, Department of Communication Engineering, Tohoku University Setsuo Osuga, associate professor, University of Tokyo, Institute of Space and Spacenautical Science Hozumi Tanaka, chief, Machine Inference Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Ko-ichiro Tamura, chief, Logical Systems Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Makoto Nagao, professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, Kyoto University Ken Hirose, professor, Departaent of Mathematics, Waseda University Toshio Yokoi, senior researcher, Machine Inference Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Akinori Yonezawa, assistant professor, Department of Information Science, Tokyo Institute of Technology International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 Masahito Aaamiya, staff engineer, First Research Section, Musashino Electric Comaunication Laboratory, NTT Ko-ichi Furukawa (observer), senior researcher, Information Systeas Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Shun Ishizaki (observer), Speech Processing Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Motoi Suwa (observer), Computer Vision Section, Electrotechnical Laboratory Subcomaittee for Computer Architecture Bideo Aiso (chairman), professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, Keio University Shoichi Iikawa, manager, Software Development Division, Computer Works, Mitsubishi Electric Corp. Bajime Iizuka, professor, Department of Manageaent Engineering, Seikei University Shun-ichi Uchida, Inforaation Systea Division, Electrotechnical Laboratory Toshihiko Odaka, senior engineer, Computer Division, Kanagawa works, Hitachi, Ltd. Yasuo Sakaaa, staff engineer, Data Caaaunication System Section, Yokosuka Electric Comaunication Ken Sakaaura, assistant professor, Department of Information Science, University of Tokyo Masakatsu Sugimoto, assistant manager, Development Engineering Department, Fujitsu, Ltd. Kinji Takei, chief engineer, Information Systeas Laboratory, Toshiba Research Center Bidehiko Tanaka, professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Tokyo Hiroshi Botta, engineering aanager, Systeaa Engineering Department, Nippon Electric Co., Ltd. Hiroshi Yasubara, Information Processing Systems RŁD Department, Laboratory, Oki Electric Industry Co., Ltd. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D LIST OP PAPBRS IN ŁRBSBAJ1CB REPORTS IN JAPAN--A COLLBCTIOR OP RBCBN'l' RBSBAaCB REPORTS RBLATBD TO 'l'BB R'D OP TIIB FGCsŁ 1. Transformation of Natural Language Descriptions into Foraal Specifications in a Montague-like Fr ... work--An Bxa.ple, by K. Fuchi, BTL 2. Derivation of Logic Programs from Formal Dijkstra's Three MAXes, by K. Fuchi, BTL l. Predicate Logic Programming--A Proposal of BPILOG, by K. Fuchi, BTL 4. PIOLOG and Natural Language Processing, by B. Tanaka and Y. Matsu.oto, BTL 5. PIOLOG and Data-Plow Computation Mechani ... , by T. Yokoi, BTL 6. A PIOLOG-Based Production SystŁ, by M. Suwa and B. Tanaka, BTL 7. Problem Solving with PIOLOG, by K. Furukawa, BTL 8. Logic Simulation in PIOLOG, by S. Uchida, BTL, and T. Higuchi, Keio University 9. Description of the PIOLOG Interpreter by a Concurrent Progr ... ing Language, by K. Nitta and K. Furukawa, BTL 10. The Relation Between Computation and the Proof in Logic, by s. Oyagi and K. Taaura, BTL 11. Functional Interpretation of a Logical Sentence--A Preliminary Mote, by s. Oyagi and K. Tamura, BTL 12. List Processing on a Data Flow Machine, by M. Amamiya, R. Hasegawa, and B. Mik .. ai, NTT Ł ll. A Database Machine Architecture Using DPNBT (Data Partitioning Network) and Set Operation Engines, by Y. Oka and K. Shima, NTT 14. Large-Scale Scientific Calculation Oriented Data Flow Processing Array System, by N. Takahashi, M. Yoshida, and M. Amamiya, NTT 15. A List Processing Oriented Data Flow Machine Architecture, by 11. Alluliya, R. Hasegawa, and H. Mikami, NTT 16. Valid--A High Level Functional Language for Data Flow Machines, by 11. Amamiya, N'l'T 17. Basic Design of LISP Machine ELIS, by Y. Hibino, N. Ohsato, and K. Watanabe, tft"l' 18. A Logic Programming Approach to Self-Descriptive Deductive Database, by B. Okuno, tft"l' 19. A Li.nguistic Processor in a Conversational Speech Recognition Syst .. , by K. Shikano and M. Kohda, N'l'T 73 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 20. An Acoustic Processor in a Conversational Speech Recognition System, by R. Nakatsu and M. Kohda, NTT 21. DURALa A Model Extension of PIOLOG, by s. Goto, NTT 22. PIOLOG/KRa The Language Features (A Brief Survey), by B. Nakashima, NT'l' 23. S-NBTa A Foundation for Knowledge Representation Languages, by M. Nagao and J. Tsujii, Kyoto University 24. Some Topics of Language Processing for the Purpose of Machine Translation, by M. Nagao and J. Tsujii, Kyoto University 25. Research on Relational Data Base Machine, by Faculty of Engineering, University of Tokyo 26. Research on Associative Processing System, by Faculty of Engineering, University of Tokyo 27. Research on Procedure Level Data Flow Machine, by Faculty of Engineering, University of Tokyo 28. Distributed File Management and Job Management of Network-Oriented Operating System, by B. Tanaka and T. Moto-oka, University of Tokyo i I International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E ANALYSIS OF 720 ARTICLES IN 11 JOURNALS, BY AUTHOR'S COUNTRY Below is a listing by the author's country of computer-science-related articles published in 1980. Articles with authors from different countries are listed twice. Articles in a foreign language are so indicated. Entries labeled PROC denote proceedings of conferences. The journals in this survey and the abbreviations used are as follows: Acta Informatica Acta CACM IPL JACM LNCS MCS Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery Information Processing Letters Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery Springer Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science Mathematics and Computers in Simulation SJC SIAM Journal on Computing SPE Software--Practice and Experience 'l'CS Theoretical Computer Science TOP LAS IEEESE IEEECOM Transactions of Programming Languages IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering IEEE Transactions on Computers Australia (11) Acta 14, 107-118, Bromley IPL 10, 25-27, GoldSchlager IPL 11, 96-97, Colbourn, McKay IPL 11, 119-125, Robson IPL 11, 130-133, Bailey, Dromey LNCS 79, p255, Tobias, PROC SJC 9, 54-66, Brent, Traub SPE 10, 889-896, Kerr SPE 10, 1029-1036, Hurst SPE 10, 673-684, Lakos TCS 11, 39-48, Staples Austria (4) Acta 13, 87-108, Maurer et al. Acta 13, 155-168, Bentley, Maurer Acta 13, 365-378, Maurer, Nivat IPL 11, 66-67, Urbanek 75 Belgium (6) CACM 23, 286-293, Maes IEEECOM 29, 79-88, Rahier, Jespers IEEESE 4, 334-339, Tavernier, Notredame IPL 10, 4-8, Olivie IPL 11, 152-155, Paredaens, Ponsaert JACM 27, 499-518, Engelfriet, Rozenberg Brazil (4) SPE 10, 355-372, Cowan et al. 'l'CS 11, 227-246, Hennessy, Ashcroft 'l'CS 11, 337-340, Netto TOPLAS 2, 386-414, Casanova, Bernstein International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bulgaria (2) IPL 10, 63-67, Passy MCS 22, 133-140, van Cutsem et al. Canada (47) Acta 13, 39-52, Gonnet et al. Acta 13, 87-108, Maurer et al. Acta 13, 205-224, Tampa Acta 13, 257-268, Rozenberg, Wood Acta 14, 119-134, Vaishnavi et al. CACM 23, 440-443, Compton IEEECOM 29, 44-49, Mehra et al. IEEECOM 290, 899-904, Jullien IEEECOM 292, 1104-1113, Smith IEEECOM 29, 288-299, Agarwal, Masson 76 IEEECOM 29, 611-617, Chanson, Sinha IEEECOM 29, 618-631, Chin, Fok IEEECOM 29, 710-719, Engelberg et al. IEEESE 2, 162-169, Howden IEEESE 6, 585-594, Taylor et al. IEEESE 6, 595-601, Taylor et al. IPL 10, 20-20, Deb IPL 10, 35-36, Bui IPL 10, 51-56, Van Leeuven, Wood IPL 10, 68-75, Wilson, Short IPL 10, 87-88, Santoro IPL 10, 127-128, Kirkpatrick IPL 10, 213-218, Meijer, Akl IPL 10, 240-242, Booth IPL 11, pl26, Avis IPL 11, 193-198, Petreschi, Simeone JACM 27, 235-249, Reiter JACM 27, 270-280, Kameda LNCS 91, p314, Wood MCS 22, 30-35, Carver MCS 22, 49-54, Masliyak, Kumar MCS 22, 188-199, Birta MCS 22, 298-318, Carver SJC 9, 67-84, Hennessy SJC 9, 251-272, Morgera SJC 9, 281-297, Cornell, Kirkpatrick SJC 9, 583-593, George, Liu SJC 9, 628-634, Babai et al. SJC 9, 636-652·, Cook, Rackoff SPE 10, 21-28, Marsland, Sutphen SPE 10, 823-834, Gujar, Fitzgerald SPE 10, 959-972, Dedourek et al. SPE 10, 77-96, Agarwal, Chanson SPE 10, 355-372, Cowan et al. SPE 10, 501-506, Horspool TCS 11, 227-246, Hennessy, Ashcroft TOPLAS 2, 307-320, Howden Czechoslovakia (1) TCS 11, 93-106, Kucera et al. Denmark (4) IEEESE 1, 49-52, Ravn LNCS 86, p560, Bjorner, PROC LNCS 98, p629, Bjorner, Oest SPE 10, 635-658, Kornerup et al. England (48) CACM 23, 625-626, Pitteway, Watkinson CACM 23, 389-394, Cheng, Feast CACM 23, 432-440, Triance, Yow IEEECOM, 29, 20-27, Jesshope IEEESE 3, 278-285, Woodward et al. IEEESE 4, 329-333, Hennell, Prudom IEEESE 5, 489-500, Littlewood IPL 10, 9-13, Rayword-Smith, Rolph IPL 10, 47-50, Anderson IPL 10, 120-123, Wallis, Silverman IPL 10, 148-152, Barnden IPL 10, 198-201, Burton, Lewis MCS 22, 113-117, Evans, Benson MCS 22, 232-241, Coulbeck MCS 22, 256-263, Evans, Missirlia SPE 10, 45-56, Gay SPE 10, 57-76, Hazel SPE 10, 765-772, Moody, Richards SPE 10, 791-800, Triance, Yow SPE 10, 801-816, Barnett SPE 10, 851-888, Barnes SPE 10, 919-934, Alty, Coombs SPE 10, 953-958, HJames, Ireland SPE 10, 127-134, Thimbleby SPE 10, 135-148, Shave SPE 10, 149-158, Hazel SPE 10, 175-182, Hopkins SPE 10, 183-188, Coutant, Fraser SPE 10, 219-230, Cox, Walsh SPE 10, 231-240, Pemberton SPE 10, 241-246, Cornelius et al. SPE 10, 273-382, Harland SPE 10, 307-318, Pyle SPE 10, 319-328, Izatt SPE 10, 347-354, Ledd International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPE 10, 373-382, Green SPE 10, 393-404, Stevenson SPE 10, 427-430, Ince, Robson SPE 10, 431-434, Brown SPE 10, 519-523, Radford SPE 10, 524-530, Bunt SPE 10, 593-622, Bolden, Wand SPE 10, 659-672, Wilson SPE 10, 707-720, Barnes SPE 10, 751-763, Schofield et al. TCS 11, 167-180, Bexnon TOPLAS 2, 122-128, Arnold, Sleep TOPLAS 2, 137-152, Wallis Finland (4) Acta 13, 87-108, Maurer et al. 77 Acta 14, 157-175, Soisaion-Soininen IPL 11, 137-140, Erkio IPL 11, 224-228, Pajunen France (27) Acta 13, 189-198, Reutenauer Acta 13, 365-378, Mauer, Nivat CACM 23, 584-593, Potier, Leblanc CACM 23, 229-239, Vuillemin IEEBCOM 292, 1060-1067, Gardarin, Chu IEEESE 4, 373-380, Libetoulle, Pujolle IPL 10, 99-103, Brandajn, Joly IPL 10, 137-147, Cellary, Mayer IPL 11, 77-80, Preperata, Vuillemin JACM 27, 519-532, Fayolle JACM 27, 772-796, Raoult, Vuillemin JACM 27, 797-821, Huet LNCS 82, pl46, Sanderson, PROC LNCS 83, p341, Rabinet, PROC LNCS 87, p385, Bibel, Kowalski, PROC LNCS 99, pl58, Guesserian MCS 22, 141-150, Bois, Vignes MCS 22, 177-188, Vergnes MCS 22, 213-230, Bensoussan et al. SJC 9, 142-158, Flajolet, Ramshaw SPE 10, 553-562, Vaucher TCS 11, 181-206, Arnold, Nivat Acta 13, 347-364, Latteaux, French Acta 14, 39-62, Plateau, French TCS 11, 207-220, Bougaut, French TCS 11, 221-225, Vauquelin et al., French Acta 14, 87-106, Phillipp, Prauss, German Germany (47) Acta 13, 67-86, Siekmann and Wrightson Acta 13, 109-114, Wegener Acta 13, 115-140, Rohrich Acta 13, 229-256, Kastens Acta 13, 269-286, Buening, Priese Acta 13, 287-298, Rollik Acta 13, 383-408, Mescheder Acta 14, 119-134, Vaishnavi et al. Acta 14, 175-194, Wegener Acta 14, 243-256, Paul et al. Acta 14, 256-270, Commentz, Sattler Acta 14, 295-298, Kemp Acta 14, 317-336, Moll Acta 14, 371-390, Kroeger Acta 14, 391-403, Paul, Reischuk IEEESE 3, 286-290, Voges et al. IEEESE 4, 348-356, Reuter IEEESE 6, 539-544, Voss IPL 10, 193-197, Broy, Wirsing IPL 11, 70-72, Ebert IPL 11, 87-91, Broy IPL 11, 94-95, Calmet, Loos IPL 11, 96-97, Colbourn, McKay IPL 11, 147-151, Laut IPL 11, 190-192, Majster-cederbaum IPL 11, 218-223, Kandzia, Mangelmann IPL 11, 229-231, Jammel, Stiegeler JACM 27, 412-427, Altenkamp, Mehlhorn JACM 27, 839-850, Reischuk LNCS 84, p535, Brauer, PROC LNCS 89, p457, Encarnaco, PROC MCS 22, 1-6, Neundorf MCS 22, 7-9, Posch, Schmidt MCS 22, 81-90, Duschtoz, Dehl SJC 9, 441-469, Ehrig, Rosen SJC 9, 490-508, Schoenhage SJC 9, 729-743, Book, Brandenburg SJC 9, 785-807, Majster SPE 10, 935-942, Wendt TCS 11, 123-144, Boerger, Bueny TCS 11, 247-276, Ehrig, Rosen TCS 11, 303-320, Blum, Mehlhorn TCS 11, 321-330, Heintz, Sieveking International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOPLAS 2, 321-336, Broy, Krieg-Bruckner Acta 13, 59-66, Reinsch, German Acta 14, 87-106, Phillipp, Prauss, German TCS 11, 107-116, Hotz, German Greece (2) MCS 22, 36-48, Maritsas, Frangakis MCS 22, 242-247, Hadjidomos Hungary (2) SJC 9, 212-216, Babai SJC 9, 628-635, Babai et al. India (7) 78 CACM 23, 279-285, Sethi, Chatterjee IEEECOM 29, 145-148, Mathialagan, Biswas IEEECOM 29, 269-277, Wagh, Ganaesh IPL 10, 111-115, Arora, Rana IPL 11, 199-203, Arora, Rana SPE 10, 163-174, Verman, Sharan SPE 10, 507-518, Prasad Iran (1) IEEECOM 29, 385-392, Jafari et al. Ireland (2) SPE 10, 283-306, Patel, Purser SPE 10, 687-696, McKeag, Milligan Israel (20) Acta 13, 53-58, Galil Acta 14, 221-242, Galil CACM 23, 645-653, Hofri IEEESE 1, 40-48, Tamir IPL 10, 96-98, Ben-Ari IPL 10, 178-179, Fraenkel, Yesha JACM 27, 60-71, Henderson, Zalcstein JACM 27, 445-456, Shiloach JACM 27, 474-483, Mendelson, Yechiali SJC 9,, 197-199, Galil SJC 9, 219-224, Shiloach SJC 9, 273-280, Rabin SJC 9, 417-438, Galil, Seiferas SJC 9, 758-767, Seroussi, Lempel SJC 9, 827-846, Aspvall, Shiloach SPE 10, 383-392, Barak, Shapir SPE 10, 421-426, Schach TCS 11, 341-342, Ben-Ari TOPLAS 2, 90-121, Manna, Waldinger TOPLAS 2, 359-385, Krzysztof et al. Italy (15) CACM 23, 394-395, Luccio, Pagli IEEECOM 290, 855-863, Bongiovanni, Luccio IEEESE 4, 320-328, Celentano et al. IPL 10, 173-177, Bertossi IPL 10, 180-183, Luccio, Mazzone IPL 10, 226-230, Chun et al. IPL 10, 231-233, Boehm et al. IPL 11, 134-136, Romani IPL 11, 172-179, Pettorossi IPL 11, 193-198, Petreschi, Simeone JACM 27, 564-579, Ghezzi, Mandrioli LNCS 81, p596, Blazer MCS 22, 118-126, Cennamo SJC 9, 692-697, Bini et al. SPE 10, 897-918, Celantano Japan (19) Acta 14, 135-156, Nakajima et al. Acta 14, 359-370, Nishimurta CACM 23, 368-378, Banno et al. IEEECOM 29, 102-107, Funabashi et al. IEEECOM 29, 89-96, Kita et al. IEEECOM 29, 317-323, Kitajima IEEECOM 29, 577-595, Hagiwara et al. IEEECOM 29, 681-688, Nishioka et al. IEEESE 1, 53-63, Takahashi IPL 10, 116-119, Watanabe IPL 10, 219-222, Nakamura, Inoue IPL 10, 245-248, Inoue, Takanami IPL 11, 204-210, Kawai JACM 27, 619-632, Tsukiyama et al. LNCS 97, pl25, Osaki, Nishio SPE 10, 11-20, Kawai SPE 10, 29-44, Arisawa, Fuchi SPE 10, 575-588, Muramatsu TCS 11, 79-92, Morisaki, Sakai Korea (2) JACM 27, 550-563, Sahni, Cho SJC 9, 91-103, Cho, Sahni International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Mexico lll · SJC 9, 509-5121 Rytter New Zealand (1) IPL 10, 206-208, Doran, Thomas Poland (10) IEBECOM 29, 703-709, Weglarz IPL 10, 21-24, Truszczynski IPL 10, 153-158, Czaja IPL 10, 234-239, Czaja IPL 11, 59-65, Banachowski JACM 27, 30-41, Pawlikowski JACM 27, 263-269, Wasilkowski LNCS 88, p723, Dembinski, PROC MCS 22, 319-323, Grandek SJC 9, 509-512, Rytter Scotland (5) IPL 10, 1-3, Gordon LNCS 92, pl71, Milner SPB 10, 993-1008, Stephens et al. SPB 10, 97-126, Warren SPB 10, 329-332, McGregor, Malone South Africa (5) IBBBSB 2, 219-225, Kritzinger et al. IEBBSB 4, 381-389, Kritzinger et al. IPL 11, 180-185, Williams IPL 11, 186-189, Williams SPB 10, 475-488, Messerschmidt Spain (1) IPL 11, 102-109, Luque, Ripoll Sweden (3) IBBBCOM 29, 482-491, Ossfeldt, Jonsson SPB 10, 987-992, SPB 10, 205-218, Mattsson Switzerland (5) 79 IBBBCOM 29, 134-144, Zeman, Ragle JACM 27, 313-322, Reiser, Lavenberg SPB 10, 773-790, Kriz, Sandaayr SPB 10, 697-706, Hoppe TCS 11, 331-336, Gather, Strassen Taiwan (1) IPL 10, 129-131, Wang The Netherlands (25) Acta 13, 257-268, Rozenberg, Wood Acta 13, 4 (809), 1-8, Dijsktra Acta 14, 271-294, Nijholt IBBBCOM 290, 884-888, Jansen, Kessels IPL 10, 51-56, Van Leeuven, Wood IPL 10, 83-86, Vitanyi IPL 10, 124-126, Hemerik IPL 10, 132-136, van Bmde Boas IPL 10, 159-162, Kessels IPL 10, 163-168, van der Nat IPL 10, 209-212, Overmars, van Leeuven IPL 10, 223-225, Bhrenfeucht, Rozenberg IPL 11, 168-171, ter Bekke IPL 11, 211-217, ten Hoopen JACM 27, 96-117, Bngelfriet et al. JACM 27, 499-518, Bngelfriet Rozenberg JACM 27, 656-663, Bhrenfeucht, Rozenberg LNCS 85, p671, DeBakker, van Leeuwen, PROC LNCS 93, p253, Nijholt SJC 9, 558-565, Lawler et al. SJC 9, 665-671, Apt, Meertens SPB 10, 435-474, Boom, DeJong SPB 10, 563-574, Aretz et al. TCS 11, 19-38, Bergsra, Klop TOPLAS 2, 359-385, Krzysztof et al. u.s. (393) Acta 13, 21-38, Heidelberger Acta 13, 39-52, Gonnet et al. Acta 13, 9-20, Hoffmann Acta 13, 141-154, Fischer et al. Acta 13, 155-168, Bentley, Maurer Acta 13, 169-188, Clarke Acta 13, 189-204, Kintala, Wotschke Acta 13, 225-228, Barstow Acta 13, 299-324, Franta, Bilodeau Acta 13, 325-346, Berztiss Acta 13, 379-382, Morito, Salkin Acta 14, 1-20, Russell Acta 14, 21-38, Lamport Acta 14, 63-86, Ellis International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acta 14, 195-220, Casanova, Bernstein Acta 14, 299-316, Purdom, Brown Acta 14, 337-358, Wand CACM 23, 10-23, O'Neill, O'Neill CACM 23, 14-17, Maziack CACM 23, 17-19, Chichelli CACM 23, 20-23, Abelson, Andreas CACM 23, 23-34, Blinn et al. CACM 23, 546-555, Chand, Yadav CACM 23, 556-563, Ledgard et al. CACM 23, 564-572, Bard CACM 23, 573-583, Chandy, Sauer CACM 23, 620-624, Cook, Kim CACM 23, 627-628, Hirschberg, Sinclair CACM 23, 628-645, Steele, Sussman CACM 23, 676-687, Peterson CACM 23, 689-703, Winston CACM 23, 703-710, Samet CACM 23, 711-721, Shoch, Hupp CACM 23, 105-118, Lampson, Redell CACM 23, 118-131, Walker et al. CACM 23, 67-70, Ralston, Shaw CACM 23, 71-80, Canon et al. CACM 23, 81-92, Redell et al. CACM 23, 92-105, Ousterhut et al. CACM 23, 147-154, Ling CACM 23, 154-158, Fraser CACM 23, 159-162, Lee CACM 23, 163-170, Samet CACM 23, 171-179, Dyer et al. CACM 23, 199-206, Gold et al. CACM 23, 207-213, Brooks CACM 23, 214-228, Bentley CACM 23, 264-271, Glasa CACM 23, 272-277, Turner CACM 23, 294-300, Gill CACM 23, 324-331, House CACM 23, 332-342, Chambers, Sprecher CACM 23, 343-349, Whitted CACM 23, 350-351, Fletcher CACM 23, 379-388, Barel CACM 29, 396-410, Card et al. CACM 23, 444-465, Iverson 80 CACM 23, 466-474, Peterson, Budgor CACM 23, 49-5-502, Hall et al. CACM 23, 503-510, Asai CACM 23, 511-521, Kumar, Davidson CACM 23, 522-528, Pfaltz et al. IPL 10, 14-19, Honeryaan et al. IPL 10, 28-31, Lloyd IPL 10, 32-34, Zaniolo IPL 10, 37-40, Sleator IPL 10, 41-45, Sarwate IPL 10, 104-107, Pagan IPL 10, 108-110, Jazayeri IPL 10, 76-79, Liang IPL 10, 80-82, Blum et al. IPL 10, 89-95, Samet, Marcus IPL 10, 99-103, Brandajn, Joly IPL 10, 169-172, Melville, Gries IPL 10, 184-188, Lengauer, Tarjan IPL 10, 189-192, Farley IPL 10, 198-201, Burton, Lewis IPL 10, 202-205, Savage IPL 10, 206-208, Doran, Thomas IPL 10, 223-225, Ehrenfeucht, Rozenberg IPL 10, 226-230, Chun et al. IPL 10, 243-244, Buneman, Levy IPL 11, 110-113, Leiss IPL 11, 68-69, Gries, Levin IPL 11, 73-76, Liu, De-ars IPL 11, 77-80, Preperata, Vuilleain IPL 11, 81-83, Chung et al. IPL 11, 84-86, Yao IPL 11, 92-93, Johnson IPL 11, 98-101, Kanellakis IPL 11, 115-118, Leung, Merrill IPL 11, 127-129, Moura IPL 11, 141-143, Dershowitz IPL 11, 156-161, Frederickson IPL 11, pl62, Ibarra et al. IPL 11, 163-167, Hanson JACM 27, 1-2, Proskurowaki JACM 27, 118-122, Kannan JACM 27, 123-127, DeMillo et al. JACM 27, 128-145, Kaplan, Ullman JACM 27, 146-163, Bhaakaram, Sethi JACM 27, 164-180, Wand JACM 27, 181-190, Bender JACM 27, 191-205, Suzuki, Jefferson JACM 27, 3-5, Solomon, Finkel JACM 27, 42-59, Swartz JACM 27, 6-29, Nassimi, Sahni JACM 27, 60-71, Henderson, Zalcstein JACM 27, 72-80, Silberschatz, Kedea JACM 27, 81-95, Lipton et al. JACM 27, 96-117, Engelfriet et al. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.JACM 21, 207-227, Yao JACM 27, 228-234, Shostak, Lamport JACM 27, 250-262, Sagiv JACM 27, 281-286, Chow 81 JACM 27, 287-312, Gonzalez, Johnson JACM 27, 313-322, Reiser, Lavenberg JACM 27, 323-337, Towsley JACM 27, 338-355, Krishnaswamy, Pyster JACM 27, 356-364, Nelson, Oppen JACM 27, 365-383, Ward, Halstead JACM 27, 384-393, Abelson JACM 27, 393-401, Lichtenstein, Sipser JACM 27, 403-411, Oppen JACM 27, 428-444, Graham et al. JACM 27, 457-473, Trivedi JACM 27, 474-483, Mendelson, Yechiali JACM 27, 484-498, Abramson et al. JACM 27, 533-549, Papademitriou, Kanellakis JACM 27, 550-563, Sahni, Cho JACM 27, 580-597, Sethi, Tang JACM 27, 599-603, Aronson et al. JACM 27, 604-618, Lee JACM 27, 633-655, Sagiv, Yannakakis JACM 27, 656-663, Ehrenfeucht, Rozenberg JACM 27, 664-674, Maier JACM 27, 675-700, Greibach, Friedman JACM 27, 701-717, Schwartz JACM 27, 718-735, Fisher, Bochbaum JACM 27, 736-757, Ramakrishnan JACM 27, 758-771, Downey et al. JACM 27, 822-830, JaJa JACM 27, 831-838, Ladner, Fischer LNCS 80, p444, Chang, Fu, PROC LNCS 90, p239, Sandford LNCS 94, p489, Jones, PROC LNCS 95, p248, Martin LNCS 96, p213, Peterson MCS 22, 11-17, Finlayson MCS 22, 18-24, Bank, Sherman MCS 22, 25-29, Bayes Ł MCS 22, 103-112, Wadia, Payne MCS 22, 127-132, Cooke, Blanchard MCS 22, 91-97, Roustis et al. MCS 22, 98-102, Vichneultshz MCS 22, 200-207, Greenspan MCS 22, 231-232, Azadivar, Talauage MCS 22, 248-255, Keramidas MCS 22, 291-297, Birkhoff, Lynch SJC 9, 1-24, Tucker SJC 9, 104-110, Statman SJC 9, 111-113, Wong, Easton SJC 9, 114-120, Hartmanis SJC 9, 121-125, Dobkin, Lipton SJC 9, 126-129, Hirschberg SJC -9, 130-141, Joichi et al. SJC 9, 142-158, Flajolet, Raaahaw SJC 9, 159-196, Rosen SJC 9, 200-211, Lee, Wong SJC 9, 25-45, Bloom et al. SJC 9, 46-53, Kintala, Fischer SJC 9, 54-66, Brent, Traub SJC 9, 85-90, Stockmeyer, Yao SJC 9, 91-103, Cho, Sahni SJC 9, 225-229, Winograd SJC 9, 230-250, Pippenger SJC 9, 298-320, &wong SJC 9, 321-342, Pan SJC 9, 342-347, Yao, Rivest SJC 9, 375-396, Rei£ SJC 9, 397-416, Constable, Sahni SJC 9, 417-438, Galil, Seiferas SJC 9, 441-469, Ehrig, Rosen SJC 9, 470-489, Parker SJC 9, 513-524, Gibbert et al. SJC 9, 525-540, Bloom et al. SJC 9, 541-551, Jaffe SJC 9, 552-557, Weide SJC 9, 566-582, Yao SJC 9, 594-614, Brown, Tarjan SJC 9, 615-627, Lipton, Tarjan SJC 9, 653-665, Tai SJC 9, 672-682, Guibas, Odlyzko SJC 9, 683-691, Bloom, Tindell SJC 9, 698-705, Plaisted SJC 9, 706-712, Beyer, Bedetniemi SJC 9, 713-728, JaJa SJC 9, 729-743, Book, Brandenburg SJC 9, 744-757, Nassimi, Sahni SJC 9, 768-784, Feldman, Nigam SJC 9, 808-826, Coffman et al. SJC 9, 827-846, Aspvall, Shiloach SJC 9, 847-855, Baker et al. SPE 10, 1-10, Griswol SPE 10, 817-822, Fraser SPE 10, 835-848, Harrington SPE 10, 848-943, Hansen, Fellows International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 SPE 10, 1009-1028, Hamlet, Baralick SPE 10, 1037-1042, Zelkowitz SPE 10, 973-986, Sreenivasan et al. SPE 10, 189-204, Pauli, Soffa SPE 10, 249-264, Morris SPE 10, 265-272, Wetherell SPE 10, 335-346, Barach, Fram SPE 10, 405-418, Bart SPE 10, 489-500, Hanson SPE 10, 531-552, Smith SPE 10, 623-634, Hanson SPE 10, 721-742, Frankowska, Franta SPE 10, 743-750, Munn, Stuart TCS 11, 1-18, Dobkin, Reiss TCS 11, 49-56, Pippenger TCS 11, 59-70, Bruss, Meyer TCS 11, 71-78, Berman TCS 11, 117-122, Barary TCS 11, 145-166, Rosenberg et al. TCS 11, 247-276, Ehrig, Rosen TCS 11, 277-302, Kozen TOPLAS 2, 1-17, Barel TOPLAS 2, 129-133, Ca.er TOPLAS 2, 18-41, Pai, Kieburtz TOPLAS 2, 42-55, Francez TOPLAS 2, 56-76, Andrews, Reitman TOPLAS 2, 77-89, Papadiaitriou, Bernstein TOPLAS 2, 90-121, Manna, Waldinger TOPLAS 2, 153-172, Griswold, Hanson TOPLAS 2, 173-190, Cattell TOPLAS 2, 191-202, Davidson, Fraser TOPLAS 2, 203-224, Fischer TOPLAS 2, 225-233, Luckham, Polak TOPLAS 2, 234-238, Bernstein TOPLAS 2, 239-262, Ma, Lewis TOPLAS 2, 269-273, Bobrow TOPLAS 2, 274-289, Leverett, Szymanski TOPLAS 2, 290-306, Samet TOPLAS 2, 337-358, Clarke TOPLAS 2, 386-414, Casanova, Bernstein TOPLAS 2, 415-462, Graham et al. TOPLAS 2, 465-483, Oppen TOPLAS 2, 484-521, Schwartz TOPLAS 2, 522-543, Ernst, Ogden TOPLAS 2, 544-563, Landwehr TOPLAS 2, 564-579, Gries, Levin TOPLAS 2, 580-595, Moret et al. IEBBCOM 29, 2-19, Rauscher, Adas IEBBCOM 29, 28-32, Suet IBBBCOM 29, 33-43, Goudan, Bayes IEBBCOM 29, S0-54, Cull IEBBCOM 29, SS-58, Kodandapani, Pradham IBEBCOM 290, 864-873, Chung et al. IEBBCOM 290, 874-883, Tilove IBBBCOM 290, 889-898, Wojcik, Fang IEEBCOM 290, 905-919, Gostelow, Thomas IEBBCOM 291, 1002-1011, Ng, Avizienis IBEBCOM 291, 957-970, Doty et al. IEBBCOM 291, 971-977, Chu, Shen IBEBCOM 291, 978-985, Goundan, Bayes IBEBCOM 291, 986-993, Kandel, Francioni IEBBCOM 291, 994-1001, Saaari, Schneider IBEBCOM 292, 1038-1051, Razouk, Estrin IEEBCOM 292, 1052-1059, Keraani, Kleinrok IEEBCOM 292, 1068-1079, Chen, Akoka IBBBOOM 292, 1080-1086, Flynn, Hennessy IEBBCOM 292, 1087-1094, Gonzalez, Jordan IEEBCOM 292, 1095-1103, McGraw IEEBCOM 292, 1114-1132, Kartashev, Kartashev IEEBCOM 292, 1133-1143, Wittie, van Tilborg IEBBCOM 292, 1144-1162, Lesser, Erman IEBBCOM 29, 108-115, Patterson, Sequin IEBBCOM 29, 116-124, Weissberger IEBBCOM 29, 125-133, Cliff IEBBCOM 29, 149-160, Arulpraga .. et al. IEBBCOM 29, 161-179, Lenahan, Fung IEBBCOM 29, 180-190, Tabak, Lipovski IEEECOM 29, 68-78, Haviland, Tuszynski IEEBCOM 29, 97-101, Townsend et al. IEBBCOM 29, 213-222, Parker IEEBCOM 29, 223-234, Breuer, Fried .. n International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IBBBCOK 29, 235-248, Lesser, Shedletsky IBBBCOM 29, 278-287, Reeves IBBBCOM 29, 300-307, Jenkins, Boward IBBBCOM 29, 308-316, Bruno et al. IBBBCOM 29, 337-340, Brown, Dobkin IBBBCOM 29, 341-353, Swartzlander, Gilbert IBBBCOM 29, 354-359, Wallach, Konrad IBBBCOM 29, 360-370, Finkel, Solomon IBBBCOM 29, 371-384, Lee IBBBCOM 29, 419-428, Suk, Reddy IBBBCOM 29, 429-441, Thatte, Abraham IBBBCOM 29, 442-450, Savir IBBBCOM 29, 451-460, Abr amov ic i , 
Breuer IBBBCOM 29, 461-470, Mallela, Masson IBBBCOM 29, 471-481, Pradhan IBBBCOM 29, 492-500, Sedmak, Liebergot IBBBCOM 29, 501-509, Meyer et al. IBBBCOM 29, 553-562, Chung et al. IBBBCOM 29, 563-570, VanScoy IBBBCOM 29, 571-576, Bentley, Wood IBBBCOM 29, 596-603, Lam IBBBCOM 29, 604-610, Dao et al. IBBBCOM 29, 632-638, Wing, Huang IBBBCOM 29, 639-647, Dervisoglu, Sholl IBBBCOM 29, 648-656, Sutton Bredeson IBBBCOM 29, 689-693, Chang IBBBCOM 29, 694-702, Wu, Feng IBBBCOM 29, 720-731, Meyer IBBBCOM 29, 763-776, Padau et al. IEEBCOM 29, 777-790, Pradhan, Kodandapani IBBBCOM 29, 791-800, Siegel IBBBCOM 29, 801-810, Wu, Peng IEBBCOM 29, 811-817, Ellis IBEECOM 29, 818-825, El-Dessouki, Huen IBBBSB 1, 13-23, Guttag IEBBSB 1, 2-12, Heninger IBBBSB 1, 24-31, Musser IBBBSB l, 32-39, Basu 83 IBBBSB 1, 64-84, Denning IBBBSB l, 85-90, Leinbaugh IEEBSE 1, 91-109, Banerjee et al. IBBBSE 2, 118-125, Cheung IEBBSB 2, 126-137, Yau, Chen IEEBSE 2, 138-151, Booth, Wiecek IBEBSB 2, 152-161, Beck IEEESB 2, 170-182, Basu IBBBSE 2, 183-193, Russell IEBBSE 2, 194-204, Mao, Yeh IBBBSE 2, 205-218, Chang, Cheng IBBBSB 2, 226-231, Hsia, Petry IEBESB 3, 236-246, Weyuker, Ostrand IBBBSB 3, 247-257, White, Cohen IEBBSB 3, 258-264, Poster IBEESB 3, 265-277, Taylor, Osterweil IBBBSB 3, 291-296, Parr IBEESE 3, 297-303, Lomet IEBBSB 4, 313-319, Fischer, LeBlanc IBBESE 4, 340-347, Young, Liu IBEESE 4, 357-372, Hardgrave IEBBSB 5, 402-410, Babad, Hoffer IEEESB 5, 411-419, Gudes IBBBSB 5, 420-434, Mekly, Yau IEEESE 5, 435-439, Gligor, Shattuck IBBBSE 5, 440-449, Ramamoorthy, Ho IBEESB 5, 450-453, Birrel, Needham IEEESE 5, 454-464, Basili, Noonan IBEESE 5, 465-479, King IEEESE 5, 480-484, Huang IEEESB 5, 485-488, Leung, Ramamoorthy IBEESE 6, 506-511, Baker, Zweben IEEESE 6, 512-518, Paiman, Kortesoja IBEESB 6, 519-524, Chang, Fu IEEESE 6, 525-530, Murata IEBBSB 6, 531-538, Tai IEEESB 6, 545-552, Yau, Collofello IEEESE 6, 553-562, Brender IEBBSE 6, 563-571, Cook IBBBSB 6, 572-584, Bentley, Shaw USSR (2) IPL 10, 57-62, Sabelfeld IPL ll, 144-146, Kinber International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix F ANALYSIS OF 720 ARTICLES IN 11 JOURNALS, BY SOURCE Below is a list of computer-science-related articles published in 1980, giving page numbers, authors, and country. Articles with authors from different countries are listed twice. Articles in a foreign language are so indicated. The following journals, containing about 720 articles, are covered in this survey: Acta Informatica Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery Information Processing Letters Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery Springer Verlag Lecture Notes in Computer Science Mathematics and Computers in Simulation SIAM Journal on Computing Software--Practice and Experience Theoretical Computer Science Transactions of Programming Languages IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering IEEE Transactions on Computers Many of the Springer Verlag Lecture Notes are proceedings of conferences1 these are marked PROC. Acta Informatica 13 (1980) 1-8, Dijsktra, The Netherlands 9-20, Hoffmann, u.s. 21-38, Reidelberger, u.s. 39-52, Gonnet et al., u.s. 39-52, Gonnet et al., Canada 53-58, Galil, Israel 59-66, Reinsch, Germany, German 67-86, Siekmann and Wrightson, Germany 87-108, Maurer et al., Austria 87-108, Maurer et al., Finland 87-108, Maurer et al., Canada 109-114, Wegener, Germany 115-140, Rohrich, Germany 84 141-154, Fischer et al., u.s. 155-168, Bentley, Maurer, u.s. 155-168, Maurer, Austria 169-188, Clarke, u.s. 189-198, Reutenauer, France 189-204, Kintala, Wotschke, u.s. 205-224, Tompa, Canada 225-228, Barstow, u.s. 229-256, Kastens, Germany 257-268, Wood, Canada 257-268, Rozenberg, The Netherlands 269-286, Buening, Priese, Germany 287-298, Rollik, Germany 299-324, Franta, Bilodeau, u.s. 325-346, Berztiss, u.s. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Latteaux, France, French 365-378, Mauer, Nivat, Austria 365-378, Mauer, Rivat, France 379-382, Morito, Salkin, u.s. 383-408, Mescheder, Germany Acta Informatica 14 (1980) 1-20, Russell, u.s. 21-38, Lamport, u.s. 39-62, Plateau, France, French 63-86, Ellis, u.s. 85 87-106, Phillipp, France, German 87-106, Prauss, Germany, German 107-118, Bromley, Australia 119-134, Vaishnavi et al., Canada 119-134, Vaishnavi et al., Germany 135-156, Nakajiaa et al., Japan 157-175, Soisaion-Soininen, Finland 175-194, Wegener, Germany 195-220, Casanova, Bernstein, u.s. 221-242, Galil, Israel 243-256, Paul et al., Germany 256-270, Commentz, Sattler, Germany 271-294, Nijholt, The Netherlands 295-298, Kemp, Germany 299-316, Purdom, Brown, u.s. 317-336, Moll, Germany 337-358, Wand, u.s. 359-370, Nishimurta, Japan 371-390, Kroeger, Germany 391-403, Paul, Reischuk, Germany Software--Practice and Experience 10 (1980) 1-10, Griswol, u.s. 11-20, Kawai, Japan 21-28, Marsland, Sutphen, Canada 29-44, Arisawa, Fuchi, Japan 45-56, Gay, 57-76, Hazel, England 77-96, Agarwal, Chanson, Canada 97-126, Warren, Scotland 127-134, Thimbleby, England 135-148, Shave, England 149-158, Hazel, England 163-174, Verman, Sharan, India 175-182, Hopkins, England 183-188, Coutant, Fraser, England 189-204, Pauli, Soffa, u.s. 205-218, Mattsson, Sweden 219-230, Cox, Walsh, England 231-240, Pemberton, England 241-246, Cornelius et al., England 249-264, Morris, u.s. 265-272, Wetherell, u.s. 273-282, Harland, England 283-306, Patel, Purser, Ireland 307-318, Pyle, England 319-328, Izatt, England 329-332, McGregor, Malone, Scotland 335-346, Barach, Pram, u.s. 347-354, Ledd, England 355-372, Cowan et al., Canada 355-372, Cowan et al., Brazil 373-382, Green, England 383-392, Barak, Shapir, Israel 393-404, Stevenson, England 405-418, Bart, u.s. 421-426, Schach, Israel 427-430, Ince, Robson, England 431-434, Brown, England 435-474, Boom, DeJong, The Netherlands 475-488, Messerschmidt, South Africa 489-500, Hanson, u.s. 501-506, Horspool, Canada 507-518, Prasad, India 519-523, Radford, England Bunt, England 531-552, Smith, u.s. 553-562, Vaucher, France 563-574, Aretz et al., The Netherlands 575-588, Muramatsu, Japan 593-622, Holden, Wand, England 623-634, Hanson, u.s. 635-658, Kornerup et al., Denmark 659-672, Wilson, England 673-684, Lakos, Australia 687-696, McKeag, Milligan, Ireland 697-706, Hoppe, Switzerland 707-720, Barnes, England 721-742, Frankowska, Franta, u.s. 743-750, Munn, Stuart, u.s. 751-763, Schofield et al., England 765-772, Moody, Richards, England 773-790, Kriz, Sandmayr, Switzerland 791-800, Triance, Yow, England 801-816, Barnett, England 817-822, Fraser, u.s. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.823-834, Gujar, Fitzgerald, Canada 835-848, Harrington, u.s. 851-888, Barnes, England 889-896, Kerr, Australia 897-918, Celantano, Italy 919-934, Alty, Coombs, England 935-942, Wendt, Germany 943-948, Hansen, Fellows, u.s. 953-958, BJames, Ireland, England 959-972, Dedourek et al., Canada 973-986, Sreenivasan et al., u.s. 987-992, Palme, Sweden 993-1008, Stephens et al. Scotland 1009-1028, Hamlet, Haralick, u.s. 1029-1036, Hurst, Australia 1037-1042, Zelkowitl, u.s. Theoretical Computer Science 11 (1980) 1-18, Dobkin, Reiss, u.s. 19-38, Bergsra, Klop, The Netherlands 39-48, Staples, Australia 49-56, Pippenger, u.s. 59-70, Bruss, Meyer, u.s. 71-78, Berman, u.s. 79-92, Morisaki, Sakai, Japan 93-106, Kucera et al., Czechoslovakia 107-116, Hotz, Germany, German 117-122, Harary, u.s. 123-144, Boerger, Bueny, Germany 145-166, Rosenberg et al., u.s. 167-180, Bexnon, England 181-206, Arnold, Nivat, France 207-220, Bougaut, Prance, French 221-225, Vauquelin et al., France, French 86 227-246, Hennessy, Ashcroft, Brazil 227-246, Hennessy, Ashcroft, Canada 247-276, Ehrig, Rosen, u.s. 247-276, Ehrig, Rosen, Germany 277-302, Kozen, u.s. 303-320, Blum, Mehlhorn, Germany 321-330, Heintz, Sieveking, Germany 331-336, Gather, Strassen, Switzerland 337-340, Netto, Brazil 341-342, Ben-Ari, Israel Mathematics and Computers in Simulation 22 (1980) 1-6, Neundorf, Germany 7-9, Posch, Schmidt, Germany 11-17, Finlayson, u.s. 18-24, Bank, Sherman, u.s. 25-29, Hayes, u.s. 30-35, Carver, Canada 36-48, Maritsas, Frangakis, Greece 49-54, Masliyak, Kumar, Canada 81-90, Duschtoz, Dehl, Germany 91-97, Houstis et al., u.s. 98-102, Vichneultshz, u.s. 103-112, Wadia, Payne, u.s. 113-117, Evans, Benson, England 118-126, Cennamo, Italy 127-132, Cooke, Blanchard, u.s. 133-140, van Cutsem et al., Bulgaria 141-150, Bois, Vignes, France 177-188, Vergnes, France 188-199, Birta, Canada 200-207, Greenspan, u.s. 213-230, Bensoussan et al., Prance Azadivar, Talauage, u.s. 232-241, Coulbeck, England 242-247, Hadjidomos, Greece 248-255, Keramidas, u.s. 256-263, Evans, Missirlis, England 291-297, Birkhoff, Lynch, u.s. 298-318, Carver, Canada 319-323, Grandek, Poland SIAM Journal on Computing 9 (1980) 1-24, Tucker, u.s. 25-45, Bloom et al., u.s. 46-53, Kintala, Fischer, u.s. 54-66, Brent, Traub, u.s. 54-66, Brent, Traub, Australia 67-84, Hennessy, Canada 85-90, Stockmeyer, Yao, u.s. 91-103, Cho, Sahni, Korea 91-103, Cho, Sahni, u.s. 104-110, Statman, u.s. 111-113, Wong, Easton, u.s. 114-120, Hartmanis, u.s. 121-125, Dobkin, Lipton, u.s. 126-129, Hirschberg, u.s. 130-141, Joichi et al., u.s. 142-158, Flajolet, Ramshaw, Prance 142-158, Flajolet, Ramshaw, u.s. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.159-196, Rosen, u.s. 197-199, Galil, Israel ·200-211, Lee, Wong, u.s. 212-216, Babai, Hungary 219-224, Shiloach, Israel 225-229, Winograd, u.s. 230-250, Pippenger, u.s. 251-272, Morgera, Canada 273-280, Rabin, Israel 281-297, Cornell, Kirkpatrick, Canada 298-320, Hwong, u.s. 321-342, Pan, u.s. 342-347, Yao, Rivest, u.s. 375-396, Rei£, u.s. 397-416, Conatable, Sahni, u.s. 417-438, Galil, Seiferas, u.s. 417-438, Galil, Seiferas, Israel 441-469, Ehrig, Rosen, u.s. 441-469, Bhrig, Rosen, Germany 470-489, Parker, u.s. 490-508, Schoenhage, Germany 509-512, Rytter, Mexico 509-512, Rytter, Poland 513-524, Gibbert et al., u.s. 525-540, Bloom et al., u.s. 541-551, Jaffe, u.s. 552-557, Weide, u.s. 558-565, Lawler et al., The Netherlands 566-582, Yao, u.s. 583-593, George, Liu, Canada 594-614, Brown, Tarjan, u.s. 615-627, Lipton, Tarjan, u.s. 628-635, Babai et al., Canada 628-635, Babai et al., Hungary 636-652, Cook, Rackoff, Canada 653-665, Tal, u.s. 665-671, Apt, Meertens, The Netherlands 672-682, Guibas, Odlyzko, u.s. 683-691, Bloom, Tindell, u.s. 692-697, Bini et al., Italy 698-705, Plaisted, u.s. 706-712, Beyer, Hedetniemi, u.s. 713-728, Jaja, u.s. 87 729-743, Book, Brandenburg, u.s. 729-743, Book, Brandenburg, Germany 744-757, Nassimi, Sahni, u.s. 758-767, Seroussi, Lempel, Israel 768-784, Feldman, Nigam, u.s. 785-807, Majster, Germany 808-826, Coffman et al., u.s. 827-846, Aspvall, Shiloach, Israel 827-846, Aspvall, Shiloach, u.s. 847-855, Baker et al., u.s. Springer Verlag Lecture Notes in CO!futer Science, 1980 79, p255, Tobias, PROC, Australia 80, p444, Chang, Fu, PROC, U.S. 81, p596, Blazer, Italy 82, pl46, Sanderson, PROC, France 83, p341, Rabinet, PROC, France 84, p535, Brauer, PROC, Germany 85, p671, De Bakker, van Leeuven, PROC, The Netherlands 86, p560, Bjorner, PROC, Denmark 87, p385, Bibel, Kowalski, PROC, France 88, p723, Dembinski, PROC, Poland 89, p457, Encarnaco, PROC, Germany 90, p239, Sandford, u.s. 91, p314, Wood, Canada 92, pl71, Milner, Scotland 93, p253, Nijholt, The Netherlands 94, p489, Jones, PROC, u.s. 95, p248, Martin, u.s. 96, p213, Peterson, u.s. 97, pl25, Osaki, Nishio, Japan 98, p629, Bjorner, Oest, Denmark 99, pl58, Guesserian, Prance Information Processing Letters 10 {1980) 1-3, Gordon, Scotland 4-8, Olivie, Belgium 9-13, Rayword-Smith, Rolph, Bngland 14-19, Honeryman et al., u.s. p20, Deb, Canada 21-24, Truszczynski, Poland 25-27, GoldSchlager, Australia 28-31, Lloyd, u.s. 32-34, Zaniolo, u.s. 35-36, Bui, Canada 37-40, Sleator, u.s. 41-45, Sarwate, u.s. 47-50, Anderson, England 51-56, van Leeuven, Wood, Canada 51-56, van Leeuven, Wood, The Netherlands 57-62, Sabelfeld, USSR International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63-67, Passy, Bulgaria 68-75, Wilson, Short, Canada 76-79, Liang, u.s. 80-82, Blum et al., u.s. 83-86, Vitanyi, The Netherlands 87-88, Santoro, Canada 89-95, Samet, Marcus, u.s. 96-98, Ben-Ari, Israel 99-103, Brandajn, Joly, Prance 99-103, Brandajn, Joly, u.s. 104-107, Pagan, u.s. 108-110, Jazayeri, u.s. 111-115, Arora, Rana, India 116-119, Watanabe, Japan 88 120-123, Wallis, Silverman, England 124-126, Hemerik, The Netherlands 127-128, Kirkpatrick, Canada 129-131, Wang, Taiwan 132-136, van Emde Boas, The Netherlands 137-147, Cellary, Mayer, Prance 148-152, Barnden, England 153-158, Czaja, Poland 159-162, Kessels, The Netherlands 163-168, van der Nat, The Netherlands 169-172, Melville, Gries, u.s. 173-177, Bertossi, Italy 178-179, Praenkel, Yesha, Israel 180-183, Luccio, Mazzone, Italy 184-188, Lengauer, Tarjan, u.s. 189-192, Parley, u.s. 193-197, Broy, Wirsing, Germany 198-201, Burton, Lewis, u.s. 198-201, Burton, Lewis, England 202-205, Savage, u.s. 206-208, Doran, Thomas, New Zealand 206-208, Doran, Thomas, u.s. 209-212, Overmars, van Leeuven, The Netherlands 213-218, Meijer, Akl, Canada 219-222, Nakamura, Inoue, Japan 223-225, Ehrenfeucht, Rozenberg, The Netherlands 223-225, Ehrenfeucht, Rozenberg, u.s. 226-230, Chun et al., Italy 226-230, Chun et al., u.s. 231-233, Boehm et al., Italy 234-239, Czaja, Poland 240-242, Booth, Canada 243-244, Buneman, Levy, u.s. 245-248, Inoue, Takanami, Japan Information Processing Letters 11 (1980) 59-65, Banachowski, Poland 66-67, Urbanek, Austria 68-69, Gries, Levin, u.s. 70-72, Ebert, Germany 73-76, Liu, Demers, u.s. 77-80, Preperata, Vuillemin, u.s. 77-80, Preperata, Vuillemin, Prance 81-83, Chung et al., u.s. 84-86, Yao, u.s. 87-91, Broy, Germany 92-93, Johnson, u.s. 94-95, Calmet, Loos, Germany 96-97, Colbourn, McKay, Australia 96-97, Colbourn, McKay, Germany 98-101, Kanellakis, u.s. 102-109, Luque, Ripoll, Spain 110-113, Leiss, u.s. 115-118, Leung, Merrill, u.s. 119-125, Robson, Australia pl26, Avis, Canada 127-129, Moura, u.s. 130-133, Bailey, Dormey, Australia 134-136, Romani, Italy 137-140, Erkio, Finland 141-143, Dershowitz, u.s. 144-146, Kinber, USSR 147-151, Laut, Germany 152-155, Paredaens, Ponsaert, Belgium 156-161, Frederickson, u.s. pl62, Ibarra et al., u.s. 163-167, Hanson, u.s. 168-171, ter Bekke, The Netherlands 172-179, Pettorossi, Italy 180-185, Williams, South Africa 186-189, Williams, South Africa 190-192, Majster-cederbaum, Germany 193-198, Petreschi, Simeone, Canada 193-198, Petreschi, Simeone, Italy 199-203, Arora, Rana, India 204-210, Kawai, Japan 211-217, ten Hoopen, The Netherlands 218-223, Kandzia, Mangelmann, Germany International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.89 224-228, Pajunen, Finland 229-231, Jammel, Stiegeler, Germany Tranaactions of Programming Languages 2 ( 
1980) 1-17, Barel, u.s. 18-41, Pai, Kieburtz, u.s. 42-55, Francez, u.s. 56-76, Andrews, Reitman, u.s. 77-89, Papadimitriou, Bernstein, u.s. 90-121, Manna, Waldinger, u.s. 90-121, Manna, Waldinger, Israel 122-128, Arnold, Sleep, England 129-133, Coaer, u.s. 137-152, Wallis, England 153-172, Griswold, Ranson, u.s. 173-190, Cattell, u.s. 191-202, Davidson, Fraser, u.s. 203-224, Fischer, u.s. 225-233, Luckham, Polak, u.s. 234-238, Bernstein, u.s. 239-262, Ma, Lewis, u.s. 269-273, Bobrow, u.s. 274-289, Leverett, Szymanski, u.s. 290-306, Samet, u.s. 307-320, Bowden, Canada 321-336, Broy, Krieg-Bruckner, Germany 337-358, Clarke, u.s. 359-385, Krzysztof et al., Israel 359-385, Krzysztof et al., The Netherlands 386-414, Casanova, Bernstein, Brazil 386-414, Casanova, Bernstein, u.s. 415-462, Graham et al., u.s. 465-483, Oppen, u.s. 484-521, Schwartz, u.s. 522-543, Ernst, Ogden, u.s. 544-563, Landwehr, u.s. 564-579, Gries, Levin, u.s. 580-595, Moret et al., u.s. Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery 27 (1980) 1-2, Proskurowski, u.s. 3-5, Solomon, Finkel, u.s. 6-29, Nassimi, Sahni, u.s. 30-41, Pawlikowski, Poland 42-59, Swartz, u.s. 60-71, Henderson, Zalcstein, u.s. 60-71, Henderson, Zalcstein, Israel 72-80, Silberschatz, Kedem, u.s. 81-95, Lipton et al., u.s. 96-117, Bngelfriet et al., u.s. 96-117, Engelfriet et al., The Netherlands 118-122, Kannan, u.s. 123-127, DeMillo et al., u.s. 128-145, Kaplan, Ullman, u.s. 146-163, Bhaskaram, Sethi, u.s. 164-180, Wand, u.s. 181-190, Bender, u.s. 191-205, Suzuki, Jefferson, u.s. 207-227, Yao, u.s. 228-234, Shostak, Lamport, u.s. 235-249, Reiter, Canada 250-262, Sagiv, u.s. 263-269, wasilkowski, Poland 270-280, Kameda, Canada 281-286, Chow, u.s. 287-312, Gonzalez, Johnson, u.s. 313-322, Reiser, Lavenberg, Switzerland 313-322, Reiser, Lavenberg, u.s. 323-337, Towsley, u.s. 338-355, Krishnaswamy, Pyster, u.s. 356-364, Nelson, Oppen, u.s. 365-383, ward, Halstead, u.s. 384-392, Abelson, u.s. 393-401, Lichtenstein, Sipser, u.s. 403-411, Oppen, u.s. 412-427, Altenkamp, Mehlhorn, Germany 428-444, Graham et al., u.s. 445-456, Shiloach, Israel 457-473, Trivedi, u.s. 474-483, Mendelson, Yechiali, u.s. 474-483, Mendelson, Yechiali, Israel 484-498, Abramson et al., u.s. 499-518, Engelfriet, Rozenberg, The Netherlands 499-518, Engelfriet, Rozenberg, Belgium 519-532, Fayolle, France 533-549, Papademitriou, Kanellakis, u.s. 550-563, Sahni, Cho, u.s. 550-563, Sahni, Cho, Korea 564-579, Ghezzi, Mandrioli, Italy International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.580-597, Sethi, Tang, u.s. 599-603, Aronson et al., u.s. 604-618, Lee, u.s. 619-632, Tsukiyama et al., Japan 633-655, Sagiv, Yannakakis, u.s. 656-663, Ehrenfeucht, Rozenberg, u.s. 656-663, Ehrenfeucht, Rozenberg, The Netherlands 664-674, Maier, u.s. 675-700, Greibach, Friedman, u.s. 701-717, Schwartz, u.s. 718-735, Fisher, Hochbaum, u.s. 736-757, Ramakrishnan, u.s. 758-771, Downey et al., u.s. 772-796, Raoult, Vuillemin, France 797-821, Huet, France 822-830, JaJa, u.s. 831-838, Ladner, Fischer, u.s. 839-850, Reischuk, Germany Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery 23 (1980) 10-13, O'Neill, O'Neill, U.S. 14-17, Maziack, u.s. 17-19, Cichelli, u.s. 20-23, Abelson, Andreas, u.s. 23-34, Blinn et al., u.s. 67-70, Ralston, Shaw, u.s. 71-80, Canon et al., u.s. 81-92, Redell et al., u.s. 92-105, Ousterhut et al., u.s. 105-118, Lampson, Redell, u.s. 118-131, Walker et al., u.s. 147-154, Ling, U.S. 154-158, Fraser, u.s. 159-162, Lee, u.s. 163-170, Samet, u.s. 171-179, Dyer et al., u.s. 199-206, Gold et al., u.s. 207-213, Brooks, u.s. 214-228, Bentley, u.s. 229-239, Vuillemin, France 264-271, Glass, u.s. 272-277, Turner, u.s. 279-285, Sethi, Chatterjee, India 286-293, Maes, Belgium 294-300, Gill, U.S. 324-331, House, u.s. 332-342, Chambers, Sprecher, u.s. 332-349, Whitted, u.s. 90 350-351, Fletcher, u.s. 368-378, Banno et al., Japan 379-388, Barel, u.s. 389-394, Cheng, Feast, England 394-395, Luccio, Pagli, Italy 396-410, Card et al., u.s. 432-440, Triance, Yow, England 440-443, Ca.pton, Canada 444-465, Iverson, u.s. 466-474, Peterson, Budgor, u.s. 495-502, Ballet al., u.s. 503-510, Asai, u.s. 511-521, luaar, Davidson, u.s. 522-528, Pfaltz et al., u.s. 546-555, Chand, Yadav, u.s. 556-563, Ledgard et al., u.s. 564-572, Bard, u.s. 573-583, Chandy, Sauer, u.s. 584-593, Potier, Leblanc, France 620-624, Cook, lim, u.s. 625-626, Pitteway, Watkinson, England 627-628, Hirschberg, Sinclair, u.s. 628-645, Steele, Susaaan, u.s. 645-653, Bofri, Israel 676-687, Peterson, u.s. 689-703, Winston, u.s. 703-710, Sa.et, U.S. 711-721, Shoch, Bupp, U.S. IEBB Transactions on Software Engineering (1980) 2-12, Beninger, u.s. 13-23, Guttag, u.s. 24-31, Musser, u.s. 32-39, Basu, u.s. 40-48, Tamir, Israel 49-52, Ravn, Denmark 53-63, Takahashi, Japan 64-84, Denning, u.s. 85-90, Leinbaugh, u.s. 91-109, Banerjee et al., u.s. 118-125, Cheung, u.s. 126-137, Yau, Chen, u.s. 138-151, Booth, Wiacek, u.s. 152-161, Beck, u.s. 162-169, Bowden, Canada 170-182, Basu, u.s. 183-193, Ruasell, u.s. 194-204, Mao, Yeh, u.s. 205-218, Chang, Cheng, u.s. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.119-225, Kritzinger et al., South Africa 226-231, Bsia, Petry, u.s. 236-246, Weyuker, Ostrand, u.s. 247-257, White, Cohen, u.s. 258-264, Poster, u.s. 265-277, Taylor, Osterweil, u.s. 278-285, Woodward et al., England 286-290, Voges et al., Germany 291-296, Parr, u.s. 297-303, Lomet, u.s. 313-319, Fischer, LeBlanc, u.s. 320-328, Celentano et al., Italy 329-333, Hennell, Prudom, England 334-339, Tavernier, Notredame, Belgium 340-347, Young, Liu, u.s. 348-356, Reuter, Germany 357-372, Hardgrave, u.s. 373-380, Labetoulle, Pujolle, Prance 381-389, Kritzinger et al., South Africa 402-410, Babad, Hoffer, u.s. 411-419, Gudes, u.s. 420-434, Mekly, Yau, u.s. 435-439, Gligor, Shattuck, u.s. 440-449, Ramamoorthy, Bo, u.s. 450-453, Birrel, Needham, u.s. 454-464, Basili, Noonan, u.s. 465-479, King, U.S. 480-484, Huang, u.s. 485-488, Leung, Ramamoorthy, u.s. 489-500, Littlewood, England 506-511, Baker, Zweben, u.s. 512-518, Faiman, Kortesoja, u.s. 519-524, Chang, Pu, u.s. 525-530, Murata, u.s. 531-538, Tai, u.s. 539-544, Voss, Germany 545-552, Yau, Collofello, u.s. 553-562, Brender, u.s. 563-571, Cook, u.s. 572-584, Bentley, Shaw, u.s. 585-594, Taylor et al., Canada 595-601, Taylor et al., Canada IEEE Transactions on Computers 2-19, Rauscher, Adams, U.S. 20-27, Jesshope, England 28-32, Samet, u.s. 91 33-43, Goudan, Bayes, u.s. 44-49, Mehra et al., Canada S0-54, Cull, U.S. SS-58, Kodandapani, Pradhu, u.s. 68-78, Haviland, Tuszynski, u.s. 79-88, Rahier, Jespers, Belgium 89-96, Kita et al., Japan 97-101, Townsend et al., u.s. 102-107, Punabashi et al., Japan 108-115, Patterson, Sequin, u.s. 116-124, Weissberger, u.s. 125-133, Cliff, u.s. 134-144, Zeman, Nagle, Switzerland 145-148, Mathialagan, Biswas, India 149-160, Arulpragasm et al., u.s. 161-179, Lenahan, Pung, u.s. 180-190, Tabak, Lipovski, u.s. 213-222, Parker, u.s. 223-234, Breuer, Friedman, u.s. 235-248, Lesser, Shedletsky, u.s. 269-277, Wagh, Ganaesh, India 278-287, Reeves, u.s. 288-299, Agarwal, Masson, Canada 300-307, Jenkins, Howard, u.s. 308-316, Bruno et al., u.s. 317-323, Kitajima, Japan 337-340, Brown, Dobkin, u.s. 341-353, Swartzlander, Gilbert, u.s. 354-359, Wallach, Konrad, u.s. 360-370, Finkel, Solomon, u.s. 371-384, Lee, u.s. 385-392, Jafari et al., Iran 419-428, Suk, Reddy, u.s. 429-441, Thatte, Abraham, u.s. 442-450, Savir, u.s. 451-460, Abraaovici, Breuer, u.s. 461-470, Mallela, Masson, u.s. 471-481, Pradhan, u.s. 482-491, Ossfeldt, Jonsson, Sweden 492-500, Sedmak, Liebergot, u.s. 501-509, Meyer et al., u.s. 553-562, Chung et al., u.s. 563-570, VanScoy, u.s. 571-576, Bentley, Wood, u.s. 577-595, Hagiwara et al., Japan 596-603, Lam, u.s. 604-610, Dao et al., u.s. 611-617, Chanson, Sinha, Canada 618-631, Chin, Fok, Canada 632-638, Wing, Huang, u.s. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.639-647, Dervisoglu, Sholl, u.s. 648-656, Sutton, Bredeson, u.s. 681-688, Nishioka et al., Japan 689-693, Chang, u.s. 694-702, Wu, Feng, u.s. 703-709, Weglarz, Poland 710-719, Engelberg et al., Canada 720-731, Meyer, u.s. 92 763-776, Padua et al., u.s. 777-790, Pradhan, Kodandapani, u.s. 791-800, Siegel, u.s. 801-810, Wu, Feng, u.s. 811-817, Ellis, u.s. 818-825, El-Dessouki, Huen, u.s. 855-863, Bongiovanni, Luccio, Italy 864-873, Chung et al., u.s. 874-883, Tilove, u.s. 884-888, Jansen, Kessels, The Netherlands 889-898, Wojcik, Fang, u.s. 899-904, Jullien, Canada 905-919, Gostelow, Thomas, u.s. 957-970, Doty et al., u.s. 971-977, Chu, Shen, u.s. 978-985, Goundan, Hayes, u.s. 986-993, Kandel, Francioni, u.s. 994-1001, Samari, Schneider, u.s. 1002-1011, Ng, Avizienis, u.s. 1038-1051, Razouk, Estrin, u.s. 1052-1059, Kermani, Kleinrok, u.s. 1060-1067, Gardarin, Chu, France 1068-1079, Chen, Akoka, u.s. 1080-1086, Flynn, Hennessy, u.s. 1087-1094, Gonzalez, Jordan, u.s. 1095-1103, McGraw, u.s. 1104-1113, Smith, Canada 1114-1132, Kartashev, Kartashev, u.s. 1133-1143, Wittie, van Tilborg, u.s. 1144-1162, Lesser, Erman, u.s. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix G SURVEY OF BIGII'l' WBSTDR EUROPEAN COD'BRBNCB PROCBBDINGS proceedings froa eight Western Buropean conferences were exaained to deteraine the nuabera of papers by foreigners, the nuabers by and the numbers not in English. Tbe nuaber to the left of the conference title is.the Springer Verlag Lecture NOtes in Oo!fUter Science nuaber. Papers by Papers by Hon-Bnglish Foreigners Americans Pa2!rs 81 Data Base Techniques for Pictorial Applications, Florence, 1979 18 14 0 83 International Symposium on Programming, Paris, April 1980 20 3 3 
84 Net Theory and Applications, Proceedings of the Advanced Course, Bamburg, 1979 15 4 0 85 Conference on Automata, Languagesand Parsing, The Netherlands, July 1980 45 12 0 86 Copenhagen Winter School on Abstract Software Specifications,l979 10 4 0 87 Fifth Conference on Automated Deduction, Lea Res, Prance, July 1980 13 17 0 89 CoBputer-Aided Design Modeling, Systems Engineering, CAD-Systems, (Advanced Course), Darmstadt, 1980 2 0 94 Semantics-Directed Compiler Generation Workshop, Aarhus, January 1980 12 5 0 'IOTAL 137 61 3 93 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B J!'OURTBBR USSR COMP0'1'BR SCIBHCB JOURNALS Automatic Control and Computer Sciences (Translation of Automatika i vychislitel'naya Teknika), Allerton Press, Inc., 150 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10011. Automatic Documentation and Mathematical Linguistics (Translation of Hauchno-Teknicheskaya Informatsiya), Allerton Press, Inc., 150 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10011. ISBN 0005-1055. Automatic Monitoring and Measuring (Translation of Autometriya), Scientific Information Consultants, Ltd., 661 Finchley Road, LOndon NW 2 2BN, United Kingdoa. ISBN 0005-1292. Automation and Remote Control (Translation of Automatrika i Telemekhanika), Plenum Publishing Corp., 227 w. 17th St., New York, N.Y. 10011. ISSN 0005-1179. Cybernetics (Translation of Kibernetika), Plenum Publishing Corp., 227 W. 17th St., New York, N.Y. 10011. ISBN 0011-4235. Differential Equations (Translation of Differentsial'nye Uravneniya), Plenum Publishing Corp., 227 w. 17th St., New York, N.Y. 10011. ISBN 0012-2661. Engineering Cybernetics (Translation of Izv. Akad. Nauk. SSR Tekh. Kibern.), Scripta Publishing Corp., 1511 K St., N.w., Washington, D.C. 20005. ISBN 0013-788X. Functional Analysis and Its Applications (Translation of Funksional'nyi Analiz i Bgo Prilozheniya), Plenum Publishing Corp., 227 w. 17th St., New York, N.Y. 10011. ISSN 0016-2663. Probleas of Information Transmission (Translation of Probl.-y Peredachi Informatsii), Plenum Publishing COrp., 227 W. 17th St., New York, N.Y. 10011. ISSN 0032-9460. Progr.-ming and Computer Software (Translation of Progra.airovanie), Plenua Publishing Corp., 227 w. 17 St., New York, N.Y. 10011. SIAM Theory of Probability and its Application& (Translation of Teoriya Veroyatnotsey i ee Primeneniya), SIAM Publications, 33 s. 17th St., Philadelphia, Pa. 19013. Soviet Automatic Control (Translation of Automatica), Scripta Publishing Corp., 1511 K St., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005. ISBN 0038-5328. Soviet Mathematics (Translation of Izv. vyssh. Uchebn. zaved. Mat.), Allerton Press, Inc., 150 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10011. USSR Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Physics (Translation of Zh. vychisl. Mat. Mat. Fiz.), Pergamon Press, Inc., Maxwell Bouse, Fairview Park, Elmsford, N.Y. 10523. ISBN 0041-5553. 94 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix I ANALYSIS OF NINE LATIN AMERICAN PERIODICALS BRAZIL Dados E Ideias: Circulation 8000; bimonthly publication in Portuguese; occasional translation of foreign articles into Portuguese. Data News: A bimonthly industry newsletter. Sistemas: Published by the University of Sao Paulo Center for Data Processing and System Studies; Portuguese. COLOMBIA DAT/IS: Independent publication on computer-related topics; Spanish. Delta: Publication of local users group; Spanish. Sistemas: Publication of System Engineers of Colombia; Spanish. CUBA Control Cibernetica Y Automatizacion: Circulation 2000; published by the Cuban Academy of Sciences and Institute of Mathematics, Cybernetics, and Computations; text in Spanish, with abstracts in English and French; dates back to 1967. MEXICO Informatica: Circulation 5000; Spanish. PERU Revista De Tecnologia Educativa: Circulation 600; published by the National University of Trujillo, Peru; reviews papers and articles in programming and cybernetics; text in Spanish, with abstracts in English, German, and Spanish. 95 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix J BIBLIOGRAPHY ON <DIPOTING IN CHINA 1. Allen, P.B., and J.T. Schwartz. Coaputing in Chinaa A Trip Report. New York University. July 1973. 2. Allen, P.B., and J .T. Schwartz. Coaputing in China a A Second Trip Report. New York University. October 1977. 3. Auerbach, I.L. Computing in China, 1979--an update. Ccaputer Magazine 12(ll)a52-60, Noveaber 1979. 4. Baark, E. The Institute of Scientific and Technical Information of Chinaa a abort presentation. China Exchange Newsletter 8(2)a35-37, April 1980. 5. Berner, B. Dissemination of Technology Information in China. An Investigation in Publishing in Electronics and Metallurgy. Tech. Rep. 127, Research Policy Institute, University of Lund, Lund, 
Sweden, 1979. 82 pp. 6. Berner, B. The Organization and Planning of Scientific Research in China Today. Tech. Rep. 134, Research Policy Institute, University of Lund, Lund, Sweden, Noveaber 1979. 113 pp. 7. Billgren, B., and J. Sigurdson. An Batiaate of Research and Development Expenditures in the People's Republic of China. Tech. Rep. OBCD Development Centre, Paris, 1977. 8. Booratein, R.o. Professional Societies in the People's Republic of China. The National Council for U.S.-China Trade, Washington, D.c., 1979. 115 pp. 9. Broadbent, K.P. Dissemination of Scientific Information in the People's Republic of China. Tech. Rep. International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, canada, 1980. 60 pp. 10. Chan, B.Y. People's Republic of China's modernizations depend on iaport of technology. Data Manag ... nta 35-37, July 1981. 11. Cheatham, T.B., W.A. Clark, A.W. Bolt, S.M. Ornstein, A.J. Perlia, and B.A. Simon. in Chinaa a travel report. Science 182(4108)al34-140, October 1973. 12. Cheng, P.P.W. A panoramic view of Chinese acadeaic journals today. Paper presented to the Association for Asian Studies 32nd Annual Meeting, March 21-23, 1980, washington, D.C. 6 pp. 13. National Council for u.S.-China Trade. China's current science and technology aerial publications. The China Buaineaa Reviewa 37-38, September-october 1980. 96 International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.97 14. National Foreign Assesuent Center, Central Intelligence Agency. Directory of Chinese Scientific and Educational Officials. 15. Committee on Scholarly Communication with the People's Republic of China. Computer-chinese bibliography for a Chinese ASCII. Scientific Forum 12(3):44-50, Autuan 1980. 16. Brogna, o. China: competitor or supplier? Minicomputer News 4(15), August 1978 (the newspaper for the mini/microcomputer industry and small system users). 17. Dale, N.B. An overview of computer science in China: research interests and educational directions. In Eleventh Special Interest Group Computer Science Education (SIGCSE) Technical Symposium on Computer Science, ACM, New York, pp. 186-190, 1980. 18. Dean, G., and F. Chernow. The Choice of Technology in the Electronics Industry in the People's Republic of China: The Fabrication of Semiconductors. Tech. Rep. 5, Stanford u.s.-china Relations Program, Stanford, Calif., 1978. (Report of the u.s. Ion Delegation, 9/27-10/12/76.) 94 pp. 19. Garner, H.L. Computing in China, 1978. Computer 12(3), March 1979. 20. Sherman, H., et al. Report of the First IEEE Delegation to the P.:. 1977. 21. Garner, H.L., and Y.L. Garner, et al., editors. Report of the IEEE Computer Society Delegation to China. 1979. 22. IEEE Computer Society China Study Group. Computing in China, 1980. February 1981. 23. Maier, J.H. Information technology in China. Asian Survey 20(8), August 1980. Regents of the University of California. 24. National Foreign Assessment Centers, Central Intelligence Agency. China: The Continuing Search for a Moderni2ation Strategy. 21 pp. 25. Stanford University. Annual Report of the Northeast Asia-United States Forum on International Policy. February 1981. 26. Nunn, s.s. Research institutes in the People's Republic of China. U.S.-china Business Review 3:39-50, March/April 1976. 27. OECD Development Centre. Science and Technology in the People's Republic of China. Seminar report by the QECD Committee for Scientific and Technological Policy, 216 pp. 28. Orleans, L.A., editor. Science in Contemporary China. Stanford University Press, Stanford, Calif., 1980. 29. Perrolle, P.M., and L.A. Reed. An Introduction to Education in the People's Republic of China and U.S.-china Educational Exchanges. u.s.-china Education Clearinghouse, Washington, D.C., 1980. 30. Reifer, D.J. Snapshots of computing in China. Datamation 25(3):125-131, March 1979. 31. Unknown. Research institutes of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. China Exchange Newsletter 7(2):8-11, April 1979. 32. Schnarch, A. R&D Policy in China after the Cultural Revolution. International Journal of Research Management 19:28-32, January 1976. 33. Sherman, H. Electrotechnology in China. IEEE Spectrum: 61-66, February 1978. International Developments in Computer Science: A ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98 34. Sorensen, S.M. Computer Science in China. Tech. Rep. Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University, Denmark, Noveaber 1978. 35. Surveys & Research Corporation. Directory of Selected Scientific Institutions in Mainland China. Hoover Institution Press, Stanford, Calif., 1970. 36. Swannack-Nunn, s. Directory of Scientific Research Institutes in the People's Republic of China. The National Council for U.S.-china Trade, Washington, D.C., 1978. 37. Szuprowicz, B.O. China's computer industry. Datamation: 83-88, June 1975. 38. Tappan, D.s., Jr., chairman. The National Council for u.s.-china Trade--Officers and Staff. China Business Review. September-October 1980. 39. Tien, B.C. A Chinese ASCII: alphabetized standard code for information interchange. Scientific Forum 12(3):38-43, Autumn 1980. 40. Yang, T.S., T. Kuo, and F.J. Shulman. East Asian Resources in American Libraries. Paragon Book Gallery, New York, 1977. 