DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/20030Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive Programs37 pages | 7 x 10 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-33590-4 | DOI 10.17226/20030Geophysical Data Panel; Committee on Data Interchange and Data Centers;Geophysics Research Board; Assembly of Mathematical and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilGeophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive Programs Geophysical Data Panel .committee on Data Interchange and Data Centers Geophysics Research Board ·Assembly of Mathematical and Physical Sciences f. · ... I l· ,. _. . 1 ... . . "J., . I, '" NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES Washington, D. C. 1976 ·, :· ,Ł1;JJI 1echnical 1;11Hril.J1;,J:'1 3pringfic!d, Va. 22161 ..Joo SCf b Order No. Ł NAS-NAE MAR 2 6 1976 . LIBRARY Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the Councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the Committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance. This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the tute of Medicine. The Geophysics Research Board is pleased to acknowledge the assistance of the National Science Foundation and National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce, whose continuing support of the Committee on Data Interchange and Data Centers has made this report possible. Avai"lab"le fl'om Geophysics Research Board National Research Council 2101 Constitution Avenue Washington, D.C. 20418 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GEOPHYSICAL DATA PANEL Carl H. Savit, Western Geophysical Company, Sidney A. Bowhill, University of Illinois Lewis M. Branscomb, International Business Machines Corporation Thomas 0. Haig, University of Wisconsin Carl Kisslinger, University of Colorado Marvin Minsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology William J. Schmitz, Jr., Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Donald C. Shapero, Secretary Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION At its meeting in May 1974, the Geophysics Research Board (GRB) Committee on Data Interchange and Data Centers (CDIDC) recommended that a special study be undertaken regarding new demands that are being placed on World Data Centers (WDCs) and associated national data centers by large-scale geophysics programs. This recommendation was strongly supported by the GRB. Thomas Malone, man of the GRB, then asked Carl Savit to visit data centers in the United States and to prepare a letter report on his findings. The main text of that letter report follows: Geophysical data of the more traditional types falling within the sponsibilities of the Centers are handled efficiently and economically. Data management is excellent from the point of view of filing and trieval procedures, data editing, compilation, data conditioning, and dissemination. Response to requests appears to be uniquely well ed to the needs and requirements of the user community. In part, the efficiency and effectiveness of the operation may be attributed to the virtual identity of the communities of users and pliers of data. The data are submitted in a format that is readily vertible to useful forms by well-established techniques. Editing and taxonomic functions are within the realms of expertise of the technicians in the Centers and are primarily carried out manually or with the aid of simple analog devices. In contrast to this well-ordered and stable data flow, new forms of data are beginning to appear. These new forms are primarily terized by being several orders of magnitude more voluminous in mation content than the old types of data. They generally appear on magnetic tape in one of a variety of digital (or sometimes analog) formats. All steps performed on the old types of data will necessarily have to be performed in some fashion on the new types of data. These new data will require editing, formatting, condensation, summarization, excerpting, and other derivative processes. To effect these requirements, a profound change will have to be made in the organization, staffing, and funding of the World Data Centers. Access will be required to powerful and large-scale digital computers. Special-purpose processors will probably have to be designed, built, and procured. Staffs of programmers will have to be employed and trained, and scientific guidance will have to be provided to these programmers. 1 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 Storage facilities suitable to magnetic tapes will have to be vided. Printout facilities under the control of EDP equipment will have to be available, and inventories of specialized materials will have to be maintained. All the above procedures will require very substantial initial funding and a considerable increase in continued funding levels. The approach to data-user and data-supplier costs and charges will have to be re-examined. The supplier community and the user community will certainly be, at least in part, disjunct. It is quite probable that a large fraction of the user community will be interested only in rized, generalized, or abstracted data, and will be unable to pay any substantial part of the costs of obtaining such derived data from the massive files of raw data. A number of other problems and caveats stemming from the advent of the newer types of data are visible to one extent or another at the present time. Every aspect of the new data forms and new data content that have already begun to appear imply an exponential rise in data quantity, with the concomitant implication of substantial impacts on administration, staffing, and funding. Subsequently, the Geophysical Data Panel (GDP) of the CDIDC was formed, with Mr. Savit as chairman. The charge to the GDP was to amplify and substantiate the findings of the letter report. The resulting report consists of two parts. In the first part the ings and recommendations of the Panel are set forth and discussed. The ation of some typical World Data Centers and associated national data centers is described, and the impact of new data forms and quantities on them is sidered. The second part contains the results of a survey of digital data quantities from past, ongoing, and planned large-scale geophysics programs. The growth of the task of data centers can be measured in several dimen-sions: 1. Budget for large-scale geophysics programs 2. Number of programs 3. Number of nations involved in programs 4. The extent and resolution of geographical coverage 5. The amount of data generated The figures pertaining to data quantities in the second part of the report serve to emphasize the importance of the main issues to which this report is addressed: 1. The increasing expectations of benefit and growing investment by domestic and foreign government agencies and national and international entific bodies in large-scale geophysics programs; 2. The urgency of ensuring the effective dissemination of the knowledge gained in such programs so that those benefits will be realized; 3. The central role of World Data Centers and their associated national data centers in accomplishing the dissemination of that knowledge. Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I PANEL REPORT Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 1. The facilities of national. and fJJorZd data center-s must be 63:panded and impl'OVed if they a:r>e to continue to caztzty out their-assigned functions. 2. The planner-s of Zar-ge-scaZe geophysics programs ar-e making ing use of advanced sensor-and computer-technoZogy to meet scientific tives. The data sets so gener-ated a:r>e order-s of magnitude Zar-ger-than those of programs using tr-aditional. methods of obser-vation. This gztOf.IJth can be expected to cr-eating incr-easing demandS to stor-e data and to pr-ovide data pr-oducts. 3. Dealing fJJith these data sets fJJiZZ cr-eate a need for-'Laztge-scaZe speciaZ-purpose and infor-mation stor-age and r-etr-ieval. systems at data center-s. Such systems r-equir-e sophisticated knOf.IJZedge and procedur-es to per-mit access to specific data sets. Staff to pr-ovide ming ser-vices and scientific advice fJJiZZ be necessary both in the stor-age and access phases. 4. or-abstr-acted data fiJi ZZ be r-equir-ed by much of the user-c011'111Unity. The costs of der-iving such data pr-oducts fr-om mzJ data must be defrayed by means that fJJiZZ be compatibZe fJJith the r-esour-ces of both the gener-ator-of the data and the user-c011'111Unity. 5. In the decisions Zeading to acquisition of Zar-ge data sets in geophysical. a str-ategy shouU be for-mutated for-data handling and a:r>chiving. Cost tr-adeoffs acquisition and handZing and ar-chiving consider-ations shouU be an integr-al. par-t of pZanning. The str-ategy shouU incZude provisions for-any thinning or-compr-ession of data. The star-ting point in pZanning shouU be consider-ation of the uZtimate beneficiar-ies of the info:rmation. Program pr-oposaZs shouZd incZude the str-ategy for-and costs of ar-chiving data and making them avai Zab Ze to user-s. 6. Gener-al. cr-iter-ia shouU be for-mutated for-data taking into among other-data and handUng ments. 7. Decisions to thin or-discard geophysical. data may be a necessary consequence of Umited r-esour-ces. Such decisions entail. an obligation on the par-t of data center-s to (a) give notice in a timeZy way to the inter-national. scientific c011'111Unity of the intent to destr-oy data so as not to for-ecZose action to ser-ve the data; (b) consider-the r-eZative economics of and compr-ession of data; 5 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 (c) preserve geophysically significant data samples or subsets; (d) give priority to retention of data that are not reproducible. 8. Regarding the operation of the WDC system: (a) The principles and proctices of operotion as set dobm in the Guide to International Data Exchange through the World Data Centres shouZd be adhered to. (b) World Data Centers should be consulted in the planning of programs that ?JiZZ lead to new demands on the WDC system. 9. Both technologically developed and less developed countries have found the World Data Centers to be a valuable resource. Future planning garding WorZd Data Centers should be directed toward increasing their siveness to the needs of less developed countries. Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOME TYPICAL DATA CENTERS The data centers discussed below are treated in more detail in a CDIDC report.1 The Appendix lists present holdings of the data centers, including traditional data forms. Conversion factors for information content of a few tive forms are given in that Appendix. Services related to traditional forms continue to be important. Services related to digital data are considered below. Each of the centers discussed consists of a World Data Center and an associated national data center. Most of the resources of the centers are devoted to the tion of the national data centers. The World Data Centers serve special functions as described in the Guide to InternationaL Data Exchange through the Data Centres and depend heavily on the facilities and resources of the associated national data center. The National Geophysical and Solar Terrestrial Data Center (NGSDC) has on file approximately 600 reels of magnetic tape containing digital data. A CDC-6600 computer is used for batch computation. An XDS-940 time-sharing system is also available. Computers are used on a part-time basis only. proximately 20 percent of the budget is devoted to computer services. The National Climatic Center (NCC) has on file approximately 77,000 reels of magnetic tape containing digital data. A UNIVAC series 70/45 computer is used full time, and four other computers (Raytheon 703, Daconic 3630, Packard 9830, and Wang 700) are used on a part-time basis. NCC, in cooperation with the Air Force, is in the process of procurement of a new computer. imately 25 percent of the budget is devoted to computer services. Data from the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP) Atlantic Tropical Experiment (GATE) are available from the Computer Products Branch of the National Climatic Center and are archived by WDC-A for Meteorology, which is collocated with NCC. Data from the First GARP Global Experiment (FGGE) will be similarly handled. The National Oceanographic Data Center (NODC) has on file approximately 60 reels of magnetic tape containing digital data. An IBM 360/65 computer is used on a part-time basis. Approximately 20 percent of the budget is devoted to computer services. The National Space Science Data Center (NSSDC) has on file approximately 41,000 reels of magnetic tape containing digital data. An IBM 7094 is used full time, and IBM 360/75 and 360/91 computers are used on a part-time basis. Approximately 15 percent of the budget is devoted to computer use. 7 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 Each of these centers also has large files of data recorded in tional formats, such as photographic film, punched cards, and printed data sheets. Each center is experienced in meeting requests for data in these forms. Generally speaking, most of their resources are devoted to meeting such requests, a task that they discharge effectively (see Appendix). Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEW DEMANDS ON DATA CENTERS LESS DEVELOPED COUNTRIES Although the technologically developed countries are the biggest users of the woes, both in terms of volume of data and numbers of requests, users of the WOCs, including regular users, are to be found in virtually all the countries that have participated in the international geophysical programs. Moreover, responses to the survey that led to the report An Assessment of the Impaat of the WorLd Data Centers on Geophysias1 indicated that the World Data Centers have been particularly important to scientists in the less developed countries because of the lack of national data or scientific centers in those countries. In the future, the World Data Centers are likely to take on a sharply increased importance in connection with the less developed countries. The beginnings of this are already evident. Plans for the Global Environmental Monitoring System call for use of the woes. The proposal has been made (Law of the Sea Conference) that data obtained on oceanographic vessels in the territorial waters of other countries be made available through the World Data Centers. The World Data Centers are apparently accepted throughout the world as an effective handed mechanism. Some of the future programs are likely to be of specific interest to the less developed countries. Future planning regarding the WOCs should give careful attention to efforts to make them more responsive to the needs of the less developed countries in connection with basic science and practical problems. In particular, there will be a need for more highly cessed data products designed to meet the needs of users lacking high-technology resources. DATA VOLUMES The data centers may be expected to encounter difficulties in meeting requests for data products derived from the kind of data-intensive programs described in Part II. The most apparent source of difficulty is the contrast between the volume of digital data generated by these programs and the volumes with which the data centers are accustomed to dealing. To take an example, only 9 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 one (there will be five) of the synchronous meteorological satellites (SMS) in the First GARP Global Experiment (FGGE) will generate about 5 x 1013 bits of digitally encoded visual information over the 18-month FGGE period. To record these data on conventional 2400-foot reels of 1600 BPI computer tape would require 200,000 to 400,000 reels of tape. World Data Centers and the associated national data centers generally are able to deal with relatively small numbers of tape reels of this type as discussed above. But they clearly will not be able to deal effectively with a large number of programs each of which may generate volumes of digital data several orders of magnitude larger than those to which they are accustomed without some major adjustments in organization, staffing, and funding. Several other aspects of data handling may also present problems. Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASPECTS OF DATA HANDLING RETENTION It is not clear that it is practical to attempt to retain raw data volumes of the magnitude discussed above. Assuming that the data can be compressed with the aid of new technology, access time becomes a limiting factor. If we assume a processing speed of about 10,000,000 bits per second, it would require 75 days to process the output of one FGGE SMS. With present technology, then, it would be difficult to make such data bases available for the exclusive use of any but a small set of well-funded users. This difficulty might be partly overcome by scheduling times when specific subsets of extremely large data bases would be put on-line for simultaneous access by a large number of users. It should be noted that commercial facilities do exist that store and provide access to even larger magnetic tape quantities. Computer technology is advancing rapidly, and what may appear today to be an almost unmanageable problem may seem much less formidable in the near future. There is strong evidence that performance of computers is growing exponentially.2 Should data volumes also grow exponentially, then at any given future time, the volume of newly acquired data will dwarf that of old data. Should such stances obtain, discarding old data will have a negligible effect on required storage capacity. Therefore, if economic factors compel a decision to discard data, this decision will necessarily have to be directed primarily at the new data sets. The acquisition and preservation of data from large geophysics programs should be systematized and accomplished in a coherent way. General criteria should be formulated for the acquisition of data taking into account, among other things, format and data quality. Some provision should be made for ing with the various formats peculiar to each discipline, but some limits will have to be imposed on the variety of formats with which the data centers will be required to deal. These objectives were met very effectively in the ning of GATE. However undesirable it may be to thin or discard data, limited resources may nonetheless force a decision to do so. Such a decision should be taken only with the greatest circumspection. The international scientific community should be notified of the intent to destroy data so that the tunity to take action to preserve them will not be lost and so that the munity will have the opportunity to make provisions for retaining data of 11 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 special significance. Examples of such might include data associated with unique geophysical events or phenomena, unprocessed data in which reduction processes destroy information, or data that cannot be taken again simply cause geophysical events do not repeat themselves. A decision to discard data can be costly in the sense that the expense of storing data is generally less than that of acquiring it. INDEXING Data are organized and indexed according to the objectives or exigencies of the program generating them. For example, for experiments covering a large area, it is often necessary to employ an array of field recording equipment generating a set of tapes each of which contains data in chronological order associated with a particular location. It may be desirable to reorganize these tapes into a form in which all data coded according to location and responding to a given time are grouped together. In the most general sense, a datum corresponds to a point in a multidimensional coordinate and parameter space. Different indexing schemes allow one to examine different sequences of subspaces. It is advantageous to anticipate indexing schemes that will be needed by secondary users and to put the entire data set on line to generate in one operation special data sets correspondingly organized. Anticipating such needs is important, since the largest aggregate demand for data comes from secondary users. Data center staff must not only have mastery of plinary fields but must also maintain close contact with the data-using munities. LEVELS OF PROCESSING The degree of processing of data can be characterized in the following way: I. Raw data II. Data processed to yield physical parameters III. Data interpolated according to a standardized array of points in space and time This characterization was developed in the GATE program, and we use it generally. The higher the level of processing, the more compact is the data set. One criterion that has been proposed for data retention and that would reduce the data volume flowing into data centers considerably would be to tain only the level III data set. As can be seen from the Appendix, for the FGGE, the level III data set is about three orders of magnitude smaller than the level I data set. Obviously, however, such a compression must involve considerable loss of information. For example, the processing of level I spectral data to produce temperature profiles is not a reversible process. Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13 But spectral data have diverse uses. Thus, information of potential use might be lost if only the level III data set were retained. At least some subsets of raw data should, in general, be retained, not only for their information content per se but also to facilitate tracing of processing. Use for secondary purposes of data from scientific programs will in general require reprocessing. Such reprocessing requires trained personnel and a hierarchy of computing bilities. STORAGE The amounts of data that may be expected to be retained in data centers are such that, to provide prompt access, a hierarchy of mass storage systems will be required. Ideally, the storage systems would have sufficient capacity and flexibility so that specially processed data sets could be produced cally. With advanced technology, storage of even the FGGE level I data set would not be particularly difficult. A volumetric compression factor of almost 200 is possible with videotape data storage. Use of videotape would reduce the number of tapes necessary to store the FGGE geostationary satellite data to about 5000 tapes for five satellites for the entire FGGE period. For purposes of comparison, the National Climatic Center has available for purchase 5986 SMS-1 tapes containing visual (VIS) and infrared (IR) imagery on a conventional 1600 BPI tape format. Thus videotape storage should make storage of the FGGE level I data set no more difficult than that of the GATE SMS VIS and IR imagery. However, as mentioned before, access is limited by processing rates for FGGE level I data. It would be straightforward for data centers to make available individual videotapes, but a user requiring a special subset of the data set would have to have access to the entire set. If the electronic data-processing staff and facilities necessary to prepare special data sets are not provided by data centers, some users would have to purchase the entire data set, most of which they might not need, and process it themselves to accomplish their objectives. That is already the case for the GATE VIS and IR data sets ed on magnetic tape. Should this trend continue, data centers will increasingly become repositories for data that are effectively inaccessible to the majority of potential users. An alternative to storage in data centers is to rely on informal ments with outside centers (e.g., universities) to maintain data sets. Data centers would then provide referral services. Without formal arrangements, data centers may lose control over the data sets, and it can be anticipated that as programs in outside centers are phased out, data sets would be carded. Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 ACCESSIBILITY If data centers are to ensure the preservation of information and availability of data products from large programs in accessible forms, advisory services and equipment will have to be provided to assist users in extracting needed data products. For many users, interactive facilities are desirable in order to allow optimization of the data products that they receive. Planning of data handling must encompass archiving and retrieval. Data-acquisition systems and format specifications should be designed not only to make possible efficient processing of data for the purpose of extracting and organizing physical eters but also to maximize accessibility of information to users. Realization of the benefits of large-scale geophysics programs depends on the effectiveness with which information is shared, which in turn depends on the ability of data centers to disseminate information. Program planning must take into account not only experimental design and data analysis but also archiving and retrieval. The entire path of information flow, beginning with data acquisition in the experiment, including data analysis, and ending with archiving and retrieval, must be considered with the overall goal of providing maximum access to formation. Careful experimental design and data analysis are necessary but not sufficient to accomplish that goal. COSTS Data centers will need additional support, either direct or indirect, for new activities and services associated with increased demands on them. Direct funding must provide part of the additional support, but it may be unrealistic to expect these demands to be met entirely by increases in internal budgets of data centers and charges to users. Therefore, in the interest of ensuring the dissemination of information, a significant part of the cost of depositing data in data centers in an accessible form must be provided for in the budget of the program that generates those data. Only marginal costs can be tically charged to the user, and it is idle to suppose that, without additional funding from the initial data-gathering program, the data centers will be able effectively to provide access to the data. The amount involved may be 5 to 20 percent of the cost of the research. Experimenters should provide for these costs in the same way that they budget for publication costs. Funding agencies should examine proposals in the light of these guidelines, and if an menter has failed to budget to provide appropriate access to the information that he intends to gather, he should be advised to examine the tradeoffs tween data acquisition and data access more realistically. Program planners should not be allowed to avoid responsibility for the costs of data storage and retrieval. If too great a fraction of the cost of obtaining access to information is forced on users, they will simply ignore the data in the data centers, and the expected benefits of large-scale programs will not be fully realized. Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES 1. An Assessment of the Impact of WoroZd Data Centeros on Geophysics, Report of the CDIDC of the GRB (National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C., 1975). 2. C. Starr and R. Rudman, "Parameters of Technological Growth," Science 182, 358 (1973). 15 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART I I 
SURVEY OF DATA QUANTITIES FOR GEOPHYSICAL PROGRAMS Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION In Part II, estimated data quantities in bits for a sampling of programs from the four main branches of geophysics are tabulated. The nature of the prograa is described briefly. Where possible, separate quantities are stated for raw data (Level I), data processed to yield physical parameters (Level II), and data interpolated according to a standardized array of points in space and time (Level III). It must be borne in mind that these data quantities are For programs planned to take place at future dates, projected estimates of data quantities must be used. In some cases approximate conversions from number of tapes to number of bits on the basis of recording format have been made. Such conversions do take into account the presence of record gaps in which no information is recorded and tend to overestimate data quantities by roughly a factor of 2. 19 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ATMOSPHERE BOMEX One objective of BOMEX was to serve as a pilot experiment to develop the acquisition and data-handling capabilities that proposed large-area experiments, planned as part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program, would require. The central scientific objective was to evaluate the sea-air interaction process. The observations were completed in three months in 1969. Measurement Category 1. Ship Operations and Navigation Data Set 2. Boom Surface Meteorological Data Set 3. Marine Meteorological Observations and Pressure--Marine barogram Data Set 4. Rawinsonde and sonde Data Set 5. Boundary Layer Instrument Package (BLIP) Data Set 6. Salinity-Temperature-Depth (STD) Data Set 7. Surface Radar Data Set 8. Aircraft Data Set 9. Dropsonde Data Set TOTAL 20 Data Quantity in Bits Level II 4 X 109 3 X 108 2 X 109 4 X 108 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21 GARP GARP is a program for studying atmospheric physical processes governing sient, large-scale fluctuations and the statistical properties of general circulation. The objectives are to improve the accuracy and range of weather forecasting and to develop a better understanding of the physical basis of climate. The program has two components: numerical modeling and experimental studies to test the validity of these models. Two of the experimental programs on which data volume estimates are available are described below. There are several other experimental subprograms and related projects. GATE GATE was the first major international experiment of GARP. Its main objective was to clarify the relationship between convective activity and synoptic-scale systems in tropical regions sufficiently to allow accurate representation of the effects of convection in numerical prediction programs. It took place over the tropical Atlantic Ocean and adjacent land areas in a period of four months in 1974. GATE provided a data quantity of approximately 2 x 1012 bits of Level I (raw) data. Of this amount, approximately 1.4 x 1012 bits were obtained by the United States (roughly half of which are retained in the National Holdings .at NCC) and less than 1 x 1012 bits by non-U.S. sources. Approximately 2 x 1011 bits of nationally processed and validated (Level II) data are being produced by the ten 
GATE National Processing Centers (about half U.S. and half non-U.S.), for subsequent archiving in World Data Centers in the United States and the Soviet Union. Approximately 1011 bits of internationally processed and validated (Level II) data are being produced by the five GATE Subprogram Data Centers (about 4 x 1010 by the Convection Subprogram Data Center in the United States and 5 x 1010 by the other SDC's) for subsequent archiving in World Data Centers in the United States and the Soviet Union. Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 Measurement Category Data from GATE National Processing Centers 1. WWW Land Stations 2. A-Scale Ships 3. A/B-Scale Ships 4. B-Scale Ships 5. Roving Oceanographic Ships and Oceanographic Buoys 6. GATE Aircraft 7. Satellites (not including resolution radiance data) 8. Commercial Aircraft and Voluntary Ships Data from GATE Subprogram Data Centers 9. Boundary-Layer Subprogram Data Center (BSDC) 10. Convection Subprogram Data Center (CSDC) 11. Oceanographic Subprogram Data Center (OSDC) 12. Radiation Subprogram Data Center (RSDC) 13. Synoptic-Scale Subprogram Data Center (SSDC) Selected Data Associated National Holdings 14. ATS-3 VIS Satellite Imagery 15. SMS IR and VIS Satellite Imagery 16. U.S. Ship Systems (not including upper air and radar) 17. GARP Level II Data Set (NMC Global Synoptic Data Set) 18. NESS Sea-Surface Temperature Analysis TOTAL FGGE Data quantity in Bits Level I Level II (Included in (Included in SSDC Below) 1.8 X 109 3.8 X 1010 1.4 X 1011 OSDC below) 1.8 X 10 l0 2.2 X 109 (Included in SSDC below) 1.8 x 1011 8.8 X 1011 1.2 x 1011 1.2 X 1012 1.5 X 1010 3.9 X 1010 2.6 X 1010 1.8x 109 6.5 X 109 9.4 X 109 2.0 X 109 3.0 X 1011 The FGGE will attempt to find the limits of deterministic forecasting of spheric phenomena. It will test the accuracy with which existing global models of the atmosphere simulate climate. The buildup phase will begin on September 1, 1977. Data collection will start on January 1, 1978. The operational phase will begin on September 1, 1978, and will last until accepted data have been obtained for 12 consecutive months. It will provide a global data set more complete than any in the history of meteorology. Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Measurement Category 1. SMS satellite imagery 2. Polar-orbiting satellite imagery 3. Raw radiance data 4. Surface-based WWW system Land stations Ships Aircraft Radio Radiowind 5. Space-based WWW system Polar-orbiting satellite Sea-surface temperatures Geostationary satellites 6. Special observing systems Carrier balloons plus ships Constant-level balloons Buoys 7. Experimental satellites (based on Nimbus-G equipment) Temperature profiles Radiation balance 23 Precipitation over oceans, soil mositure, sea-ice extent and melting 8. All categories TOTAL Data Quantity in Bits Level I Level II 3 )( 1014 3 x 1011 3 )( 1011 2 )( 109 4 )( 108 1 )( 108 2 )( 108 2 X 108 5 )( 1010 2 )( 108 5 )( 108 6 )( 1010 Level III Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL IMS The IKS is an international cooperative enterprise to be conducted in 1976-1978. Its main objective is to elucidate the physical behavior of plasma in the earth's magnetic field. Its operational basis consists of a plan of ordinated observations from spacecraft, ground-based facilities, aircraft, balloons, and research rockets. Listed below are data quantities for a few specific IMS programs and estimates for the total ground and space data. Data Quantity in Bits Measurement Category Level I Level II 1. Specific Ground-Based Arrays: Magnetometer Network 2 X 1010 AFS MAGAF Networka 1010 Meridian Scanning Photometer (one year) 5 X 1010 109 2. Estimated Total Ground Arrays x 1011 3. Specific Spacecraft Experiments: Magnetic Measurements 3 X 1011 4. Estimated Total s2acecraft Data -5 X 1012 aData from MAGAF Network may be contributed to AFGWC The AFGWC processes several kinds of geophysical data received from DMSP Satellites. Quantities are for a one-year period. Measurement Category 1. Auroral Imagery 2. Preci2itating Electron Data 24 Data Quantity in Bits Level I Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SoLID EARTH MARINE SEISMIC REFLECTION DATA Large quantitites of marine seismic reflection data will become available in 1975-1978. These multichannel CDP data are collected by USGS and other stitutions. Measurement Category 1. Atlantic CDP 2. Alaska/Pacific CDP SDAC Data Quantity in Bits Level I The SDAC has a large number of digital tapes on file. Some digital seismic data collected from the ALPA and the Montana LASA are on permanent file. Measurement Category 1. Short-Period Data (LASA) 2. Long-Period Data (LASA + ALPA) 3. All Digital Tapes 25 Data Quantity in Bits Level I 2 X 1012 2 X 1012 1013 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 SRO The USGS is developing a Seismic Research Observatory system using digital data recording. About 13 stations are planned for installation throughout the world. The data quantity is a rough estimate for one year of operation of the entire system. Measurement Category 1. SRO System Data Quantity in Bits Level I Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OCEAN I DOE The !DOE is a long-term international cooperative program of ocean research and exploration intended to contribute to preservation of the quality of the ocean environment and to determine potential resources of the ocean floor. U.S. tention to participate was announced in 1969. In 1972, further objectives of providing knowledge of biological processes necessary to manage living marine resources and improving mechanisms for worldwide exchange of marine data were added. There are four subprograms: Environmental Quality, Environmental casting, Seabed Assessment, and Living Resources. Each subprogram consists of several ongoing projects. The estimates below combine the data quantities for all these projects with the exception of POLYMODE, which is listed separately. Measurement Category 1. All Categories, 1970-1975 2. All Categories, 1975-1980 POLYMODE Data Quantity in Bits Level II POLYMODE is a large-scale midocean dynamics experiment based on results of the Polygon (U.S.S.R.) and MODE-I (U.S.A. and U.K.) experiments. It will consist of an intensive initial field program lasting at least one year, with the jective of advancing understanding of mesocale midoceanic eddies and their role in general ocean circulation. Accomplishing this objective is one step toward the development of a physically correct ocean model that will make possible oceanological forecasting and the construction of a model coupling ocean and atmospheric dynamics. The intensive data collection period is to be 1977-1978. 27 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 Data Quantitx in Bits Measurement Category Level I Level II loll 2 X 107 109 t 2 2 X 109 108 1. Floats (U.S.) 4. Current Meters (U.S.) 3. Density (U.S.) 4. Other 5. Moored Arrax (U.S.S.R.) 109 t 2 IGOSS The IGOSS is a system of real-time services for oceanography, including gional analysis and predictions. Data quantity is from 1972 to the present It is expanding to include international sightings of oil slicks and tar balls and to analyze ocean-water samples for hydrocarbons. Measurement Categorx 1. Bathythermographs 2. Oil Slick Sighting& (to 1980) 3. Tar Ball Sightings (to 1980) 4. Hxdrocarbon Analxses (to 1980) MESA NEW YORK BIGHT Data Quantity in Bits Level II The objective of the MESA New York Bight project is to establish baselines describing physical, biological, and chemical processes in the bight and to develop understanding of these processes in order to aid in assessment of the impact of future management decisions. Data quantity is from 1973 to the present on only one of the several measurement categories for this project. Measurement Categorx 1. Current Meters Data Quantity in Bits Level II Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29 NEGOA The NEGOA is a program of marine environmental data acquisition and analysis along sections of the Alaskan outer continental shelf now under consideration for leasing. Data quantity is from 1975 to the present. Measurement Category 1. Current Meters 2. Density 3. Zooplankton IFYGL Data Quantity in Bits Level II The IFYGL, an intensive field study of Lake Ontario and its drainage basin, was a joint Canadian and U.S. contribution to the International Hydrological Decade (1965-1974) .. It was a coordinated program of physical, chemical, and biological research, with the objective of improving understanding of Lake Ontario and its basin. Data were collected from April 1972 through March 1973, with some data systems operating through July 1973. Measurement Category 1. U.S. Nonsatellite Data !. U.S. Satellite Data 3. Canadian Data Data Quantity in Bits Level II 1.7 X 1011 1.0 X 1010 6.2 X 109 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AFGWC AFS ALPA ARPA ATS BOMEX CDP DMSP FGGE GARP GATE !DOE IFYGL IGOSS IMS IR LASA MAGAF MESA MODE NCC NEGOA NESS NGSDC NMC NODC NSSDC SDAC SMS SRO USGS VIS www ABBREVIATIONS Air Force Global Weather Central Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories Alaska Long Period Array Advanced Research Projects Agency Applications Technology Satellite Barbados Oceanographic and Meteorolgical Experiment Common Depth Point Defense Meteorological Satellite Program First GARP Global Experiment Global Atmospheric Research Program GARP Atlantic Tropical Experiment International Decade of Ocean Exploration International Field Year for the Great Lakes Integrated Global Ocean Station System International Magnetospheric Study infrared Large Aperture Seismic Array Air Force Ground Based Magnetometer Network Marine Ecosystems Analysis Mid Ocean Dynamics Experiment National Climatic Center Northeast Gulf of Alaska National Environmental Satellite Service National Geophysical and Solar-Terrestrial Data Center National Meteorological Center National Oceanographic Data Center National Space Science Data Center Seismic Data Analysis Center (Va.) Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Seismic Research Observatory U.S. Geological Survey visual World Weather Watch 30 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX: PRESENT HoLDINGS oF DATA CENTERs* CONVERSIONS Form of Record Number of Bits 2400-foot, 9-track, 3.7 X 108 1600 BPI magnetic tape reel SMS satellite picture Traditional ionogram 2 x 107 (unassessed) 3 x 104 (assessed echoes) NCC Form Sheets of original ms and autographic records 100-ft reels of microfilm of original ms and autographic records Microfilmed images of punched cards 2400-ft reels of magnetic tape (includes approximately 3000 reels of satellite data) lOQ-ft reels of radar film (35-and 16-mm) 100-ft reels of satellite film 10" x 10" negatives of satellite film Microfiche of original records and data publications Unpublished data tabulations and summaries Back issues of single climatological data publications (does not include shelf stock) Quantity 76,000,000 86,000 377,000,000 77,000 19,800 7,000 175,000 58,000 24,300 194,000 *Of four major national geophysical data centers and the associated branches of World Data Center A. 31 Geophysical Data Centers: Impact of Data-Intensive ProgramsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NGSDC Form 35-tmn film Magnetic tape Punched cards Pa2er data 2rints1 NSSDC Form Microfilm, 100-foot reels Microfiche Digital magnetic tapes Photographic films 5 inch width, linear feet 9.5 inch, linear feet 70 tmn, linear feet 16 mm, linear feet 35 mm, linear feet 4" x 5" each 8" x 10" each 16" x 20" each 20" x 24" each Hardco2Iz sheets NODC Form Station data geosort BT data digitized geosort XBT data digitized geosort BT analog prints Biological data, digital 32 or 2ublications Biological papers stored for retrieval Surface current data Total number of digital magnetic ta2es Quantiti 1.2 600 1.6 5.1 Quantiti X 107 ft reels X 106 X 103 cu ft Quantity 27,519 18,198 40,931 45,800 17,500 509,663 119,276 759,976 12,291 6,289 93 8,005 1881612 549,793 stations 782,204 observations 159,182 observations 820,000 observations 13,000 stations 22,917 4,175,324 observations 60 