DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/20074A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in FederalConstruction Agencies20 pages | 7 x 10 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-33672-7 | DOI 10.17226/20074Standing Committee on Computer Technology; Federal Construction Council;Building Research Advisory Board; Division of Engineering; National ResearchCouncilA Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BUILDING RESEARCH ADVISORY BOARD THE BUILDING RESEARCH ADVISORY BOARD, a unit of the NA5-NAE National Research Council, undertakes activities serving research in building science and technology, and provides for appropriate dissemination of information resultina from those activities. In its work for and with private organizations and units of government, the Board provides advice on research or technical problems, monitors research studies undertaken by others, organizes conferences and symposia, acts to stimulate research and correlate information, and, in general, explores subjects in the housing, buildins, and related community and environmental desian and ment field where objective treatment is needed. Voluntary association of research-interested individuals and orpnlzations Is vided by the Board through its Building Research Institute; the Federal Construction Council provides continulns cooperation amona construction agencies of the Federal Government in advancins the science and technolog)· of Federal Government buildina and struction; and the Building Industry Manufacturers Research Council, having as its central purpose the consideration of the needa and opportunities of the manufacturing segment of the building industry, provides couns.:l to the Board on specific matten of mutual concern. The 36 members of the Board, together with a number of individuals from Federal agencies who serve In a liaison capacity, are recognized authorities in buildins-interested sesments of Industry, government, and academic and research Institutions, appointed on a rotating and overlapping basis by the Chairman of the NRC Division of Engineering with approval of the President of the National Academy of Sciences. Each Board member serves as an individual, never as a representative of any other oraanization or interest group. TI1e Board, acting as a body, establishes special and standing advisory or study committeeŁ, panels, task groups, and similar working bodies as needed to carry out its various undertakings. OFFICERS AND MEMBERS 1973-74 OFFICERS Herbert H. Swinburne, Charles E. Schaffner, Vier Chairman J. Neils Thompson, Yiu ChalrmDn Robert M. Dillon, EnCilti>t! Dirutor MEMBERS :Jack A. Baird, Vlu Prttsidttnt, American Telephone and Telef.aph Company, New York, New York Brian . L. Berry, lr>lng B. Harris Pro/<'ssor of Urban Gttography, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Berkeley G. Burrell, Prttsident, National Business League, Washington, D. C. ŁNorman Cohn, Chaimran of tht! Board, Urban Investment and Development Co., Chicago, Illinois Patrick J. Cusick, Jr., Assoc/aU, Hayden Associates, Inc., Real Estate Counsellors, Bloomfield, Connecticut ŁtWalter S. Douglas, Sttnior PDrtn<'r, Parsons, Brinckerhoff, Quade & Douglas, New York, New York William D. Drake, Pro/<'ssor of Urban and RetlioMI ning and Associate Dean for Research, School of Natural Resources, University of Michigan. Ann Arbor, Michigan ŁRobert Martin Engelbrecht, Robert Martin Engelbrecht & Associates, Architects, Planners, Researchers, Princeton, New Jersey fJoseph T. English, M.D., Dlrutor, Department of Psychiatry, St. Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of New York, New York, New York Arthur J. Fox, Jr., Editor, Engineering News-Record, New York, New York Richard T. Geoghegan, Rnired (formerly Director of ing Maintenance and Construction for New York Life Insurance), Darien, Connecticut Robert A. Georgine, Suntary Trrasurer, Building and Construction Trades Department, AFL-CIO, Washington. D. C. Charles P. Graves, Professor, College of Architecture, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky Calvin S. Hamilton, Dinctor of Planning, City of Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California ŁtWalter R. Hibbard, Jr .. Vice President-Tuhnica/ S<'rvices, Owens-Coming Fiberglas Corporation, Toledo, Ohio Matt M. Jetton, p,..sidttnt, Sunstate Builders, Inc., Tampa, Florida Rudard A. Jones, AlA, Director and Reuarch Professor of A rchllecturtt. Small Homes Council-Building Research Council, University of Illinois at Urbana, Champaian, Illinois ŁW. E. Kemp, Director, Technical PIDnning, Development Department, Organic Materials Division, Koppers pany, Incorporated, Monroeville, Pennsylvania Marjorie M. Lawson, Allorney, Lawson and LaWIOn, Washington, D. C. Richard G. Lugar, Mayor, City of Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana Otis M. Mader, Presldttnl, ALCOA Buildina Industries, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Catherine E. Martini, Director, Economics and R,.elll'clt, National Association of Realtors, Washington, D. C. Paul W. McCracken, Edmund Eua Day Unl><'rsity /<'ssor of Administration, University of Mlchiaan, Ann Arbor, Michigan Ł D. Quinn Mills, A ssociatt Pro/n.wr, Industrial Relations Section, Alfred P. Sloan School of Management, chusetts lnŁtitute of Teohnology, Cambridge, Massachusetts Thomas F. Murphy, President, Briclr.layen, Masons and terers International Union of America, Washington, D. C. ŁAustin J. Paddock, Chairman of th<' Board, Pnsldent, and Chi<'/ Officer, Blount, Inc., Montaomery, Alabama Robert D. Pauley, Yice Prt!sidttnl, Research and ing, Weyerhaeuser Company, Tacoma, Washington ŁJoseph A. Rorick, Dlrutor of Duign and Englneuinr, Real Estate and ConŁtruction Division, IBM Corporation, White Plains, New York ŁCharles E. Schaffner, Yiu Pnsldlnt, Syska & Hennessy, Inc., New York, New York tLouis D. Smullin, Pro/ttssor and Head of Electrical nurlng Dt!partnrell/, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts ŁHerbert H. Swinburne, FAIA, Nolen and Swinburne Associates, Architects, Enaineers, Planners, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Ł J. Neils Thompson. Director, Balcones Research Center, T1le University of Texas, Austin, Texas John F. C. Turner, Lecturer, Department of Urban Studies and Planning, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts Beverly A. Willis, AlA, Willis & Associates, San Francisco, California Joseph H. Zettel. Yiu Preddttnt, Dine/or of Rt!searclt, Industrial Products Research Department, Johns-Manville Products Corporation, Denver, Colorado LIAISON Robert E. Isaacs, Assistant Postmastu General, United States Postal Service, Washington, D. C. William L. McGrath, Yice Pnsident, Operations, Carlcor Limited, London, England Arthur F. Sampson, Administrator, General Services Administration, Washington, D. C. Edward J. Sheridan, Deputy Assistant Secntary of (Installations and Housins), Department of Defense, Washington, D. C. F. Karl Willenbrock, Director. Institute for Applied nology, National Bureau of Standards, Washington, D. C. EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE (Past Chairmen) John P. Gnaedinger, Pnsident, Soil Testing Services, Inc., Northbrook., Ulinois J. Donald Rollins, Vice Presldent-lnterMtloMI, U.S. Steel Corporation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania tJoseph H. Newman, Senior VIce Presidlnt, Tishman search Corporation, and First Vier Pnsidlnt, Tishman Realty and Construction Company, Inc., New York, New York EX-OFFICIO tPhilip Handler, Pnsldenr, ŁMember, BRAB tRobert C. Seamans. Jr., Pnsident, National Academy of Engineerina of Engineering, National Research Council , NAS tMember, NAE IMember, 10M A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A PROGRAM FOR FACILITATING THE USE OF COMPUTERS IN FEDERAL CONSTRUCTION AGENCIES TECHNICAL REPORT NO. 64 Prepared by The Standing Committee on Computer Technology of the Federal Construction Council Building Research Advisory Board Division of Engineering National Research Council National Academy of Sciences Washington, D. C. 1974 A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The program under which the project reported on here was conducted was approved by the Governing Board of the National Research Council, in behalf of the National Academy of Sciences. Such approval reflects the Board's judgment that the program is of national importance and appropriate with respect to both the purposes and resources of the National Research Council. · The members of the Committee selected to undertake this project and prepare this report were chosen for recognized scholarly competence and with due consideration for the balance of disciplines appropriate to the project. Responsibility for the detailed aspects of this report rests with that Committee. Each report issuing from a study committee of the National Research Council is reviewed by an independent group of qualified individuals ing to procedures established and monitored by the Report Review Committee of the National Academy of Sciences. Distribution of the report is approved, by the President of the Academy, upon satisfactory completion of the review process. This report was prepared under the following contracts between the National Academy of Sciences and the supporting federal agencies: Atomic Energy mission, WA-73-3061; Department of the Army, DACA 73-73-C-0004; Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, OS-73-116; National Aeronautics and Space Administration, NASW-2461; Department of the Navy, N00025-73-C-0024; ment of the Air Force, N00025-73-C-0024; Department of Commerce, 3-35819; General Services Administration, GS-00-B-871; Veterans Administration, VlOOlP-290; Department of the Interior, 13-D-2501. By support contract agreement, federal agencies wishing copies of this report are entitled to such copies on request to: Building Research Advisory Board, Division of Engineering, National Research Council, Washington, D. C. 20418. Inquiries concerning this publication should be addressed to: The Executive Director, Building Research Advisory Board, Division of Engineering, National Research Council, 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, D. C. 20418. Order from 1tianal Technicar ·· :or'::ition Service, Va Ł . 11 Sl Crder t;o. 7L1ry-I'JOO A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FED£RAL CONSTRUCTION COUNCIL of the IUlLOUIG RESEMQI ADVISORY IIOARD The federal Construction Council serves as 1 planning, coordinating, and operating body to encourage continuing cooperation among federal agencies in advancing the science and technology of building as related to federal construction activities. In thts punutt, its specific objectives include: Assellbly and correlation of na11able knowledge and experieece each of the agencies; eliMination of undesirable duplication in investigative effort on probl..s; free discussion ..eng scientific and technical personnel, both within and outside the govern.ent, on selected building proble.s; objective resolution of technical probleMS of particular concern to the federal construction agencies; and appropriate distribution of resulting infor..tion. The Council as such ca.prises ten llelllbers appointed by the BRAS Chai!"Nn BRAS llelllbenhip, plus one Ieiber froM the senior professional staff of each of the supporting federal agencies (currently nine), also appointed by the BRAB on from the individual agencies; all appointaents are subject to approval by the President of the National of Sciences. The Council directs the conduct of technical investigations and surveys of practice, holds arranges for interchanges of information and for monitoring of research and technical projects. COUIICIL IIEMBERSH1PŁŁlt72·1t73 Chlinlln Herbert H. Swinburne, FAlA, Partner The Nolen and Swinburne Partnership kcllttects, Engineers, Planners Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Yi'111 II. Anderson, Oel!!!tr Director, ProgrŁs IIICI [llgin ... ing DivisiOII, lllttonal Aeronautics IIICI Spice Adllfatstratt011, lllsll1ngton, D. c. leorge B. legg, Jr., syec:1a1 Assistant to the Assistant COI!IiSSiO!!tr tor Construction l!tntQ!!!!!t, Pullltc lutldings Service, Qeneral Services Adi nistrat1on, Wash ngton, b. c. Robert 11. Blake, Chief, Research and Oevelo..-nt Stiff, Facility EnginHring and Construction Aeent1Ł DlparWnt of lllllth, Eduutton, llld ililTare, Wuhington, D. c. htrick Conley, Vice President, The Boston Consul tint "liroUp, Inc., Boston !!tssachusetts lieof'9l E. DtstelhUrst, Director, Res .. rch Stiff, Office of Construction, Veterans Adllintstratton, lllshington, D. C. *WalterS. Douglas, Partner, Parsons, Brinckerhoff, Quade and Douglas, New York, New York · llobert A. Treasurer, Butlding and Construction Trades Oeparwnt, Mlrican Federation of Llbor·..(ongress of Industrial Organizations, washington, D. c. Charla P. Graves, Professor, College of Architecture, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kantuck1 *Walter R. Hibbard, Jr., Vice Services, O.nsŁCorning Filltrglas Corporation, Q-anville, Ohio SUutl ICr ... r, Chief. Office of Federal 11u 1d1nt feclino1ogy, Center for lutlding Tec:hnology, llltional Bureau of Standards, lllshington, o:-r:-' T. 11. Mt,..l, Assistant to the Con.1ssioner··5cientiftc Affatn, lureau of Recl .. tton .Ł Deparwnt of the Interior, Washington, o. c. Ryal E. Nelson, '2ief, Specifications and EstiNtes Brenc:ll. Office of the Clltef of Enginun, Dtpa"-tt of the Any, lllshtngton, D. Ł · "Harry P. Rietllln, Acting Associate Director Qf Civil Enainetrina. ,Pirectorate of Civil Engin ... tng, lltpart.nt of the Air Force, lllshington, b. c. Joseph A. Rorick, Director of Design and Engineering, Real Estate and Construction Division, IBM Corporation. Whitt Plains, 11tw York · Alfred II. TeichMaier, President, Diversified Products Division, CIIIJI1,ion International, New York. 11tw Ycirk John F. C. Turner, Depart1111nt of Ul'tlan Studies and Planning, "'ssachusetts Institute of Technology. c.bridge, !!tssachusetts Rtchlrcl H. Welles, Director, Specifications and Cost Division, lllval Fac:ilttfts Enginnring, Oeparwnt of the lllvy, Washington, 0. C. Btvtrly A. Wtllts, AlA, Wt111s I Assoc·iates, San Francisco, California Charles 1. York, Assistant Director for Engineering. Dtvtsion of Construction. Unfttd Stites AU.ic Enargy to.iuion, Washington, D. C. Joseph H. Zettel, Viet President. JohnsŁMinville Products Corporation, Oenver. Color141o "Mttllbtr, IIA£ **AppointiiJI!It pending iii A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FEDERAL CONSTRUCTION COUNCIL STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMPUTER TEOINOLOGY While the Federal Construction Council itself has overall responsibility for its technical programs, specific projects such as the one reported here are carried out under the direction of appointed task groups or standing commdttees of engineers, architects, and scientists. Each member, so appointed, serves as a specialist in his field or as a generalist in the problem area, not as a spokesman for or representative of his own agency or any other organization with which he may be associated. This project was assigned to the Standing Committee on Computer Technology. the members*of which are listed below. John J. Cecilio, Naval Facilities Engineering Command, Department of the Navy Alvin Dailey, Structural Section, Public Buildings Service, General Services Administration Tamami Kusuda, Environmental Engineering Section, Center for Building Technology, National Bureau of Standards John P. Mcintyre, Directorate of Civil Engineering, Department of the Air Force Robert L. Renner, Engineering Division, Civil Works, Office of the Chief of Engineers William A. Schmidt, Research Staff, Office of Construction, Veterans Administration BRAB Supporting Staff Henry A. Borger, Program Manager, BRAS-Federal Construction Council William A. Carswell, BRAB Consultant Claret M. Heider, BRAB Editor *Alton Bradford, Department of the Navy, and Donald W. Cryer, Department of the Air Force, served on the committee during part of the time that this report was under development. iv A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOREWORD The use of computers by both federal agencies and.private professional design firms as an aid in the design of buildings and other fixed ties has increased dramatically over the past decade. Even so, it appears that the full potential value of computers is far from being realized by the building design community. At the same time, there is considerable evidence that there is substantial duplication of effort in the development of the computer software needed for computer-aided design. This report describes a new program, developed and to be initiated by the Federal Construction Council (FCC) of the Building Research Advisory Board (BRAB), that hopefully will go a long way toward solving such problems for federal construction agencies. The program, which was developed for the Federal Construction Council by its Standing Committee on Computer nology, has the approval and endorsement of the Board. HERBERT H. SWINBURNE, Chairman Building Research Advisory Board v A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.I BACKGROUND Early in 1971, the Standing Committee on Computer Technology of the Federal Construction Council (FCC) undertook, at the request of FCC, an tion of the feasibility of establishing a federal computer access system. On the basis of its investigation, the Committee concluded that: A. The full potential of computers is not being realized by the ing divisions of most federal construction agencies. Although most agencies have made computer facilities available to their engineers (primarily on a time-sharing basis), computer usage by agency engineers has been relatively low in comparison with usual practice in large, private engineering firms and in light of the current level of ment of computer technology. B. The principal reasons for the current underutilization of. computers by federal construction agencies are: 1. That engineers at most agencies have far too few programs of proven validity available to them, primarily because most agencies have insufficient fUnds available for developing new programs or even for adapting and validating programs developed by others. 2. That most programs available in the agencies are written in such a way that they can be used only by engineers who have extensive knowledge of computers or only after the using engineer has been given detailed instructions on their use. C. Solutions to these problems are readily available, and they can and should be implemented through an appropriate interagency program. Specifically, 1. The problem of too few programs at individual agencies could be solved by pooling the programs already available in the various agencies into a consolidated interagency library of programs and subsequently initiating a coordinated interagency effort to develop new programs. 2. The problem of computer programs being too difficult for the average engineer to use could be solved through use of the library system developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that employs programs in which documentation is an inherent part of the program. The Committee reported these conclusions to the FCC in the spring of 1971 and, at the same time, requested and received FCC authorization to develop the type of interagency program suggested in conclusion C above. This effort was initiated immediately, and in due course, the Committee mitted to the FCC a prospectus on "A Proposed Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction Agencies." 1 A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The FCC approved the proposed program and authorized its implementation as soon as the various agencies slated for participation agreed. Such ment has been obtained, and the program is now being implemented. This report describes that program. II PURPOSES OF THE PROGRAM The purposes of the FCC program for facilitating the use of computers in federal construction agencies are: A. To make available for use by all federal construction agencies, through remote terminals, an extensive library (to be designated FACTS*) of fully validated, easily utilized computer programs dealing with a wide variety of construction-related engineering problems. B. To promote the continual expansion and refinement of the FACTS library through the coordinated, voluntary efforts of the various agencies. III MAIN FEATURES OF THE PROGRAM Through this program the federal construction agencies will, in essence, pool and share their computer-program resources and coordinate their computer-program development efforts for the benefit of all. The program will be coordinated by the Federal Construction Council through its Standing Committee on Computer Technology. Work associated with the development, adaptation, refinement, and validation of computer programs will be carried out on a voluntary basis by participating federal Work associated with the development of the executive program for the FACTS library (i.e., the computer program that serves as librarian) and the aration of manuals on writing programs for the library and on using the library will be carried out by the Office, Chief of Engineers, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The library itself will be maintained by the Atlanta Data Processing Center of the General Services Administration (GSA) and will be made available to federal agencies through the Center's time-sharing system identified as RAMUS, Random Access Multi-user System. *Federal Agencies Computer Time-sharing System. 2 A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Costs associated with the work of the Standing Committee on Computer Technology will be covered by the general operating funds of the FCC. Costs incurred by the Atlanta Data Processing Center in maintaining the library will be covered by the standard charges for time-sharing services. Costs associated with the work of the Office, Chief of Engineers, U.S.Army Corps of Engineers, will be absorbed by that agency. IV ANTICIPATED BENEFITS Since many more computer programs will be stored in the FACTS library than in the library of any single agency and since these programs will be in a more usable format than are most current programs, agency engineers will be able to use computers more often and more easily than they have in the past. As a result, agency engineers should be able to perform more tively such duties as preparing design criteria, reviewing and checking design calculations of private consulting engineers, and developing original designs. It is believed that the increase in computer usage will be at little or no additional cost for most agencies, except for the added direct time-sharing charges. The FCC believes that the extra time-sharing charges will be more than offset by the increase in efficiency and effectiveness of agency engineers. v ROLES OF ORGANIZATIONS PARTICIPATING IN THE PROGRAM* A. Federal Construction Council The FCC generally will be responsible for overall coordination of the program and specifically for ensuring that the level and nature of activity under the program are in accordance with the needs of the agencies. To carry out its responsibilities, the FCC will require periodic status reports from its Standing Committee on Computer nology, the group responsible for coordinating the program on behalf of the FCC. *See Figure 1. 3 A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Participating Agencies Procedural Manuals Systems Operating Instructions Federal Corps of Systems Executive Program Construction Engineers Council Status r--1---, + I Reports I I Agency A Status Policy I I Reports .I I I J---Agency B ----1 Operating I I Instructions I I on Program ' Agency C ---4 Computer Programs GSA FCC Development Work Atlanta Standing I I Data Committee Computer Programs -I Processing I On Program Evaluation r--Agency D ---i Center Computer Reports J Computer Services Technology Procedural Manuals Ł I Usage Reports I I Program Development ____ _J I Requests I Program Evaluation I Requests Nonparticipating __ _J User Agencies Usage Reports Figure 1 Flow-of-information diagram A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.B. FCC Standing Committee on Computer Technology The FCC Standing Committee on Computer Technology generally will be responsible for coordinating the program on behalf of the FCC and specifically for: 1. Disseminating to participating agencies information on the program including lists of computer programs available in the FACTS manuals on how to prepare programs for inclusion in the library and how to use the library system, and reports on computer-program development work under way at participating agencies. 2. Arranging workshops to instruct appropriate agency personnel in the use of and the preparation of programs for the FACTS library. 3. Identifying areas in which computer-program development work is needed and promoting the initiation of such work at the agencies. 4. Determining the nature and level of activity at participating agencies with regard to computer-program development and FACTS library usage. 5. Arranging for evaluation of the technical quality of programs placed in the FACTS library. 6. Periodically reviewing the operation of the FACTS library and, when necessary, recommending changes in its operation. 7. Providing the FCC and participating agencies with periodic status reports on the program. C. Office, Chief of Engineers, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers The Office, Chief of Engineers (OCE) will be responsible for developing the executive program that controls the FACTS library (i.e., acts as librarian). The OCE also will be responsible for developing and taining manuals on how to prepare computer programs to be placed in the library and on how to use the library, for directing (on behalf of the Standing Committee) the daily operation of the FACTS library, and for answering user questions during the start-up period.* *Much of the development work for which the OCE will be responsible has already been completed, and the OCE's task essentially will be to adapt available material. The documents prepared by the OCE will be made able to the central offices of federal agencies through the FCC Standing Committee on Computer Technology. 5 A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.D. Participating Agencies* Each agency participating in the program will be expected to: 1. Be a RAMUS subscriber.** 2. Modify, in accordance with the instructions to be prepared by the OCE, those computer programs it currently has that are selected for inclusion in the FACTS library. 3. Coordinate its computer-program development work with other pating agencies through the FCC Standing Committee on Computer Technology. 4. Assist in evaluating computer programs prepared by other agencies. 5. Train its personnel in the use of the FACTS library and in the ration of programs for inclusion in the library (the FCC Standing Committee will provide training for a cadre of agency personnel). 6. Publicize the existence of and promote the use of the FACTS library among its personnel. E. GSA Atlanta Data Processing Center The Atlanta Data Processing Center will store the FACTS library in its computer and will make it available to all federal agencies through its time-sharing system. If deemed desirable in the future, the Center also may assume the administrative responsibilities of the OCE in the program.*** VI PROCEDURES AND PRACTICES A. Appointment of Members to the Standing Committee on Computer Technology Members of the Standing Committee on Computer Technology will be appointed in accordance with the usual procedures of the Federal Construction *Initially, there will be five participating agencies: the Naval Facilities Engineering Command, the Public Buildings Service of GSA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Veterans Administration, and the Corps of Engineers. **Agencies not presently subscribing to RAMUS can do so by contacting the ***If the Atlanta Data Processing Center does assume these responsibilities, some means of reimbursement for services will have to be devised. 6 A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Council; i.e., by the Chairman of the Building Research Advisory Board, based on nominations by federal construction agencies, with the approval of the President of the National Academy of Sciences. All supporting agencies of the Council and all other federal construction agencies ticipating in the program will be invited to nominate individuals for committee membership. B. Eligibility Requirements for Agencies Wishing To Participate in the Program Any federal agency directly responsible for construction that possesses a construction-related computer activity and indicates a willingness to carry out the duties of a participating agency will be eligible to ticipate in the program. (An agency would not be required to pate in all aspects of the program, such as submitting programs or reprogramming present programs, to use the FACTS library; the only essential requirement is that an agency be a RAMUS subscriber.) C. Preparation and Dissemination of Required Manuals Manuals on preparing computer programs for incorporation in the FACTS library and on using the library will be prepared by the OCE and will be reviewed and disseminated by the FCC Standing Committee on Computer Technology. After dissemination, the Committee will seek suggestions from users on improving the manuals and will arrange for the preparation of revisions when necessary. D. Administration of the FACTS Library Acting on behalf of the FCC Standing Committee on Computer Technology, the OCE will handle the day-to-day administration of the FACTS library including such matters as directing the placement of new programs in the library, instituting changes in the executive program, and answering inquiries from agencies regarding the operation of the FACTS library. (Inquiries about a specific program in the library will be referred to the agency that prepared the program.) E. Selection of Computer Programs To Be Developed or Adapted for Use in the FACTS Library After initiation of the program and development of the required manuals, the FCC Standing Committee on Computer Technology will obtain tion on the programs already in use at the various agencies. In tation with specialists in the different engineering disciplines, the Committee will select from among the programs available at each pating agency those having broad applicability and will submit to each participating agency a request that it adapt the selected program for use in the FACTS library in accordance with the program preparation manual.* *It is anticipated that approximately 100 currently available programs will be adapted for inclusion in the FACTS library within one year. 7 A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.At the beginning of the second year of the program, or after a cant number of available computer programs have been adapted for use in the FACTS library, the Committee will, in consultation with specialists in the different engineering disciplines, identify engineering problems for which computer programs should be developed. The Committee then will request that the various participating agencies volunteer to develop one or more new programs for solving identified problems. This process will be repeated annually.* With regard to both adapting existing programs and developing new programs for use in the FACTS library, participating agencies will be free to undertake work other than that requested by the Standing mittee; however, agencies will be expected to give some priority to requested work and to keep the Committee informed of the status of program development work under way. Annually, the Standing Committee will prepare for dissemination by the FCC a report indicating program adaptation and development work uled, under way, and completed at the various agencies. F. Composition of the FACTS library The FACTS library will include programs dealing with all related engineering disciplines. A directory of programs stored in the library will be maintained and periodically printed and distributed to users; users also will be able to obtain a printout of the directory from the computer, via time-sharing terminals. The FACTS library will not be stored as an entity in the Atlanta Data Processing Center computer. Rather, it will be stored as part of various other libraries in the computer (see Figure 2). Frequently used, widely applicable programs in the FACTS library will be stored in the general library section of the computer (to which all sharing customers have access); infrequently used programs in the FACTS library will be stored in the libraries of individual agencies. (Generally an infrequently used program will be stored in the library of the agency that developed it.) This manner of storage will not adversely affect the user of the FACTS library since any program in the FACTS library will be available to a user regardless of where it is stored. Some agencies, however, might have special programs stored in their individual libraries that are not in the FACTS library, and other users would not have access to such programs. Actually the storage arrangement for the library is important only because it affects storage charges. The cost of storing programs in the general library section of the computer will be absorbed by the Atlanta Data Processing Center, whereas agencies will pay the standard RAMUS storage fee for programs stored in their individual libraries. *It is anticipated that in five years the FACTS library will include at least 250 programs. 8 A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RAMUS Central Library Agency A Storage RAMUS Computer Memory Figure 2 FACTS Library Storage Arrangement 9 FACTS Executive Routine Register of FACTS PROGRAMS FACTS Programs Agency A FACTS Programs Agency 8 FACTS Programs Agency C FACTS Programs Agency E FACTS Programs FACTS LIBRARY A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Atlanta Data Processing Center and the Standing Committee will jointly decide which programs are to be placed in the general library section. This determination will be made on the basis of frequency of use; a record of the number of times each program in the FACTS library is used will be maintained in the computer and a quarterly report on usage will be prepared for the agencies and the FCC by the Standing Committee. G. Review and Validation of Computer Programs A two-step procedure will be used to ensure the technical validity of programs in the FACTS library. First, each program newly developed or adapted for inclusion in the FACTS library will be labeled an "unvalidated program" and users will be requested to comment to the FCC on the results obtained using it.* Second, after a new program has been in the library for six months to one year, the FCC Standing Committee on Computer Technology will ask a participating agency, other than the preparing agency, to evaluate the program. In evaluating a program, an agency will be expected to review comments received from users in addition to making an independent analysis of the program. The evaluating agency will be instructed to judge the technical validity of the program, the clarity of user tions, and the appropriateness of the input and output formats. After completing its evaluation, the reviewing agency will be expected to mit a brief report of its findings to the Committee. If the reviewing agency finds no problems with the program,the "unvalidated program" label will be removed and the program will be considered fully approved. If the reviewing agency identifies problems with the program, the report of the reviewing agency will be sent to the preparing agency with a request that it consider correcting the identified faults. After correction of the identified faults, the revised program again will be placed in the library with or without the "unvalidated program" label, depending on the extent and nature of the changes made. If the revised program is labeled "unvalidated," the review process will be repeated. Should the reviewing agency and preparing agency disagree on the need for changes, the Standing Committee will mediate the dispute. If a mutually satisfactory solution cannot be found, the program may be retained indefinitely in the library with the "unvalidated program" label. H. Training of Programmers and Users Introduction of the system requires both the training of programmers to assemble the preambles necessary for each program, and the training of *Users will be free to submit comments on any program in the library, but they will be specifically requested to submit comments only on unvalidated programs. 10 A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.users. The Committee will conduct training workshops of both types for a cadre of personnel from each agency and this cadre will be responsible for dissemination of the information throughout that agency. After these initial workshops have been completed and evaluated, a series of "updating" workshops will be held as needed to discuss new innovations in the system, train personnel from new agencies, and provide additional training required by the original agencies. VII IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE The overall program will become fully operational within one year of tion. The schedule for carrying out the various start-up tasks during the first year is shown in Figure 3. · 11 A Program for Facilitating the Use of Computers in Federal Construction AgenciesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TASKS Install System at Atlanta ADP Center (with Available Corps of Engineers Programs) Prepare User Instructions Prepare Program Development Instructions Review Programs Available at Agencies and Select Programs to be Adapted Hold User Training Courses Hold Programming Training Courses Adapt Agency Programs MONTHS AFTER INITIATION I! 111111111111111 iII II illll! Ill i! IIi Ill llllllllllll!llllllllllllllllllll!i i l!il!!!!ll:!ill!!tltlillll!lllllllllllllll!lllllllllllll!l!lllll Figure 3 Implementation Schedule 12 