DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/2122Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality andAccessibility of Government Statistics288 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-04743-2 | DOI 10.17226/2122George T. Duncan, Thomas B. Jabine, and Virginia A. de Wolf, Editors; Panel onConfidentiality and Data Access, National Research CouncilPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVATE LIVES ANDPUBLIC POLICIESConfidentiality and Accessibility of Government
StatisticsGeorge T. Duncan, Thomas B. Jabine, and Virginia A. de Wolf,
editorsPanel on Confidentiality and Data Access
Committee on National Statistics
Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education
National Research Council
and theSocial Science Research Council
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C. 
1993iPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
 Washington, 
 D.C. 20418NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the

National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of

the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard

for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-

ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
Funding for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation, the Bureau of the
Census of the U.S. Department of Commerce, the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department

of Labor, the Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income Division of the U.S. Department of

Treasury, the National Institute on Aging of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,

the National Center for Education Statistics of the U.S. Department of Education, and, through their

general contributions to the work of the Committee on National Statistics, several other federal

agencies.Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access (U.S.)
Private lives and public policies : confidentiality and accessibility of government statis-

tics / Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access [of the] Committee on National Statis-

tics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, National Research

Council and the Social Science Research Council.

p. cm.Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 0-309-04743-9

1. Privacy, Right ofŠUnited States. 2. Public recordsŠUnited StatesŠAccess control. 3.
United StatesŠStatistical services. I. National Research Council (U.S.). Committee on National

Statistics. II. Social Science Research Council (U.S.) III. Title.
JC596.2.U5P36 1993

323.44'8-dc20 93-31312

CIPCopyright 1993 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America
iiPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PANEL ON CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS
GEORGE T. DUNCAN (
Chair)  H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and
Management, Carnegie Mellon University
JAMES T. BONNEN,  Department of Agricultural Economics, Michigan State
UniversityJOE S. CECIL,  Research Division, Federal Judicial Center

MARTIN H. DAVID,  Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin

RUTH R. FADEN,  Department of Health Policy and Management, The Johns
Hopkins UniversityDAVID H. FLAHERTY,  Social Science Centre, The University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada
F. THOMAS JUSTER,  Survey Research Center, University of Michigan

GARY T. MARX,  Department of Sociology, University of Colorado at Boulder

WILLIAM M. MASON,  Department of Sociology, University of California, Los
AngelesDONALD B. RUBIN,  Department of Statistics, Harvard University

ELEANOR SINGER,  Center for the Social Sciences, Columbia University

WILLIAM H. WILLIAMS,  Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Hunter
CollegeVirginia A. de Wolf, 
Study Director Thomas B. Jabine, 
Consultant Wlodzimierz Okrasa, 
Staff Liaison,  Social Science Research Council
Robert W. Pearson, 
Staff Liaison,  Social Science Research Council
David L. Szanton, 
Staff Liaison,  Social Science Research Council
Michele L. Conrad, 
Senior Project Assistant 
iiiPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCH COUNCIL
MEMBERS, BOARD AND COMMITTEE ON PROBLEMS
AND POLICY 1993Œ1994
ROBERT M. COEN (
Chair, Board),  Department of Economics, Northwestern
UniversityPAUL B. BALTES,  Max Planck Institute for Human Development and
Education, Berlin, Germany
ROBERT BATES,  Department of Government, Harvard University

LAWRENCE D. BOBO,  Department of Sociology, University of California, Los
AngelesWILLIAM CRONON,  Department of History, University of Wisconsin

ALBERT FISHLOW,  International and Area Studies, University of California,
BerkeleyBARBARA HEYNS,  Department of Sociology, New York University

NAGAYO HOMMA,  American Studies, Tokyo Woman's Christian University

ELIZABETH JELIN,  Centro de Estudios de Estado y Sociedad (CEDES),
Buenos Aires, Argentina
JOEL SHERZER,  Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin

BURTON H. SINGER (Chair, Committee on Problems and Policy),  Department
of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University
MARTA TIENDA,  Population Research Center, University of Chicago

KENNETH W. WACHTER,  Department of Demography, University of
California, BerkeleyDAVID WARD,  Interim Chancellor and Provost, University of Wisconsin

ANNETTE B. WEINER,  Department of Anthropology, New York University

BRACKETTE F. WILLIAMS,  African American Studies Program, University
of Arizona
ROBERT B. ZAJONC,  Maison des Sciences de l'Homme, Paris, France

DAVID FEATHERMAN, President 
ivPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS 1992-1993
BURTON H. SINGER (
Chair),  Department of Epidemiology and Public Health,
Yale University
NORMAN M. BRADBURN (
Vice Chair),  National Opinion Research Center,
University of Chicago
MARTIN H. DAVID,  Department of Economics, University of Wisconsin

NOREEN GOLDMAN,  Office of Population Research, Princeton University

LOUIS GORDON,  Department of Mathematics, University of Southern
CaliforniaJOHN F. GEWEKE,  Department of Economics, University of Minnesota,
MinneapolisJOEL B. GREENHOUSE,  Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon University

ERIC HANUSHEK,  Department of Economics, University of Rochester

ROBERT M. HAUSER,  Department of Sociology, University of Wisconsin

JANET L. NORWOOD,  The Urban Institute, Washington, D.C.

DOROTHY P. RICE,  Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, School of
Nursing, University of California, San Francisco
JOHN E. ROLPH,  The RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California

KEITH RUST,  Westat, Inc., Rockville, Maryland

DANIEL L. SOLOMON,  Department of Statistics, North Carolina State
UniversityMIRON L. STRAF, 
Director vPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AcknowledgmentsThe Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access is grateful to the many
organizations and individuals who contributed to its work.
Support for the study was provided by the National Science Foundation, the
Bureau of the Census of the U.S. Department of Commerce, the Bureau of Labor

Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor, the Internal Revenue Service

Statistics of Income Division of the U.S. Department of Treasury, the National

Institute on Aging of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the

National Center for Education Statistics of the U.S. Department of Education,

and, through their general contributions to the work of the Committee on

National Statistics, several other federal agencies. We also thank the National

Highway Traffic Safety Administration of the U.S. Department of Tansportation

for granting time, through the Intergovernmental Personnel Act, for Virginia A.

de Wolf to serve as the panel's study director.
We thank the many federal government officials who gave generously of
their time to attend panel meetings, provide documentation necessary for the

panel's work, and answer our many questions: they provided an invaluable sense

of the structure and needs of the federal statistical system. We also appreciate the

help of researchers, privacy advocates, and others who provided
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSvii
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.useful insights into nongovernment perspectives on data confidentiality and

accessibility issues.We are grateful to the Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) and the
Social Science Research Council (SSRC) for their efforts in developing and

collaborating on this study. Without the guidance and encouragement of CNSTAT

director Miron Straf, SSRC president David Featherman, and former SSRC staff

associate Robert Pearson, the work of this panel would not have been possible.

We also thank David Szanton and Wlodzimierz Okrasa, who ably maintained

SSRC's active role in the study after the departure of Robert Pearson.
We thank the participants and chairs of two workshops that preceded the
panel's formation for their contribution to our work. We thank Richard Suzman

and other staff of the National Institute on Aging, as well as staff of the Census

Bureau and the National Center for Health Statistics for their support of the

Workshop on the Longitudinal Retirement History, held in September 1987. We

thank Charles Dickens, former head of the Surveys and Analysis Section, and

other staff of the National Science Foundation for their support of the Workshop

on Confidentiality of and Access to Doctorate Records, held in November 1988.

We also thank the U.S. Department of Education, the National Endowment for

the Humanities, the National Institutes of Health of the U.S. Department of

Health and Human Services, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the U.S.

Department of Energy, the Office of Scientific and Engineering Personnel of the

National Research Council, and their staffs for their cooperation in making

possible the Workshop on Confidentiality of and Access to Doctorate Records.

Both of the workshops identified important issues for the panel.
We also thank the participants and chair of the Workshop on Confidentiality
of and Access to National Center for Education Statistics Data, and we thank the

National Center for Education Statistics for its support of the workshop. We thank

the participants of the Conference on Disclosure Limitation Approaches and Data

Access. Both of these panel sponsored activities outlined issues for the panel's

consideration.Jean Shirhall helped to strengthen the presentation of our report through her
skillful editing; we thank her for her efforts. We are indebted to Eugenia

Grohman, associate director for reports, Commission on Behavioral and Social

Sciences and Education, for her role in guiding our report through the review and

publication process.We especially thank the panel's staff. They not only functioned
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSviii
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as a harmonious team in drawing out the best in the panel members, but also

contributed individually in noteworthy ways. Virginia A. de Wolf, study director,

was especially helpful in contributing her organizational talents and energies to

the conference, meetings, and workshop that the panel sponsored. Thomas B.

Jabine, consultant, contributed his expository skill, experience with statistical

agencies, and uncommon wisdom. Robert H. Mugge, consultant, helped with the

analysis of background materials submitted by statistical agencies and prepared a

useful background paper on informed consent and notification statements used by

federal statistical agencies. Michele L. Conrad, senior project assistant, the

panel's communication center, ensured that the project functioned both efficiently

and effectively.Finally, I thank the panel members, who gave generously of their time and
wisdom to the deliberations of the panel and the production of this report. It has

been rewarding to work with such a distinguished group of people.
George T. Duncan, 
ChairPanel on Confidentiality and Data Access
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSix
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSx
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 11 PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS
 15  The Tension Between Private Lives and Public Policies,
 15  Study Goals and Scope,
 17  How Does the Federal Statistical System Function?,
 20  Key Definitions, 22  What Principles Should Guide Statistical Agencies?,
 25  The Special Role of Federal Statistical Agencies,
 29  Date Access in a Democratic Society,
 31  Problems in Ensuring Confidentiality and Data Access,
 33  Structure of the Report,
 42  Notes, 432 THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY
 45  Evolution of the Federal Statistical System,
 45  Earlier Studies of Privacy, Confidentiality, and Data Access,
 49  What Has Changed to Warrant a New Study?,
 51  Responsibilities of Federal Statistical Agencies,
 56  Notes, 58CONTENTSxiPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3 DATA SUBJECTS
 61  Introduction, 61  Informed Consent and Notification, 63  Research Related to Confidentiality and Data Access,
 80  Public Information Activities of Statistical Agencies and Organi-
zations, 864 DATA USERS
 91  Basic Concepts Related to Data Access,
 92  Expectations of Data Users,
 93  Legal and Ethical Responsibilities of Data Users,
 1005 LEGISLATION 109  General Regulation of Federal Statistical and Research Records,
 111  Agency-Specific Legislation, 117  Findings and Recommendations, 132  Notes, 1396 TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
 141  Introduction, 141  Restricted Data: Statistical Techniques to Protect Confidentiality,
 143  Restricted Access: Administrative Procedures to Protect Confi-
dentiality, 157  Notes, 1787 STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS
 181  Introduction, 181  The Energy Information Administration vs. the Department of
Justice: A Further Erosion of Functional Separation,
 185  Inability to Share Business Lists: An Embarrassment to the Fed-
eral Statistical System,
 190  Waivers: Whose Information Is It?,
 196  User Access: Getting a Better Return on Investments in Eco-
nomic Statistics,
 199CONTENTSxiiPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNC-
TIONS 203  Management of Confidentiality and Data Access Questions in the
Federal Statistical System,
 204  Alternative Models for Managing Confidentiality and Data
Access Questions: A Look at Other Countries,
 210  U.S. Proposals for an Independent Privacy Protection Board,
 214  Findings and Recommendations, 215  RECOMMENDATIONS 219  REFERENCES 229  APPENDICES  A STUDY PROCEDURES 243B BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES 259  INDEX 266CONTENTSxiiiPrivate Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS
xiv
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive SummaryThe Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access was charged by the
Committee on National Statistics and the Social Science Research Council with

developing recommendations that could aid federal statistical agencies in their

stewardship of data for policy decisions and research. Three areas were of

paramount concern in the panel's deliberations: protecting the interests of data

subjects through procedures that ensure privacy and confidentiality, enhancing

public confidence in the integrity of statistical and research data, and facilitating

the responsible dissemination of data to users.
STUDY GOALS AND SCOPE
Deciding on the exact scope of our investigation was not easy, for the
federal statistical system is complex and far reaching, and its boundaries are not

clearly defined. More than 70 federal agencies have a role in collecting data from

individuals, households, farms, businesses, and governmental bodies and

disseminating those data for a variety of statistical purposes. Federal statistical

activities include the development and dissemination of large, general-purpose

data sets based on censuses, surveys, and administrative records. They also

include the collection and analysis of personal data in experimental research with

human subjects. A few federal
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.statistical agencies conduct general or multipurpose programs (e.g., the Bureau of

the Census), but many others conduct specialized programs or activities (e.g., the

Bureau of Labor Statistics and the National Center for Education Statistics). In

addition, some basically programmatic agencies conduct some statistical

activities (e.g., the Federal Aviation Administration and the Internal Revenue

Service). Finally, the data subjects and units of analysis for statistical programs

include persons and organizations, but when the concepts of privacy and

confidentiality are applied to organizations, they have quite different meanings

than they do when applied to persons.
Given the complexity of the federal statistical system, designing an ideal
configuration to address confidentiality and data access issues throughout the

system, or even in any one federal statistical agency, was too daunting for this

panel. Instead, we sought to contribute to a long tradition in the statistical

community of periodically reconsidering current institutional structures and

practices. Fundamentally, we seek to spur this ongoing process by articulating

and applying three tenets of an ethic of information in a free society: democratic

accountability, constitutional empowerment, and individual autonomy. We

believe this attention to underlying principles can have a more beneficial and

lasting impact than would an attempt to provide detailed recommendations for

micromanagement of agency procedures for confidentiality and data access.
Although we recognize the inherent tension between data protection and
data access we do not advocate a specific trade-off between the two. The

dynamics of such a trade-off would be complicated and heavily influenced by the

missions and operational environments of individual agencies, so that a single

solution would not work for every agency. Nevertheless, we see some

opportunities to enhance data access without decreasing data protection, and

some opportunities to increase data protection without diminishing data access.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
The panel's analysis and recommendations are based on an ethic of
information formed of the three principles referred to above: democratic

accountability, constitutional empowerment, and individual autonomy. The

ethical guidance these principles provide for the structure and practice of

statistical agencies is often reinforcing, but not always harmonious.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEMOCRATIC ACCOUNTABILITY
Functionally, 
democratic accountability recognizes the responsibilities of
those who serve on behalf of others. It requires that the public have access to

comprehensive information on the effectiveness of government policies.

Government statistical agencies play a pivotal role in ensuring democratic

accountability by obtaining, protecting, and disseminating the data that allow the

accurate assessment of the influence of government policies on the public's well-

being. Furthermore, they themselves are accountable to the public for two key

functions in this process: (1) protecting the interests of data subjects through

procedures that ensure appropriate standards of privacy and confidentiality and

(2) facilitating the responsible dissemination of data to users.
CONSTITUTIONAL EMPOWERMENT
Constitutional empowerment refers to the capability of citizens to make
informed decisions about political, economic, and social questions. In the United

States, constitutional theory emphasizes that ultimate power should reside in the

people. In order to advance the common welfare, certain specific powers are

delegated to a representative government (Article X, U.S. Constitution).

Constitutional practice emphasizes restraints on executive excess and broad

access to the political process through the direct election of representatives as

well as through separation and balance of power.
INDIVIDUAL AUTONOMY
Individual autonomy
 refers to the capacity of members of society to function
as individuals, uncoerced and with privacy. Protection of individual autonomy is a

fundamental attribute of a democracy. If excessive surveillance is used to build

data bases, if data are unwittingly dispersed, or if those who capture data for

administrative purposes make that information available in personally identifiable

form, individual autonomy is compromised.
KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Most of the panel's findings and recommendations can be grouped into five
categories, each of which represents a key aspect of the trade-offs between

confidentiality and data access. In this section
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.we provide a brief summary of the major problems associated with each category

and identify the broad principles underlying the solutions we suggest in the

recommendations. We also refer to additional recommendations in the body of

the report that augment the recommendations presented here. At the end of the

section we present three cross-cutting recommendations bearing on the general

management of confidentiality and data access functions in federal statistical

agencies. (The numbering of the recommendations below follows that of the full

report.)STATUTORY PROTECTION AGAINST MANDATORY
DISCLOSURE OF INDIVIDUALLY IDENTIFIABLE DATA
For federal statistical agencies, pertinent statutes determine who can have
access to individually identifiable information collected for statistical and

research purposes, the conditions of access, and the penalties for unlawful use and

disclosure of the information. Statutes also determine who can have access to

administrative records for statistical and research purposes.
Two kinds of legislation provide the framework for federal policies and
practices with respect to confidentiality and data access: government-wide and

agency-specific legislation. In the former category, the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L.

93Œ579) is most important, and the Freedom of Information Act of 1966 (P.L.
89Œ487) and the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (P.L. 96
Œ511) are also
relevant. In the latter category, several federal statistical agencies have laws that

further specify the confidentiality and data access policies they must follow (e.g.,

the Bureau of the Census and the National Center for Health Statistics). The

procedures of some agencies, however, are not backed by statutory provisions.

Instead, they must rely on persuasion, common-law tradition, and other means to

protect identifiable statistical records from mandatory disclosure for

nonstatistical uses. But there is no guarantee that such means will always be

successful.The basic distinction between statistical and administrative data is
important. To carry out their basic functions, government agencies collect

enormous amounts of data, most of which are used directly for various

administrative purposes. Those data collected exclusively for statistical and

research purposes form a tiny fraction of the total. Data collected for

administrative purposes are often useful and appropriate for statistical purposes,

as when patterns of Food Stamp applications are used to trace the effects
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY4
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of program changes. In contrast, data collected for research and statistical

purposes are inappropriate for administrative uses.
These ideas are summarized in the concept of functional separation: Data
collected for research or statistical purposes should not be made available for

administrative action about a particular data subject. This concept was enunciated

in a recommendation of the Privacy Protection Study Commission (1977a:574):
That the Congress provide by statute that no record or information contained
therein collected or maintained for a research or statistical purpose under

Federal authority or with Federal funds may be used in individually identifiable

form to make any decision or take any action directly affecting the individual to

whom the record pertains, except within the context of the research plan or

protocol, or with the specific authorization of such individual.
In part to ensure that statistical data are not used for administrative
purposes, agencies give data providers pledges of confidentiality, both explicit

and implicit. Unless those pledges are backed by legal authority, however, they

provide an inadequate shield against administrative uses.
Recommendation 5.1
 [parts a and b] Statistical records across all federal
agencies should be governed by a consistent set of statutes and regulations

meeting standards for the maintenance of such records, including the following

features of fair statistical information practices:
(a) a definition of statistical data that incorporates the principle of
functional separation as defined by the Privacy Protection Study

Commission(b) a guarantee of confidentiality for data.
Recommendation 7.2
 Legislation that authorizes and requires protection of
the confidentiality of data for persons and organizations should be sought for all

federal statistical agencies that do not now have it and for any new federal

statistical agencies that may be created.
The panel believes that the principle of functional separation should apply
equally to data on persons and data on organizations (Recommendation 7.1). In

addition, the panel recognizes that there may have to be some exceptions to the

principle of functional separation, but it stresses that data providers participating

in statisticalEXECUTIVE SUMMARY5
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.surveys and censuses must be told of any planned or potential nonstatistical uses

of the data they provide (see Recommendation 3.2 below).
BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING WITHIN GOVERNMENT
Some of the laws that govern the confidentiality of statistical data prohibit
or severely limit interagency sharing of data for statistical purposes. Laws that

control access to administrative records, such as reports of earnings covered by

Social Security, restrict their use for statistical purposes. These barriers to data

sharing for statistical purposes have led to costly duplication of effort and

excessive burden on individuals and organizations who are asked to supply

information. They have also made it difficult or impossible to develop data sets

needed for policy analysis on topics of major interest to the public.
Not all barriers to data sharing are necessarily statutory, however. Within
agencies, organizational inertia and excessive concern for bureaucratic turf can

also impede data sharing.
Recommendation 4.1
 Greater opportunities should be available for sharing
of explicitly or potentially identifiable personal data among federal agencies for

statistical and research purposes, provided the confidentiality of the records can

be properly protected and the data cannot be used to make determinations about

individual data subjects. Greater access should be permitted to key statistical and

administrative data sets for the development of sampling frames and other

statistical uses. Additional data sharing should only be undertaken in those

instances in which the procedures for collecting the data comply with the panel's

recommendations for informed consent or notification (see Recommendation 3.2

below).In part (f) of Recommendation 5.1 (parts (a) and (b) appear above), the
panel further recommends that ''a provision that permits data sharing for

statistical purposes under controlled conditions" be included in the "consistent set

of statutes and regulations" governing the maintenance of federal statistical

records. The panel also believes interagency sharing of data for statistical

purposes should include the sharing of lists of businesses by federal and state

agencies (Recommendation 7.4).
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY6
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACCESS TO DATA BY NONGOVERNMENT USERS
Some data users complain that federal statistical agencies are not always
adequately responsive to their requests for access to data. Others appear to be

dissuaded from attempting to use federal statistical data because of perceptions of

difficulty of access.
Because of legitimate concerns about the possibility of disclosure of
individual information, statistical agencies have limited the amount of detailed

data provided to nongovernment users in tabulations and public-use microdata

files. This lack of detail restricts the ability of users to do analyses that could

contribute to the understanding of significant economic, social, and health

problems. Some agencies have developed mechanisms for providing access to

more detailed information on a restricted basis (e.g., on-site access at an agency

office, licensing agreements, remote on-line access for registered users, data

release in encrypted CD-ROM format), but current arrangements do not meet all

legitimate needs.
Recommendation 6.4
 Statistical agencies should continue widespread
release, with minimal restrictions on use, of microdata sets with no less detail

than currently provided.
Recommendation 4.2
 Federal statistical agencies should seek to improve the
access of external users to statistical data, through both legislation and the

development and greater use, under carefully controlled conditions, of tested

administrative procedures.
The panel believes that, through a combination of legislation and
administrative procedures, this can be done without sacrificing confidentiality

protections for data subjects and data providers.
Recommendation 5.3
 There should be legal sanctions for all users, both
external users and agency employees, who violate requirements to maintain the

confidentiality of data.
Under appropriate safeguards, statistical agencies should experiment with
innovative ways of providing restricted access to data (Recommendation 6.6). In

addition, federal statistical agencies that collect data on organizations should

make a special effort to make that data more accessible to users

(Recommendation 7.7).The panel notes that it is difficult to define the problems that
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.inhibit data access without better access to information on the numbers and types

of user requests that are being denied for confidentiality reasons. Thus, federal

statistical agencies should establish systematic procedures for capturing and

reviewing such information (Recommendation 4.3).
PRIVACY CONCERNS AND DECLINING
COOPERATION IN SURVEYS
Many citizens believe increasingly and with some justification that their
privacy is being eroded by organizations that develop and control the use of large

data bases that contain detailed information about them. They see the linkage of

data from different sources as a particular threat. For these and other reasons,

statistical agencies are finding it more difficult to persuade persons and

organizations to participate in statistical surveys, whether voluntary or

mandatory.Ethics and law demand that data providers be told about the conditions
under which they are asked to supply information that will be used for statistical

and research purposes. If participation is voluntary, data collectors must let data

providers know this and give them enough information to make an informed

decision about whether to provide the information requested.
Recommendation 3.2
 Basic information given to all data providers requested
to participate in statistical surveys and censuses should include
(a) for data on persons, information needed to meet all Privacy Act
requirements. Similar information is recommended for data on

organizations, except that the requirement to inform providers about

routine uses (as defined by the Privacy Act) is not applicable.
(b) a clear statement of the expected burden on the data providers,
including the expected time required to provide the data (a

requirement of the Office of Management and Budget) and, if

applicable, the nature of sensitive topics included in the survey and

plans for possible follow-up interviews of some or all respondents.
(c) no false or misleading statements. For example, a statement that
implies zero risk of disclosure is seldom, if ever, appropriate.
(d) information about any planned or potential 
nonstatistical uses of the
information to be provided. There
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY8
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.should be a clear statement of the level of confidentiality protection

that can be legally ensured.
(e) information about any planned or anticipated record linkages for
statistical or research purposes. For persons, this notification will

usually occur in conjunction with a request for the data subject's

Social Security number.
(f) a statement to cover the possibility of unanticipated future uses of the
data for statistical or research purposes.
(g) information about the length of time for which the information will
be retained in identifiable form.
The goal should be to give each data provider as much information as is
necessary to make his or her consent as informed as he or she wishes it to be. A

multistaged procedure is recommended: Those who want more information

should have the opportunity to obtain it directly from the interviewer or by other

means (Recommendation 3.1).
In addition, statistical agencies need to "know their respondents." How do
they interpret concepts like privacy, confidentiality, disclosure, data sharing, and

statistical purposes? Do they understand the informed consent and notification

statements they are given? What information about themselves do they consider

to be most sensitive? How are their decisions on survey participation influenced

by different formats and modes of presentation? How do their reactions vary by

race-ethnicity, gender, and socio-economic status?
Recommendation 3.4
 Statistical agencies should undertake and support
continuing research, using the tools of cognitive and survey research, to monitor

the views of data providers and the general public on informed consent, response

burden, sensitivity of survey questions, data sharing for statistical purposes, and

related issues.The panel believes that the risks of major or deliberate violations of privacy
or confidentiality are extremely low in the federal statistical system. The risks are

somewhat higher for federal administrative records, and probably highest of all

for private sector record systems. Because the public does not always distinguish

among these different types of records, there is a danger that violations not

involving statistical data bases can engender public
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.indignation and have damaging spill-over effects on federal statistical programs.

Thus, the panel further recommends that federal statistical agencies develop

systematic public information activities, be prepared to deal quickly and candidly

with actual or perceived violations of pledges of confidentiality, and as part of the

communication process, work closely with appropriate advocacy groups

(Recommendations 3.5
Œ3.7).STATISTICAL PROCEDURES TO PROTECT
CONFIDENTIALITYTechnological advances in computers and communications offer
opportunities and threats: opportunities to process, access, and analyze large data

sets more efficiently and threats of unauthorized access to individually

identifiable data. Statistical disclosure limitation procedures (e.g., cell

suppression, random error, topcoding) are used to transform data to limit the risk

of disclosure. Use of such a procedure is called masking the data, because it is

intended to hide personal characteristics of data subjects. Some statistical

disclosure limitation techniques are designed for data accessed as tables, and

some are designed for data accessed as records of individual data subjects

(microdata).Many federal statistical agencies have standards, guidelines, or formal
review mechanisms that are designed to ensure that (1) adequate analyses of

disclosure risk are performed and (2) appropriate statistical disclosure limitation

techniques are applied prior to release of tables and public-use microdata files.

Those standards and guidelines, however, vary widely in their specificity: Some

contain only one or two simple rules; others are much more detailed. This

variation across agencies in the comprehensiveness of disclosure review has little

justification in terms of agency mission. Further, unfulfilled opportunities exist

for agencies to work together and learn from one another, perhaps pooling

resources to investigate the strengths and weaknesses of various statistical

disclosure limitation techniques.
Every federal statistical agency should develop standards and procedures for
the application of effective statistical disclosure limitation techniques to all forms

of data dissemination, taking advantage of relevant features of standards and

procedures that have worked well for other agencies. Particular care should be

taken in the review of proposals for the release of new public-use microdata files.

In choosing among different disclosure limitation techniques, agencies should

take account of the level of protection
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY10
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.provided and the effects on the ability of users to draw valid inferences.
Based on its findings, the panel endorses the Federal Committee on
Statistical Methodology's recommendation that "All federal agencies releasing

statistical information, whether in tabular or microdata form, should formulate

and apply policies and procedures designed to avoid unacceptable

disclosures" (
Report on Statistical Disclosure 
 and Disclosure-AvoidanceTechniques, Statistical Policy Working Paper 2, 1978:41
Œ42, RecommendationB1). Since this panel convened, the federal statistical agencies have initiated

some activities consonant with the above recommendation. In particular, in 1991

the Office of Management and Budget's Statistical Policy Office took the lead in

organizing an interagency committee to coordinate research on statistical

disclosure analysis.Recommendation 6.1
 The Office of Management and Budget's Statistical
Policy Office should continue to coordinate research work on statistical

disclosure analysis and should disseminate the results of this work broadly

among statistical agencies. Major statistical agencies should actively encourage

and participate in scholarly statistical research in this area. Other agencies should

keep abreast of current developments in the application of statistical disclosure

limitation techniques.
Statistical disclosure limitation methods can hide or distort relations among
study variables and result in analyses that are incomplete or misleading. Further,

data masked by some disclosure limitation methods can only be analyzed

accurately by researchers who are highly sophisticated methodologically.
Recommendation 6.2
 Statistical agencies should determine the impact on
statistical analyses of the techniques they use to mask data. They should be sure

that the masked data can be accurately analyzed by a range of typical

researchers. If the data cannot be accurately analyzed using standard statistical

software, the agency should make appropriate consulting and software

available.The panel believes that no one procedure can be developed for all statistical
agencies. Furthermore, confidentiality laws governing
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.particular agencies differ, as do the types of data collected and the needs of data

users. Thus, the panel also endorses the following recommendations contained in

Statistical Policy Working Paper 2:
In formulating disclosure-avoidance policies, agencies should give particular
attention to the sensitivity of different data items
–. Agencies should avoid
framing regulations and policies which define unacceptable statistical disclosure

in unnecessarily broad or absolute terms. Agencies should apply a test of

reasonableness, i.e., releases should be made in such a way that it is reasonably

certain that no information about a specific individual will be disclosed in a

manner that can harm that individual (p. 42, part of Recommendation B1).
Given the potential difficulties that certain statistical disclosure limitation
techniques can cause for analysts, it is important that federal statistical agencies

involve data users in selecting such procedures. In the past, agency staffs have

often been the sole determiners of which statistical disclosure limitation

techniques are to be used prior to releasing tables and microdata files.
Recommendation 6.3
 Each statistical agency should actively involve data
users from outside the agency as statistical disclosure limitation techniques are

developed and applied to data.
CROSS-CUTTING RECOMMENDATIONS
Three recommendations of the panel refer to the general management of the
confidentiality and data access functions of federal statistical agencies.
Recommendation 8.1
 Each federal statistical agency should review its
staffing and management of confidentiality and data access functions, with

particular attention to the assignment within the agency of responsibilities for

these functions and the background and experience needed for persons who

exercise these responsibilities.
Recommendation 8.2
 Statistical agencies should take steps to provide staff
training in fair information practices, informed consent procedures,

confidentiality laws and policies, statistical disclosure limitation procedures, and

related topics.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY12
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendation 8.5
 The panel supports the general concept of an
independent federal advisory body charged with fostering a climate of enhanced

protection for all federal data about persons 
and responsible data disseminationfor research and statistical purposes. Any such advisory body should promote

the principle of functional separation and have professional staff with expertise

in privacy protection, computer data bases, official statistics, and research uses

of federal data.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY14
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Principles and Problems
Privacy is the most comprehensive of all rights and the right most 
 cherished by citizens of a
free nation.
Justice Louis Brandeis
 Olmstead v. United States, 
1928A people who mean to be their own Governors, must arm themselves 
 with the power to
which knowledge gives.
James Madison, 1822
THE TENSION BETWEEN PRIVATE LIVES AND PUBLIC
POLICIESPrivate lives are requisite for a free society. To an extent unparalleled in the
nation's history, however, private lives are being encroached on by organizations

seeking and disseminating information. In their stewardship of data collection and

data dissemination, federal statistical agencies have had a long-standing concern

for the privacy rights of their data providers, but they now face mounting

demands for privacy in the wake of such external developments as telemarketing

through random digit dialing and computerized capture of data on everyday

activities, like supermarket purchases by credit card.
In a free society, public policies come about through the actions of the
people. Those public policies influence individual lives at every stageŠfinancing

of prenatal care, state aid to school districts, job training and placement, law

enforcement, and determining retirement benefits. Data provided by federal

statistical agencies, such as the Bureau of Justice Statistics, the Bureau of Labor

Statistics, the National Center for Education Statistics, and the National Center

for Health Statistics, are the factual base needed for informed public discussion

about the direction and implementation of those policies. Further, public policies

encompassPRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS15
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.not only government programs but all those activities that influence the general

welfare, whether initiated by government, business, labor, or not-for-profit

organizations. Thus, the effective functioning of a free society requires broad

dissemination of statistical information.
Juxtaposing the Brandeis and Madison quotations above reveals a basic
tension in the stewardship of federal statistical agencies. Such agencies seek, on

the one hand, to ensure private lives for the citizenry. On the other hand, they

seek to provide the data on which public policies are based. Yet, because of

concerns about data confidentiality, there is a large unmet need for greater access

to data. Data users, whether in federal agencies (including policy research units),

state or local governments, academe, trade associations, businesses, market

research organizations, political interest groups, or the media, have persistently

asked for increased access to data.
How can federal statistical agencies serve data users better by providing
more access to useful data and at the same time serve data providers by better

ensuring privacy and confidentiality? What principles must guide their actions?

What are the key problems? Because facts are the lifeblood of a free society,

answers to these questions concern many people
Šnot just government
statisticians. In particular, they are of concern to data users and data providers.
Answers to fundamental questions of confidentiality and data access affect
many data users. Included in this category are researchers (e.g., university
researchers investigating the affordability of housing), policy analysts (e.g., staff

of an educational policy group assessing the influence of federal student loans on

degree completion rates), and legislators and congressional staff (e.g., members

of the Joint Committee on Taxation who are modeling the effects of proposed

changes in the tax code).
Answers to questions of confidentiality and data access also affect many
data providers. Included in this category are individuals (e.g., those in
households throughout the country who respond to decennial censuses),

institutions (e.g., nursing homes that provide data to the National Center for

Health Statistics), and enterprises (e.g., car manufacturers that respond to the

Energy Information Administration's Manufacturing Energy Consumption

Survey).In addition, many other individuals and groups are concerned with data use
and data supply. Included in this category are legislators (e.g., members of the

House Committee on Government Operations); lawyers (e.g., attorneys trying to

build a class action
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS16
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.case for Medicaid clients turned out of nursing homes or representing a client

whose research files on a project funded by the National Institutes of health have

been subpoenaed); journalists (e.g., a reporter writing about freedom of

information or privacy issues involving AIDS); and business executives, who

simultaneously are asked for data on their operations and are seeking information

on their business environment.
Finally, advocacy groups represent various positions on these issues. Groups
such as Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility are concerned with

computer-related privacy issues. And professional organizations such as the

Association for Public Data Users are concerned with issues like access to health

data on minority populations.STUDY GOALS AND SCOPE
The federal statistical system is complex and far reaching. It encompasses
more than 70 federal agencies having a role in collecting data from individuals,

households, farms, businesses, and governmental bodies and disseminating data

for statistical purposes. Those statistical purposes include description, evaluation,

and research. Although it may collect data from individual respondents,

administrative records, or organizations, a statistical agency does not do so in

order to take administrative, regulatory, or enforcement action toward a particular

individual or organization.
1  Indeed, it is not concerned with identifying the
respondent with particular information, but rather with describing and inferring

patterns, trends, and relationships for groups of respondents (National Research

Council, 1992b).The Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access was charged by the
Committee on National Statistics and the Social Science Research Council with

developing recommendations that could aid federal statistical agencies in their

stewardship of data for policy decisions and research. Three areas were of

paramount concern in our deliberations: protecting the interests of data subjects

through procedures that ensure privacy and confidentiality, enhancing public

confidence in the integrity of statistical and research data, and facilitating the

responsible dissemination of data to users.
Deciding on the exact scope of our investigation was not easy, for the
boundaries of federal statistical activities are not clearly defined. Federal

statistical activities include the development and dissemination of large, general-

purpose data sets based on censuses, surveys, and administrative records. They

also includePRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS17
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the collection and analysis of personal data in experimental research with human

subjects. A few federal statistical agencies conduct general or multipurpose

programs, but many others conduct specialized statistical programs or activities.

In addition, some basically programmatic agencies, like the Federal Aviation

Administration, the Health Care Financing Administration, and the Internal

Revenue Service, conduct some statistical activities. Moreover, many federally

supported statistical activities are carried out by contractors and grantees, and

some statistical activities depend heavily on federal-state cooperative

arrangements of long-standing. Finally, the data subjects and units of analysis for

statistical programs include persons and organizations, but when the concepts of

privacy and confidentiality are applied to organizations, they have quite different

meanings than they do when applied to persons.
To make our task manageable, we decided to concentrate our attention on
major federal statistical programs and to look beyond them only to the extent that

seemed necessary to provide adequate coverage of confidentiality and data access

questions related to those programs. In addition, given the basic nature of the

issues and our backgrounds and experience (see 
Appendix B
), we were more
comfortable dealing with our charge as it applied to personal, rather than

organizational, data. Nevertheless, input from statistical agencies and events that

occurred during our deliberations made it clear that there are major issues relating

to data for organizations that cannot be ignored. Accordingly, we lay out a

framework for the treatment of data on organizations in 
Chapter 7. We also refer
to organizations in other chapters, especially 
Chapter 5, which deals withlegislation. We believe that confidentiality and data access questions for

organizations warrant more attention than they have received in the past and more

than we have been able to give. We hope that the federal statistical agencies and

others will pursue them through systematic studies.
Given the complexity of the federal statistical system, designing an ideal
configuration to address confidentiality and data access issues throughout the

system, or even in any one federal statistical agency, is too daunting for this

panel. Instead, we seek to contribute to a long tradition in the statistical

community of periodically reconsidering current institutional structure and

practice. Fundamentally, we seek to spur this ongoing process by articulating and

applying three tenets of an ethic of information in a free society: democratic

accountability, constitutional empowerment, and individual autonomy. These

tenets are consistent with the
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS18
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ethos of American society and are the basis for trustworthy operation of federal

statistical agencies. We believe that this attention to underlying principle can

have a more beneficial and lasting impact than would an attempt to provide

detailed recommendations for micromanagement of agency confidentiality and

data access procedures.
Although we recognize the inherent tension between data protection and
data access, we do not advocate a specific trade-off between the two. The

dynamics of such a trade-off would be complicated and heavily influenced by the

missions and operational environments of individual agencies, so that a single

solution would not work for every agency. Nevertheless, we see some

opportunities to enhance data access without decreasing data protection, and

some opportunities to increase data protection without diminishing data access.

Accordingly, society faces win/no loss situations, arguably because current

institutional arrangements are inadequate. To develop this theme and inductively

build a better understanding of the broad principles, we use as illustrations

particular circumstances that individual agencies currently confront.
Many topics that fall under the rubric of societal concerns for effective,
efficient, and ethical collection and use of information are largely outside the

scope of this report. We are mindful of the burgeoning information industry in the

private sector, including marketing firms and consumer credit bureaus. While we

have concerns about this industry's impact on individual privacy, those concerns

are outside the scope of this report. Nor do we address the paperwork and privacy

burden imposed by government in administering its programs.
Directly within the scope of this report is the functioning of the federal
statistical system as it grapples with confidentiality and data access issues.

Specifically, we have a concern for how a federal statistical agency relates to its

three diverse and overlapping constituencies: data providers, government itself,

and data users.We direct this report to all concerned with confidentiality and data access
issues. We hope that the ideas and recommendations we put forth will stimulate

consideration of these critical issues by all concerned and make each interested

party more aware of the legitimate concerns of the other parties. Further, we hope

that this report will stimulate discussion of confidentiality and data access issues

across levels of government and across geographical boundaries.
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS19
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HOW DOES THE FEDERAL STATISTICAL SYSTEM
FUNCTION?The federal statistical system is a largely decentralized agglomeration of
agencies. Each agency functions under the guidance of officials in a government

department, as the Bureau of the Census does in the Department of Commerce

and the National Center for Education Statistics does in the Department of

Education. The agencies operate with various legal authorizations to compile,

analyze, and disseminate statistical data. According to the Office of Federal

Statistical Policy and Standards (1978:413),
The ultimate purpose of all Federal statistical collection activities is to develop
statistical material for use by Government agencies, policymakers, and the

public. The ultimate test of the Federal Statistical System is the availability of

relevant information; therefore, the question of data access must continually

receive a high level of attention.
Identifying seven of the larger federal statistical agencies illustrates the reach
of the system's activities:
   Bureau of the Census
   Bureau of Justice Statistics
   Bureau of Labor Statistics
   Energy Information Administration
   National Agricultural Statistics Service
   National Center for Education Statistics
   National Center for Health Statistics
Some of these agencies have purposes that are not purely statistical. The
Energy Information Administration (EIA), for instance, is in some cases required

to provide identifiable data in support of regulatory and program needs of the

Department of Energy.
Each of the existing federal statistical agencies was founded in response to
needs for data bearing on critical areas of public policy. A recent addition is the

Bureau of Transportation Statistics, which was established by Congress in 1991

to compile and analyze data related to such issues as the environmental impact of

mass transit, the factors affecting choice of transportation mode, and the nature of

vehicular accidents. Congressional support has been voiced for the establishment

of specialized statistical agencies in other crucial policy areas, as well.
In collecting data, as noted, the agencies of the federal statistical system
obtain data from individual respondents (e.g., the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's

Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS20
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Wildlife Related Recreation elicits data from outdoor enthusiasts on their

recreational activities), households (e.g., the Census Bureau conducts the

Consumer Expenditures Survey for the Bureau of Labor Statistics), organizations

(e.g., the National Agricultural Statistics Service collects information from farm

operators on some 120 crops and 45 varieties of livestock), and governmental

sub-units (e.g., the Census Bureau collects data from state and local

governments).In disseminating data, federal statistical agencies provide information to a
range of clients. Within the government, clients include researchers within the

same department (e.g., the National Agricultural Statistics Service provides data

to the Economic Research Service in the Department of Agriculture), other

federal agencies (e.g., the Internal Revenue Service's Statistics of Income

Division furnishes data to the Bureau of Economic Analysis in the Department of

Commerce), state and local governments (e.g., the National Center for Education

Statistics supplies data to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania's Department of

Education), business firms (e.g., the National Center for Health Statistics makes

data available to the Kaiser Permanente Health Maintenance Organization),

Congress (e.g., the Bureau of Economic Analysis calculates the gross domestic

product, which informs the Congressional Budget Office), and the Executive

Office of the President (e.g., the Census Bureau gives information on job seeking

by the unemployed to the Council of Economic Advisers). Outside the

government, clients include the media (e.g., the 
New York Times
, September 23,
1990:Section 3, p. 11, reported on investment in farms using Department of

Agriculture figures), individual members of the public (e.g., the 1990 
World 
Almanac, which sold over 54 million copies, is replete with government
statistics), and academic researchers (e.g., Babcock and Engberg, 1990, use

Bureau of Labor Statistics data as a reference point for their survey of local labor

market conditions).
With limited authority and resources, the Office of Management and
Budget, through its Statistical Policy Office, provides long-range planning for

statistical programs and coordinates statistical policy within the federal

government. The Statistical Policy Office does not have direct administrative

responsibility for federal statistical agencies, however.
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS21
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY DEFINITIONSA lack of general agreement on terminology has caused some confusion in
discussions of the issues involved in data protection and data access. The panel

found the following definitions for certain key terms to be helpful. They are used

consistently in this report.
DATA SUBJECTS AND DATA PROVIDERS
Data subjects are persons, households, or organizations for which data are
obtained and presented in statistical form. The data subjects are not always the

data providers, however. One person in a household may respond to a survey
questionnaire that asks for information about all members of that household. Data

providers are often called 
respondents. When respondents provide information
for data subjects other than themselves, they are called 
proxy respondents
.INFORMATIONAL PRIVACY
Privacy has multiple definitions depending on what aspect of this broad
concept is being stressed. We take the following as our working definition:
Informational privacy encompasses an individual's freedom from excessive
intrusion in the quest for information and an individual's ability to choose the

extent and circumstances under which his or her beliefs, behaviors, opinions, and

attitudes will be shared with or withheld from others.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA PROTECTION
Confidentiality refers broadly to a quality or condition accorded to
information as an obligation not to transmit that information to an unauthorized

party (National Research Council, 1991:289). This has implications that range

over religious confessionals, national security, private business ''whistleblowing,"

and disclosures of crimes. Our concern is, more narrowly, with the promises,

explicit or implicit, made to a data provider by a data gatherer regarding the

extent to which the data provided will allow others to gain specific information

about the data provider or data subject. Confidentiality has meaning only when

the promises made to a data provider can be delivered, that is, the data
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS22
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.gatherer must have the will, technical ability, and moral and legal authority to

protect the data.
Our definition of confidential data is consistent with the position of the
President's Commission on Federal Statistics (1971:222):
[Confidential should mean that dissemination] of data in a manner that would
allow public identification of the respondent or would in any way be harmful to

him is prohibited and that the data are immune from legal process.
Data protection refers to the set of privacy-motivated policies and
procedures that ensure minimal intrusion by data collection and maintenance of

data confidentiality. The term is generally used in the context of protecting

personal information (Flaherty, 1989). Unlike privacy, however, which is an

individual right, confidentiality is not restricted to data on individuals and is often

extended to data on organizations.
INFORMED CONSENT AND NOTIFICATION
Informed consent
 and notification are related, but distinct, ethical and legal
concepts. From our perspective, informed consent refers to a person's agreement

to allow personal data to be provided for research and statistical purposes.

Agreement is based on full exposure of the facts the person needs to make the

decision intelligently, including any risks involved and alternatives to providing

the data (derived from Black et al., 1990:779). Informed consent describes a

condition appropriate only when data providers have a clear choice. They must

not be, nor perceive themselves to be, subject to penalties for failure to provide

the data sought.
Notification also involves a condition of data provision under full exposure
of pertinent facts. Unlike with informed consent, however, the elements of choice

and agreement are absent. Notification is the more appropriate concept when data

provision for stated purposes is mandatory, as it is in the decennial census of

population.DISCLOSUREDisclosure relates to inappropriate attribution of information to a data
subject, whether an individual or an organization. Disclosure occurs when a data

subject is identified from a released file (
identity  disclosure), sensitiveinformation about a data subject
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS23
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.is revealed through the released file 
(attribute disclosure), or the released data
make it possible to determine the value of some characteristic of an individual

more accurately than otherwise would have been possible (
inferentialdisclosure).Inferential disclosure is the most general of the types of disclosure. The
definition above was suggested by Dalenius (1977) and supported by Statistical

Policy Working Paper 2 (Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology,

1978:41). Underlying that support was the belief that it offers the best basis for

(1) identifying all potential disclosures in connection with proposed releases, (2)

deciding which of the potential disclosures are 
unacceptable, and (3) using
appropriate techniques to prevent unacceptable disclosures.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND STATISTICAL DATA
One purpose of data collection concerns a course of action that affects a
particular person or business. The purpose can be regulatory, administrative,

legislative, or judicial. Examples include tax audits of a person, couple, or

corporation; a criminal investigation into a report of arson; license renewal for a

liquor store; and determination of welfare benefits. We refer to these purposes

generically as 
administrative.Another purpose of collecting data is to generate an aggregate description of a
group of persons or businesses. No direct action is taken for or against a specific

individual or business, although as a result of the information, policy changes

based on such information could result in benefits or costs to persons or

businesses. Examples include development of a formula for determining which

tax returns should be audited, investigating geographical patterns of arson in a

large city, and researching the relationship between the incidence of liquor law

violations by stores and store characteristics or how the duration of welfare

benefits varies with the educational level of the recipient. We refer to these

purposes generically as 
statistical. Consistent with the distinction between
administrative and statistical data, the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93
Œ579) defines astatistical record to be
a record in a system of records maintained for statistical research or reporting
purposes only and not used in whole or in part in making any determination

about an identifiable individual, except as provided by Section 8 [which

authorizes certain kinds of data access, including for research activities by the

Bureau of the Census] of Title 13.
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS24
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHAT PRINCIPLES SHOULD GUIDE STATISTICAL
AGENCIES?As creations of government, statistical agencies mirror, with varying
shadings, the ethos of their society. For the United States, and a growing list of

other countries, this ethos embraces a freedom that recognizes pluralism, public

decision making based on representative democracy, and a market-oriented

economy. Statistical agencies reflect those themes through a remarkably intricate

configuration of institutional structure and practice.
As noted above, the principles of democratic accountability, constitutional
empowerment, and individual autonomy maintain the ethos of American society

and provide valuable ethical guidance for the structure and practice of federal

statistical agencies. Recognizing that the guidance they provide is often

reinforcing but is not always harmonious, we examine each principle in turn.

When we apply the principles in subsequent chapters, we either explore ways

that they can be reconciled or note that difficult trade-offs must be made.
DEMOCRATIC ACCOUNTABILITY
Functionally, 
accountability recognizes the responsibilities of those who
serve on behalf of others. With position and involvement in manifold areas of

life, government in a democracy should serve the public
Šcollectively,individually, and in assorted assemblagesŠand be accountable to it. As John
Locke (1690/1988:426
Œ427) said in his 
Two Treatises of Government
,Who shall be Judge whether the Prince or Legislative act contrary to their
Trust – The People shall be Judge; for who shall be Judge whether his Trustee
or Deputy acts well, and according to the Trust reposed in him, but he who

deputes him.In implementation, accountability requires that the public obtain
comprehensive information on the effectiveness of government policies. Prewitt

(1985) addresses this relationship between government and citizens as

"democratic accountability." Federal statistical agencies play a pivotal role in

ensuring democratic accountability
Šthey obtain, protect, and disseminate the
data that allow accurate assessment of the influence of public policies on

individual well-being. Further, they themselves are accountable to the public for

two key functions in this process: (1) protecting the interests of data subjects

through procedures that ensure appropriate
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS25
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.standards of privacy and confidentiality and (2) facilitating the responsible

dissemination of data to users, including those to whom democratic government

is accountableŠthe country's citizens.
CONSTITUTIONAL EMPOWERMENT
Constitutional empowerment, as a cornerstone of an information ethic, is the
capability of citizens to make informed decisions about political, economic, and

social questions. In the United States, constitutional theory emphasizes that

ultimate power resides in the people. For reasons of advancing the common

welfare, certain specific powers are delegated to a representative government.

However, "the powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor

prohibited by it to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the

people" (Amendment X, U.S. Constitution). Constitutional practice emphasizes

restraints on executive excess and broad access to the political process through

the direct election of representatives, as well as through separation and balance of

power.Knowledge is a prerequisite to the ethical exercise of power. As Supreme
Court Justice Felix Frankfurter (1930:127) observed,
We now realize that democracy is not remotely an automatic device for good
government–. We now know that it is dependent on knowledge and wisdom
beyond all other forms of government
–. [Democracy] seeks to prevail when the
complexities of life make a demand upon knowledge and understanding never

made before.
The principle of constitutional empowerment is increasingly important today
as federal statistical agencies struggle to obtain and protect data needed for a

factual understanding of a fast-changing, complex world. "Electoral power per se

is the mechanical guarantee of the system, but the substantive guarantee is given

by the conditions under which the citizen gets the information" (Sartori,

1962/1972:74).As the Office of Technology Assessment (1989:1) notes in 
Statistical 
 Needsfor a Changing U.S. Economy
,Good public policy demands good information. There may be disagreement
about the wisdom of different Federal programs but there is little dispute over

the need for adequate data to inform the debate. The information generated by

the $2 billion spent this year by Federal agencies on statistical programs is a key
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS26
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.resource for government policymakers as well as for private investors, public

interest groups, academic researchers, and labor organizations
–. Government
statistics play a key role in evaluating and implementing legislation and are often

used as indexes in private contracts.
Individually, empowerment of the citizenry through access to data can
heighten fairness. Moreover, it can lessen inefficiencies ascribable to imbalances

in information. A sugar beet farmer, for example, without knowledge of current

market prices is vulnerable when negotiating a contract with a knowledgeable

sugar beet processor. Collectively, empowerment through access to data can

create benefits to parties acting cooperatively. In salary negotiations between a

school board and teachers union, for example, both sides might turn to a

common, legitimated base of statistical information about population and

property tax assessment trends to help resolve negotiations. In order to function

properly, both a political democracy and a market economy require that voters

and consumers make informed choices.
As part of their basic mandate, federal statistical agencies are instructed to
provide data that can be used to evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of

government programs. In 1967, Congress affirmed the principles of

constitutional empowerment and democratic accountability by passing the

Freedom of Information Act to serve democratic values by (1) creating a more

fully informed public debate on important issues and (2) counteracting political

corruption.INDIVIDUAL AUTONOMY
Individual autonomy
 refers to the capacity of the individual to function in
society as an individual, uncoerced and cloaked by privacy. Protection of

individual autonomy is a fundamental attribute of a democracy. Individual

autonomy is compromised by the excessive surveillance sometimes used to build

data bases (Flaherty, 1989), unwitting dispersion of data, and a willingness by

those who collect the data for administrative purposes to make them readily

available in personally identifiable form. Illustrating this latter issue is the

following, reported by Desky (1991:1):
For five cents a name, the Maryland Motor Vehicles Administration (MVA)
will sell the names of 3.3 million licensed drivers to vendors who request them,

with a minimum nonrefundable deposit of $500. All information on a driver's

license includingPRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS27
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.height, weight, gender, address and driving record from the previous three years

is being sold by the state.
While some may argue that governmental bodies appropriately use
administrative records as a source of revenue, most federal statistical agencies are

acutely aware of the importance of maintaining respect for an individual's

autonomy. The National Center for Health Statistics, for example, has legislative

authority to protect its records under the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C.

242m), which provides that
no information obtained in the course of activities undertaken or supported
under Section 304, 305, 306, or 307 (the sections authorizing the programs of

NCHS and of the National Center for Health Services Research) may be used

for any purpose other than the purpose for which it was supplied unless

authorized under regulations of the Secretary; and (1) in the case of information

obtained in the course of health statistical activities under Section 304 or 306

(which authorize the program of NCHS), such information may not be published

or released in other form if the particular establishment or person supplying the

information or described in it is identifiable unless such establishment or person

has consented (as determined under regulations of the Secretary) to its

publication or release in other form.
Federal statistical agencies have ethical and pragmatic reasons to be
concerned about individual autonomy.
2  From an ethical standpoint,
   agencies are obligated by the imperatives of our society to respect
individual dignity,   agencies should protect the personal information that has been entrusted
to them, and
   intrusive data collection by agencies can disturb an individual's chosen
solitude.From a pragmatic standpoint, most persons who are surveyed are not
required to provide data (the decennial census is the main exception). Thus, if

statistical agencies are perceived as failing to respect individual autonomy, the

supply of data providers may dry up. Even in the case of legally compelled

participation, without respect for individual autonomy, evasion and inaccurate

reporting are likely to be rampant.
3  Martin (1974:265) stated this well:
Even when responses to requests for information are required by law, the
success of a statistical program depends in large measure
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS28
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.on the willing cooperation of respondents. Respondents who understand the

purposes of the inquiry, who sympathize with the intended uses of the

information, and who believe that providing the government with the requested

information will not harm them are much more likely to answer truthfully and

with a minimum of effort on the part of the data collection agency.
One element in enlisting such cooperation is the assurance of harmlessness to
the respondent, and one of the most common methods of making such assurance

in statistical data collection is the provision for keeping the replies confidential.
Agencies must have the trust of data providers.
THE SPECIAL ROLE OF FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCIES
Federal statistical agencies have vitally served the government's information
function and rightly should serve it in the future. As far back as 1888, for

example, the U.S. Bureau of Labor was providing statistical information on the

conditions of working women. The bureau reported that 17,500 women averaged

$5.24 in weekly earnings, and it drew the policy implication that "the figures tell a

sad story, and one is forced to ask how women can live on such earnings" (U.S.

Bureau of Labor, 1889:70). Today, the Bureau of Labor Statistics provides such

policy-relevant information on earnings and employment without regard to its

political consequences.In this section we examine, first, four reasons why government should be
involved with gathering statistical information and then four reasons why federal

statistical agencies are more appropriate than federal administrative agencies or

private agencies to fulfill this function.
The government collects data because, first, it has an obligation to inform
the public on those matters that affect the welfare of the people individually and

collectively. This includes facilitating democratic accountability by providing

sufficient information on government activities to ensure public knowledge of the

government's performance. It further includes providing the empowering

information that enables a citizen to have an impact on public policies.
Second, in some cases private financial incentives are insufficient to
motivate the collection of data that are essential to a democratic society. Most

large, multipurpose national data bases, such as the decennial census and the

national income accounts, cost far more to collect than any private firm or group

of private
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS29
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.organizations could ever recover from the market should they decide to fund such

an enterprise. Thus, if the efforts are not publicly funded, such data bases would

not exist. The social value of the data far exceeds their private value.
4Third, economies of scale are often so large that even though it might be
possible to organize multiple sets of private data collectors to do the job, a single

public collection would cost significantly less, especially in the case of regularly

repeated collections. Further, economies of scale suggest that a large-scale

program of data collection has synergies that cannot be obtained by a piecemeal

approach. For example, cognitive studies of how respondents interpret various

wordings of survey questionnaires can be supported. Such studies may be

informative for a range of current and future surveys.
Fourth, private information providers have a natural interest in protecting
their investment, which may limit the spread of information.
5  On the other hand,
government can disseminate data at cost and ensure that the information is

accessible for the public good.
For a variety of reasons, the alternatives to federal statistical agencies,
whether private information organizations or federal administrative agencies

(which do have an essential role in collecting data for regulatory enforcement),

cannot be expected to provide the appropriate data. First, government

administrative agencies cannot be expected to fulfill completely the function of

providing the information needed for democratic functioning. Administrative

agencies have primarily operational tasks, whether militarily defending the

country, putting criminals in jail, collecting taxes, or running an air traffic control

system. The administrative data such agencies collect can be of general value to

society, however.Second, among most data users, federal statistical agencies have established
a reputation for integrity and independence. While certain private sector survey

firms and information organizations have fine reputations among knowledgeable

statisticians, their reputation does not have the same breadth among the relevant

public. Often, private data collection is carried out by interested parties, who are

unlikely to be objective, and if they are, the 
perception of possible bias reduces
the value of the data.
Third, some data are collected because they have direct value in
implementing government policy. This is true, for example, of the decennial

census in allocating seats in the House of Representatives among the states, of the

Consumer Price Index in determining Social Security benefits, and of the

National Center forPRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS30
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Statistics infant mortality data in shaping programmatic effort toward

prevention. When government policy is directly affected by certain data, the

government must assume responsibility for its quality. This suggests that the

government must have substantial control over the design and implementation of

the data collection and primary analysis.
Finally, federal statistical agencies have historically done the job, and done
it well. Because of the way data are produced, much useful and empowering

information is not fully provided by the workings of the private market. Data on

educational achievements of elementary school students, for example, although

often collected through privately developed test instruments, have historically

been collected and disseminated through governmental mandate. Federal

statistical agencies, such as in this case the National Center for Education

Statistics, play a key role in coordinating data gathering, maintaining quality

standards, and disseminating information.
DATA ACCESS IN A DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY
Recognized information needs in society are so great and budgets so
constraining that government analysts can do only a small fraction of the research

that can beneficially be done with federally collected data. Most of the research

must be carried out by analysts for various concerned organizations and academic

researchers. Moreover, to enhance the integrity of research findings, independent

analysts should have access to data, regardless of the organization that collected

it. As a critical element of the democratic process, this access can allow

reanalysis by groups with different agendas; stimulate new inquiries on important

social, economic, and scientific questions; lead to improvements in the quality of

data through suggestions for better measurement and data collection methods; and

provide information to improve government forecasts and resource allocations

(see National Research Council, 1985). As noted, such open access is a necessary

condition for a society to function freely and effectively. The ideal result is a

robust, resilient society in which individual and collective interests are served

through a competition for the truth. In contrast, monopolized access by "a central

state planning board" suppresses freedom and hampers efficiency.
The panel maintains that government dissemination of statistical data under
appropriate confidentiality constraints is a public good. Failure to provide data

may result in substantial lost opportunities.
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS31
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Accountability in a democracy is threatened by restricting the collection of
government statistics to only those sought by government policymakers and by
restricting access to government statistics to only government policymakers.

Wallman (1988:11) makes this point and notes a remark attributed to Christopher

DeMuth, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) administrator for

information and regulatory affairs, by Ann Crittenden (
New York Times
, July 11,
1982, Business section:4):
In the past, agencies collected much greater detail than was needed for
national policymaking purposes. It is understood now that agencies justify their

data collecting programs to OMB in terms of the needs of the federal agencies

alone, not of states, local governments, or private firms.
Wallman further notes,
In 1985 OMB distributed for comments a draft circular (A
Œ130) that provided
that ''executive branch agencies are to collect only that information necessary for

the proper performance of agency functions and that has practical utility."
After some unfavorable comment, the proposed circular was withdrawn; it
was only reissued in July 1993 with the publication of a revised OMB Circular

A-130 in the 
Federal Register (58(126):36068
Œ36086). This revised circular is
based on quite different principles than the 1985 draft circular. Leading the 1993

circular's Section 7, "Basic Considerations and Assumptions," are the following

points:a. The Federal Government is the largest single producer, collector,
consumer, and disseminator of information in the United States.

Because of the extent of the government's information activities, and

the dependence of those activities upon public cooperation, the

management of Federal information resources is an issue of

continuing importance to all Federal agencies, State and local

governments, and the public.
b. Government information is a valuable national resource. It provides
the public with knowledge of the government, society, and economy

Špast, present, and future. It is a means to ensure the accountability
of government, to manage the government's operations, to maintain

the healthy performance of the economy, and is itself a commodity in

the marketplace.c. The free flow of information between the government and the public
is essential to a democratic society. It is also essential that the

government minimize the Federal paperwork burden on the public,

minimize the cost of its information activities, and maximize the

usefulness of government information (p. 36071)
–.PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS32
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The panel agrees with the thrust of these points in the 1993 OMB circular.

Unquestionably, there can be no lively democratic policymaking
Šand so
there can be no constitutional empowerment
Šunless many individuals and
interest groups have access to information. According to Dahl (1982:11), one of

the most important characteristics distinguishing modern democracies is that

"citizens have a right to seek out alternative sources of information. Moreover,

alternative sources of information exist and are protected by law." Smith (1991:7)

also notes that "limited public access to data not only gives intramural researchers a

monopoly on the data, it also provides federal agencies an effective mechanism to

control areas of sensitivity."
The panel, however, should not be misunderstood to be advocating
unrestricted access to personal data. To the contrary, we affirm the ethical

imperative of individual autonomy, which requires appropriate guarantees on

privacy and confidentiality. Also, we recognize that useful data are more likely to

be provided by individuals and establishments under suitable guarantees of

confidentiality.PROBLEMS IN ENSURING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA
ACCESSFederal statistical agencies confront a challenging environment
Šapprehensive respondents, exasperated researchers, skeptical funders, and

pressures for administrative uses of confidential statistical records. Not

surprisingly in a decentralized statistical system, some of these problems are

specific to particular agencies and thus are outside the scope of this report.

Nonetheless, a number of problems cut across agencies. Below, we identify a

number of general problems and point to chapters of the report where they are

considered in depth.
DO STATISTICAL AGENCIES HAVE ADEQUATE
AUTHORITY TO PROTECT DATA?
At times, statistical agencies and respondents to statistical surveys have been
under pressure to disclose data in identifiable form. For example, a 1961 court

order required the St. Regis Paper Company to deliver to the Federal Trade

Commission its file copy of a completed Census Bureau form. "In a swift

reaction, Congress amended the Census law to protect copies of Census
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS33
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.documents retained in respondent's files from compulsory legal process" (Office

of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards, 1978:256). As another example, the

statistical arm of the Department of Energy, the Energy Information

Administration, collects proprietary information on pricing and production from

petroleum companies. In 1990, the Department of Justice's Antitrust Division

requested individually identifiable data from the agency to investigate alleged

price gouging by oil companies in the aftermath of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.

The agency refused, citing its policy and pledge to keep the data, which had been

collected for statistical purposes, confidential. In the ensuing disputations

between the agency and the Department of Justice, it became evident that the

agency lacked unambiguous legal authority to sustain its confidentiality pledge.

We explore this case in detail in 
Chapter 7.In discussing data protection, we emphasize the fundamental distinction
between administrative data and statistical data. Important differences exist

among the types of data collected by the government, especially data collected

for statistical and research purposes versus data collected for the administration

of government programs. Administrative data often have inherent research value,

and statistical uses are appropriate, provided confidentiality safeguards can be

maintained. Data from Medicare and Medicaid records, for example, are properly

used in studying the pattern of medical procedures, such as coronary angioplasty,

as they vary by region of the country, race, and gender. Although in certain

situations access to statistical data may seem administratively convenient, most

administrative uses would violate pledges of confidentiality. The simple

statement "Your answers are confidential" on the cover of a census form ought to

mean, for example, that information provided on household composition will not

be used to check eligibility for Aid to Families with Dependent Children. As we

have noted, federal statistical agencies have experienced pressure to provide data

for administrative purposes. Withstanding such pressure can be especially

difficult for federal statistical agencies (or programs with statistical functions)

that are housed in units with important regulatory functions. (This point was

emphasized by the Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards, 1978:258.)
The central concept of providing legislative and procedural protection to
ensure that personal data collected about a data subject for a research or

statistical purpose are not used for an administrative or other decision about that

data subject is generally
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS34
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.called functional separation. It is not a new concept, having been recommended,
for example, in a 1973 study by the Secretary's Advisory Committee on

Automated Personal Data Systems (U.S. Department of Health, Education and

Welfare). The concept was enunciated by the Privacy Protection Study

Commission (1977a:574). Stating the concept as a recommendation for

legislation by the U.S. Congress, the commission proposed
that the Congress provide by statute that no record or information contained
therein collected or maintained for a research or statistical purpose under

Federal authority or with Federal funds may be used in individually identifiable

form to make any decision or take any action directly affecting the individual to

whom the record pertains, except within the context of the research plan or

protocol, or with the specific authorization of such individual.
We examine this concept throughout the report.
CAN COMMUNICATION WITH THE PUBLIC BE
IMPROVED?For federal statistical agencies to achieve full democratic accountability,
they must be continuously cognizant of public perceptions regarding the central

issues of data protection and data access. This may require systematic studies of

public opinion, as has been done with various surveys of the public's general

perception of the Census Bureau.
6  Such studies could examine, for example, the
extent to which the public continues to have a general distrust of centralized

government records, a distrust of the kind that led to the Privacy Act of 1974.

They could also assess the public's concern about the data collection and

dissemination powers of the private sector information industry. And they could

examine the extent to which various groups of the public distinguish between

statistical agencies and administrative agencies regarding issues of data protection

and data access.Interpreting general survey results, however, is not easy; any general
political alienation will drive down confidence and be reflected in responses

about a specific area of government activity. More easily interpretable are

systematic studies of the data provider and data user communities that interact

with statistical agencies. A diversified portfolio of study techniques, including

targeted surveys, data user and data provider conferences, reinterviews, focus

groups, and small-scale experiments may be most effective. In the interests of

accountability and openness, the results of such studies should be made publicly

available.PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS35
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.How can federal statistical agencies best communicate to the general public,
the data provider communities, and the data user communities the importance of

the statistical information they can provide? How can they best instill confidence

in these diverse groups regarding the three key aspects of their data protection

policies: (1) their intention to minimize intrusions on privacy, (2) their intention

to minimize the time and efforts of data providers, and (3) their ability to maintain

confidentiality?Given the principle of democratic accountability, how are the interests of the
public best served? Institutionally, Congress addresses legislation that, for the

most part, sets fairly general guidelines for agency policy and practice. At the

more specific level of the development and implementation of agency policy

regarding confidentiality and data access, mechanisms are beginning to emerge

for ensuring input from representatives of the key affected groups. A variety of

such mechanisms are possible, including data user conferences, meetings with

privacy advocates regarding the conduct of key surveys, agency review boards

with outside representation, and a government-wide Data and Access Protection

Board.The topic of public perceptions and interests is addressed further in Chapters
2, 3, and 
4. Alternative mechanisms for ensuring input from the affected groups
are discussed in 
Chapter 8.ARE DATA PROVIDERS PROPERLY NOTIFIED OR
INFORMED?Most often, for data collected for administrative purposes, the data provider
either is legally required to provide the data
Šas with tax return filings
Šor mustprovide the data in order to receive some benefit
Šas with driver's license
applications. In broad terms, the ethics of what the agency should tell the data

provider about the use of such administrative data are not controversial. The data

provider should be notified about the need for such data and how providing the

data might affect him or her
Šand that one potential use is for statistical
purposes. A more complicated ethical question is what options data providers

should have in denying various uses of the administrative data they provide.
On the other hand, with the notable exception of the decennial census,
response to most statistical surveys of persons and households is voluntary. Law

and ethics require that consent for participation in voluntary statistical surveys be

informed. Potential respondents should be told how their data will be used and

what the consequences will be to them of participating or not participating in the

survey. They should be given the opportunity
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS36
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to make a conscious decision whether to provide the data requested.
There are many open questions about the nature of informed consent
procedures for voluntary surveys. Do the current practices of the statistical

agencies conform fully with legal and ethical requirements? Is appropriate

information being given to respondents in language that they can readily

understand? Should the same amount of detail be given to all potential

respondents? What are suitable procedures for use in telephone and mail surveys?

Are the statistical agencies always able to honor the promise of confidentiality

protection they give to respondents? To what extent should respondents be

allowed to waive standard protections in order to permit data sharing for

statistical purposes? We develop these issues in 
Chapter 3.ARE CURRENT CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA
ACCESS LAWS ADEQUATE AND APPROPRIATE?
We discussed above the issue of whether statistical agencies have adequate
authority to protect the data they collect. Here we introduce some other issues of

legislation. The laws that govern confidentiality of and access to federal

statistical data include some with general reach, like the Freedom of Information

Act and the Privacy Act, but others vary widely from agency to agency. At one

end of the spectrum, Title 13 of the U.S. Code provides extremely tight

confidentiality provisions for the Census Bureau. At the other end, many agencies

operate without any specific confidentiality legislation. Critics charge that certain

provisions of current legislation not only fail to provide sufficient protection of

confidential statistical data but create excessive barriers to data access. For

example, the Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards (1978:262) noted

obstacles to interagency data sharing and, in particular, the inability of agencies to

gain access to the Census Bureau's Standard Statistical Establishment List for

statistical sampling purposes. There are also obstacles to access by

nongovernment data users. Comprehensive revision of the relevant laws risks a

final product worse than the status quo. Further, legislation requires support if it

is to be effective. Congress and the President must be committed to

confidentiality protection and the public must understand its importance. On the

other hand, the current approach of ad hoc legislative initiatives is not working

very well either. Thus, in 
Chapter 5, we pose and address questions of variation
among statistical agencies in the protection
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS37
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.offered identifiable statistical records, possible amendments of the 1974 Privacy

Act, legislative language about "zero disclosure risk," and greater opportunities

for data sharing among federal statistical agencies for statistical purposes.
HOW CAN NONGOVERNMENT USERS BE GIVEN
ACCESS TO DATA WHILE PRESERVING
CONFIDENTIALITY?Despite efforts by several agencies to improve access to data by researchers
and policy analysts outside the government, nongovernment users' need for

detailed data is far from being fulfilled. Often, such data contain information on

individual respondents over time, as it would for any study of how firms respond

to environmental regulations, for example. Specifically, consider assessing the

likely impact of a tax, levied in response to the threat of global warming, on the

amount of carbon emitted from a plant. Combined information from EIA's

Manufacturing Energy Consumption Survey and the Census Bureau's

Longitudinal Research Database (see McGuckin and Pascoe, 1988) would show

how plants would react to the implied change in the relative price of energy.

There are many aspects to such a policy question and to answer it well

researchers would have to address it from various perspectives. Weighed against

this clear benefit, access poses serious data protection problems, and so the

researchers most likely to answer the question may not get access to the data they

need.Statistical agencies have developed some procedures for providing greater
access to data to selected researchers under conditions that subject the researchers

to enforceable penalties for violations of confidentiality standards. For example,

the designation of researchers as special sworn employees has been standard

practice at the Census Bureau. This practice has clearly protected confidentiality

in that special sworn employees have the same responsibilities as regular

employees, but it has also limited the type and amount of research that can be

done with the data. The access provided is of a temporary nature and must be

carried out on site, under supervision, and only for purposes of the Census Bureau

that are designated under Title 13 legislation. Further, it puts at a disadvantage

researchers who are not currently in the Washington, D.C., area or cannot easily

relocate.Recently, the National Center for Education Statistics and the National
Science Foundation have developed, and are evaluating, approaches for licensing

researchers to have access to data for
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS38
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.statistical purposes, with penalties for improper use. Further, the Census Bureau

has been examining for some time the possibility of establishing facilities for data

access outside the Washington, D.C., area, perhaps at its regional offices or at a

university under a data protection agreement. Most concretely, the Bureau of

Justice Statistics has provided data to form the National Justice Data Archive at

the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, which is

located at the University of Michigan. This archive functions under the legal

authority and confidentiality protection of the Code of Federal Regulations (
§ 28,Pt. 22). The Bureau of Justice Statistics provides a project monitor to the archive.
These topics of data access are further developed in Chapters 
6 and 
7.CAN INDIVIDUAL-LEVEL DATA BE PROVIDED FOR
PUBLIC USE?Fritz Scheuren (1989:20), as director of the Statistics of Income Division of
the Internal Revenue Service, described this predicament of the data collector:
Statistical Disclosure-Avoidance is an enormous problem. On the one hand,
we want to make all the microdata [sets of individual records with identifiers

removed] we produce publicly available so researchers can benefit fully; on the

other hand, we have to protect respondents (or taxpayers, in my case) from

having identifiable information inadvertently disclosed.
While some progress has been made since Scheuren's writing, the
complexity of the task and the fundamental nature of the problem leave

substantial work remaining. Statistical agencies make difficult decisions on how

best to disseminate their products so that maximum value is obtained from them

while protecting confidentiality. What kinds of data should be released with no

restrictions? What kinds of statistical disclosure limitation techniques should be

applied to data before releasing them for unrestricted public-use? Will

researchers be led to incorrect inferences because of such techniques? What is a

reasonably small risk of disclosure of individually identifiable data? How should

such decisions be made, and by whom? We develop this topic in 
Chapter 6.PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS39
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CAN LEGITIMATE NEEDS FOR DATA SHARING
WITHIN GOVERNMENT BE MET?
Are young Americans entering the labor market prepared for the competitive
challenge? Government statistics can help answer only part of this critical

question. The National Center for Education Statistics, in its National

Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988, started with 25,000 eighth graders and

gathered periodic measurements on their academic performance, school and

social environments, and family background. The Bureau of Labor Statistics

surveys youth employment. The Bureau of Justice Statistics has some information

on those in prison. As Hauser (1991:2) succinctly observes, however, "the overall

effect of fragmented responsibility and piecemeal coverage is that, once youths

leave high school, our statistical system treats them almost as if they had dropped

off the face of the earth." Actually, some surveys by the National Center for

Education Statistics do track students after high school. For example, the

National Longitudinal Study of the Class of 1972 tracked students as they made

the transition to their twenties. In general, however, there is a need for suitable

interagency coordination in meeting data needs and, possibly, for some

interagency data sharing.
Sharing of identifiable data for statistical purposes can have many potential
benefits, including the enrichment of cross-sectional and longitudinal data sets,

evaluation and improvement of the quality of census and survey data,

improvement of the timeliness and consistency of statistical reporting,

development of more complete sampling frames, and improvement of

comparability between data developed by different statistical agencies. A

significant amount of data sharing has occurred without incident, both between

statistical agencies and from administrative agencies to statistical agencies. For

many years, for example, the Census Bureau has used tax records on individuals

and businesses to enhance its demographic censuses and surveys and to evaluate

the quality of census and survey data. (Additional detail on this point is provided

in Chapter 6.) Similarly, identifiable patient records are routinely used under
controlled conditions in medical and epidemiologic research.
Decisions on whether to link records require careful examination of several
factors. Will the linking be done under conditions that conform with all statutory

confidentiality standards of the agencies involved and with pledges to data

providers concerning the use of their information? Is record linkage the only

feasiblePRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS40
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.way to develop the desired statistical products? Are the intended uses of these

products sufficiently important to justify introducing additional risks of

disclosure? Should agencies take into account potential reductions of (1) the time

and effort of data providers and (2) the costs of obtaining the desired data by

other means? If they should, how would they do it? Who will have access to the

linked data sets? Who should decide?
The statutes, regulations, and policies that affect decisions to share data and
participate in record linking projects vary widely among agencies. Statistical

agencies, like the Census Bureau, and custodians of administrative records, like

the Internal Revenue Service, operate under strict statutory controls on disclosure

of identifiable data. Other agencies, like the National Agricultural Statistics

Service, have the authority to deny access for nonstatistical purposes but also

have more flexibility to share data for statistical purposes. Still other agencies

operate primarily under general information statutes, like the Privacy Act of

1974, and have little difficulty in finding ways to participate in record linkages

for statistical and research purposes, if they choose to do so.
The value of a survey data base can sometimes be substantially enhanced by
adding data from administrative records for the persons in the data base (Juster,

1991). In carrying out a health and retirement survey, for example, researchers

might like to use earnings records from Social Security files. Other valuable

administrative records include case files from public assistance programs, health

care claims, and tax returns. Such linkages are valuable for a number of reasons:
   Existing administrative records may be more accurate than survey data
obtained from respondents, especially for detailed information that must

be recalled for earlier years, like income data.
   Surveys are made less burdensome and intrusive because certain
questions need not be asked.
   Administrative records can provide a check on the quality of survey
results, and vice versa.
While record linkage may facilitate the basic tasks of a statistical agency, it
also raises serious confidentiality concerns. Ivan P. Fellegi, chief statistician of

Canada, noted in a May 2, 1991, communication to the panel,
The issue of "moral outrage" as a possibility is real, but I believe [it] applies
particularly to record linkage (matching). For this reason we are particularly

careful about it.The topic of record linkage is developed further in Chapters 
4Œ7.PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS41
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT
In 
Chapter 2 we briefly review the evolution of the federal statistical
system, the findings of earlier studies of confidentiality and data access, and the

changes that warrant a reexamination of the issues. To complete the contextual

framework of our study, we also provide an overview of our assessment of the

responsibilities federal statistical agencies must be able to fulfill in their dealings

with the public, data providers and data subjects, data users, other statistical

agencies, and custodians of administrative records.
In 
Chapter 3 we address fair treatment of data providers, in particular the use
of informed consent as an instrument for ethical communication by data

collectors. Drawing on survey experiments, cognitive studies, and public opinion

surveys, we also examine certain research findings related to confidentiality and

data access.We examine in 
Chapter 4 the legitimate expectations of data users, within
and outside government, for access to federal statistical data. We also explore the

ethical responsibilities of data users and advocate establishing their legal

responsibilities in agency or systemwide statutes.
In 
Chapter 5 we review legislation governing confidentiality and data
access, especially the Privacy Act of 1974, Title 13 of the U.S. Code, the

Hawkins-Stafford amendments of 1988 for the National Center for Education

Statistics, and the Public Health Services Act as it affects the National Center for

Health Statistics. While recognizing a basis for diversity according to agency

mission, we emphasize the value of all statistical agencies having a certain

minimal standard of statutory authority to protect their data. The experience of

the Energy Information Administration and the Bureau of Labor Statistics

suggests that some agencies would benefit from having more comprehensive

statutory protection of their statistical records.
Extensive dissemination of detailed information is necessary to ensure that
ample value can be obtained from federal censuses and surveys. At the same

time, statistical agencies must fulfill pledges of confidentiality to data providers.

Thus, we examine in 
Chapter 6 technical and administrative procedures forproviding information while ensuring that the risk of disclosure is at most

minimal.In 
Chapter 7 we address confidentiality issues associated with statistical data
on organizations. Using four case studies, we develop
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS42
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.a conceptual basis for similarities and differences in the treatment of data on

organizations compared with data on individuals and households.
We address the management of confidentiality and data access functions in
Chapter 8, with particular attention to interagency coordination and the cross-
national experience. We also explore issues of agency staffing and data protection

legislation.Our findings and recommendations are presented in 
Chapters 3
 through 8.
A complete list of recommendations are the last chapter, and our study
procedure is described in 
Appendix A
.7  Biographical sketches of the panel
members are provided in 
Appendix B.Throughout our deliberations we have been mindful that regardless of the
efforts put forth, the tension between data protection and data access will not go

away. At best one can hope for a temporary consensus each time the community

of interested parties revisits this issue. Ideally, as with isometric exercise,

achieving correct dynamic tension in one round builds greater strength for the

next round.
NOTES1. The Environmental Protection Agency, for example, in collecting data on compliance with air

pollution regulations for the purpose of flagging offenders is 
not functioning as a statistical agency.
2. See Marx (1988:219-229, 1990) for general arguments about the value of privacy and anonymity.

3. This concern is as valid for data on organizations as it is for data on individuals or households.

4. To illustrate the lack of private financial incentives, studies on the health risks of smoking draw

some private support from the insurance industry, but that industry's financial incentives to develop

data may pale compared with those of the tobacco industry. With a primary mandate to serve the

public interest, the National Center for Health Statistics, along with the National Institutes of Health,

can generate the vital data that help inform the debate. As Lave (1990:33-34) notes,
Strongly held opinions are rarely sufficient to improve public health. For every

public health professional who favoured antismoking and AIDS communication

campaigns, there were several people opposed to these campaigns. The strength

of belief of the surgeon-general, and the mustering of support of public health

professionals were necessary, but not sufficient, conditions for being able to

conduct a campaign. The campaigns
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS43
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.could not have been mounted without mustering the data to show that the

problems were important, and that the proposed actions were likely to improve

public health.
5. For example, Allison and Cooper (1991) note a case in which Institutional Brokers Estimate System

(IBES) filed suit against a researcher who criticized their data and imposed conditions on academic

researchers that (1) require them to clear all potentioal publications with IBES so the latter can have

the opportunity "to identify factual errors or misunderstandings" and (2) require researchers using

IBES data to refrain from providing access to others (including research assistants) without prior

clearance.
6. See, for example, Bureau of the Census (1982), Louis Harris and Associates, Inc. (1981, 1983),

National Research Council (1979), the Roper Organization, Inc. (1980).

7. To facilitate its work, the panel commissioned several background papers on issues bearing on

confidentiality and data issues. The papers papers appear in a special issue of the 
Journal of Official
Statistics, 1993(2). See 
Appendix A for a list of the papers.
PRINCIPLES AND PROBLEMS44
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2The Framework of Study
You can't have a democratic society without having a good data base.
Janet Norwood, former commissioner, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1991
In 
Chapter 1, we laid out ethical principles for statistical agencies as they
struggle to broker society's insistence that citizens be allowed to lead private lives

and that public policies be based on the dissemination of relevant personal

information. In this chapter, we first put this struggle in historical context by

tracing the evolution of the federal statistical system's response to issues of

confidentiality and data access. Because of their importance, these issues have

been the subject of examination by various commissions, panels, and

committees. Thus, we next briefly review this earlier work and the

recommendations made by some of the key groups. We then argue that recent

changes in the composition of society and in computer and communications

technology make reexamination of these issues a pressing concern. Finally, we

identify and describe the responsibilities that federal statistical agencies have to

their various constituencies.
EVOLUTION OF THE FEDERAL STATISTICAL SYSTEM
The federal statistical system has evolved apace with the country, and at
each step it has had to address confidentiality and data access issues. The

Constitutional Convention of 1787 called for a count of Americans every 10

years beginning in 1790. By the second decennial census, Vice-President Thomas

Jefferson had successfully urged more detailed collection of data on people's ages

so policies could be designed to raise longevity. The seventh federal census

(1850) was greatly enlarged to report by individuals
THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY45
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.rather than families. In addition, the practice of having local marshals collect and

tabulate the results was stopped. Instead, local census takers filled out the forms,

which were then sent to the census office in Washington, D.C., for uniform

classification and tabulation. Some 640,000 pages of census schedules were

bound in 800 volumes to provide, for the first time, a comprehensive statistical

picture of the social and economic life of the nation. To organize the 1850

census, the new superintendent of the census, Professor of Political Economy

James D.B. De Bow, teamed with Lemuel Shattuck, a founder in 1839 of the

American Statistical Association.
The first permanent census office was founded following adoption of the
Permanent Census Act of March 1902. According to Boorstin (1973:172), Dr.

S.N.D. North, the first head of the permanent census office, was ready to divide

all modern history ''into two periods, the nonstatistical and the statistical; one the

period of superstition, the other the period of ascertained facts expressed in

numerical terms." Further, North continued, "the science of statistics is the chief

instrumentality through which the progress of civilization is now measured, and

by which its development hereafter will be controlled." The census office of

S.N.D. North evolved into the modern U.S. Bureau of the Census, whose

responsibilities go well beyond the decennial census.
As the need for information has grown in such areas as labor, education, and
health, the nation has created specialized statistical agencies to collect and

disseminate data. In other cases, states have assumed data collection

responsibilities, especially in the area of vital statistics, such as birth, marriage,

and death records. Unlike its northern neighbor, with its Statistics Canada, the

United States has a decentralized statistical system, in which there are numerous

federal statistical agencies, each with separate enabling legislation and distinct

data provider and data user constituencies. Because of this, substantial variations

exist in the way agencies and programs seek to protect confidentiality and

provide data access. Some variations are justifiable given the agencies' differing

mandates; however, some appear more an accident of history and reflect a lack of

coordination and systemwide thinking. In either case, the existing decentralized

system provides a natural experiment for examining what works and what does

not work for data protection and data access.
Over the past two centuries, federal statistical agencies have responded
commendably to growing public concerns about protecting individual autonomy.

Courtland (1985) reviews this historical
THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY46
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.progression for the Census Bureau. Through the first six decennial censuses

(1790Œ1840), for the limited data to be collected on each household, each census
taker was "to cause a correct copy, signed by himself, of the schedule containing

the number of inhabitants within his division to be set up at two of the most

public places within the same, there to remain for the inspection of all

concerned." By the 1850 census, this practice of public posting had been

abandoned and census takers were making assurances of confidentiality. Still,

copies of the census returns were filed with state officials and county courts, a

practice about which Francis Amasa Walker, the superintendent of the 1870

census, expressed concerns (quoted in Courtlands, 1985:409):
The whole expenditure has been worse than useless. It has been positively
mischievous. The knowledge on the part of the people that the original sheets of

the census were to be deposited among the records of the counties to which they

relate, has added almost incalculably to the resistance which the inquiries of the

census have encountered. It is useless to attempt to maintain the confidential

character of a census under such circumstances. The deposit of the returns at the

county seat of every county constitutes a direct invitation to impertinent or

malicious examination
–. At every step the work of the assistant marshal has
been made more difficult by the fear that the information would be 
– divulgedfor impertinent and malicious criticism. No one feature of the present method of

enumeration has done so much to excite and justify this fear as the provision of

the law which requires that the original returns for each county shall be

deposited in the office of the county clerk.
By 1890, census legislation required census workers to swear under oath not
to disclose census data except to their superiors and eliminated the requirement to

file copies with the county court.
During the nineteenth century there was steady growth in the collection oflabor, health, agriculture, and education statistics (see, e.g., Duncan and Shelton,

1978). In the early twentieth century, a wealth of federal administrative data

began to be assembled with the passage of the Sixteenth Amendment to the

Constitution in 1912, which enabled a federal income tax, and the Income Tax

Act of 1913, which implemented the income tax.
1  Statistics based on the data
were first published pursuant to the Revenue Act of 1916. By 1924 legislation

had loosened access to tax data to include public listing of taxpayers and their

incomes and access to tax returns by two congressional revenue committees. A

reaction to this openness led to the Revenue Act of 1926, which rescinded public

access to income data.
THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY47
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Major growth in the federal statistical system began in the 1930s with the
implementation of an array of government programs to bring the country out of

the Great Depression.2  Growth in personnel, budget, and responsibilities
accelerated in the postwar period with the passage of the Employment Act of

1946 and the accompanying establishment of the Council of Economic Advisers

and the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. The need for social, as well

as economic, data was further highlighted by the civil rights movement and Great

Society programs of the 1960s.
Paralleling the growth in the scope of its responsibilities, the Census Bureau
has paid increasing attention to protecting confidentiality. Starting in 1940, it

ceased the release of certain aggregate data
Šsuch as tables displaying counts of
the number of data subjects in various categories
Šfrom its demographic census
publications. Data tables were not released that had small cell counts. In the

1960s, the Census Bureau began to release some computer files of records about

individuals (i.e., public-use microdata files), but under the oversight of the

Census Bureau Microdata Review Panel, it deletes or modifies potentially

identifying information in the files.
Confidentiality concerns have arisen not only in regard to the Census
Bureau, but, peaking some 20 years ago, more generally in regard to the federal

government. During the Watergate period of the early 1970s, for example, the

public and Congress were alarmed by the disclosure to the White House of tax

information on a number of political opponents. Legislative remedies were then

developed. The Privacy Act of 1974 was enacted to provide greater control over

the government's use of personal records, and the Tax Reform Act of 1976

curtailed presidential authority to access tax records and to make them available

to other agencies and organizations for nontax uses.
Concern about the confidentiality of personal records hampered ordinary
statistical uses of federal data, for example, when the Department of Agriculture

was blocked in 1973 from using tax return information to construct a directory of

names for use in its surveys of farmers. During the 1970s many ambitious

proposals, like the President's Reorganization Project for the Federal Statistical

System, were developed to coordinate the federal statistical effort, and they

generally gave careful attention to confidentiality. As Statistical Policy Working

Paper 2, 
Report  on Statistical Disclosure and Disclosure-Avoidance Techniques
,indicated,THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY48
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Most agencies that release statistical information are becoming increasingly
sensitive to the disclosure issue, and 
– have adopted or are in the process of
adopting policies and procedures designed to avoid unacceptable disclosure

(Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology, 1978:41).
The decade of the 1980s is widely viewed as a period of retrenchment for
the federal statistical system; most of the agencies were on the defensive in an

effort to preserve programs and maintain budgets. The 1990s have begun with

renewed recognition of the importance of federal statistics and a commitment to

improve the quality of the system. For example, in 1991 the Economic Policy

Council Working Group of the Council of Economic Advisers (1991), under

chair Michael Boskin, proposed several initiatives to improve the quality of

economic statistics. Quality improvement
 embraces renewed attention to
confidentiality and data access concerns. Robert M. Groves, while at the Bureau

of the Census, identified "analysis of risk of disclosure of confidential

data" (quoted in National Research Council, 1992a:23) as a key interdisciplinary

need closely connected to quality improvement. The Clinton administration now

has an opportunity for further changes to improve the federal statistical system.
EARLIER STUDIES OF PRIVACY, CONFIDENTIALITY, AND
DATA ACCESSHistory suggests that privacy, confidentiality, and data access are ongoing
concerns. For the federal government, these issues have been addressed by

several groups and organizations, especially during a period of intensive activity

in the 1970s.
3  The reports prepared by the various groups chronicle their ideas,
many of which remain valid today. The scope of each study was different from

that of this study, however. For example, the Privacy Protection Study

Commission (1977a, b, c) was concerned with all uses of personal records, not

just statistical records, and the Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards

(1978) examined all aspects of federal statistical programs, going far beyond

confidentiality and data access issues. Below, we briefly review three of the

studies, which were chosen because they relate most closely to the our mission,

and we recommend their reports to all who want to probe these subjects.

Additionally, we refer the reader to the discussions in Boruch and Cecil (1979)

and Flaherty (1979, 1989).THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY49
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION AD HOC
COMMITTEE ON PRIVACY ANDCONFIDENTIALITY
In 1975, Lester R. Frankel, then president of the American Statistical
Association, appointed the Ad Hoc Committee on Privacy and Confidentiality to

deal with information reporting, privacy, and confidentiality issues. After two

years of work, the committee, chaired by Joseph L. Gastwirth, produced a final

report, which made the following key recommendations regarding

confidentiality:   Confidentiality statutes providing full and overriding protection against
compulsory disclosure of identifiable records from statistical data

systems derived either from surveys or from administrative records

should be enacted to cover each federal statistical agency and designated

units of other agencies.
   Disclosure for nonstatistical purposes of data about identifiable
individuals collected or derived from administrative records by federal

agencies solely for statistical purposes should be prohibited by

statute–.   The Committee urges the Congress to avoid the passage of legislation
which has the effect of revoking proper guarantees of confidentiality

already given by agencies collecting data to be used solely for statistical

and research purposes. Statutes which have already had this effect

should be amended to exempt data collected or compiled solely for

statistical and research purposes (American Statistical Association,

1977:75Œ76).PRIVACY PROTECTION STUDY COMMISSION
Commissioned by the Privacy Act of 1974, the Privacy Protection Study
Commission (1977a), chaired by David F. Linowes, prepared a report on

Personal Privacy in an Information Society
. Although the scope of its report is
much broader than just research and statistical uses of data, the commission

emphasized that such activities (1) benefit society as a whole and (2) depend on

voluntary cooperation for accurate information. Voluntary cooperation requires

assurances of confidentiality. It also emphasized that the rich lode of

administrative data built up by the federal government had barely been tapped for

research and statistical purposes. From our standpoint, a key recommendation of

the commission in the area of confidentiality and data access was to establish a

clear functional separation between the use of information for research and

statistical purposes and its use for administrative purposes. It further

recommended the establishment of
THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY50
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.an independent entity within the federal government to monitor and research

privacy-related issues and to issue interpretative rulings regarding implementation

of the Privacy Act of 1974.
OFFICE OF FEDERAL STATISTICAL POLICY AND
STANDARDSIn 1978 the Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards (the
equivalent at that time of OMB's Statistical Policy Office) issued a report called 
AFramework for Planning U.S. Federal Statistics 
 for the 1980's
. Some basic
recommendations made in the report regarding confidentiality and data access

were as follows:
   All agencies involved in the collection of statistical or research data
should have mandated legislative protection for the confidentiality of

information collected or otherwise obtained to be used solely for

statistical or research purposes. This should apply to both commercial

and personal data.
   The uses of statistical data must be restricted to prevent their use in
identifiable form for making determinations which would affect the

rights, benefits or privileges of the individuals.
   Exchange of data among the "protected enclaves" [see below] should be
feasible under controlled conditions.
   Administrative data sets should be accessible to statisticians and
researchers in "protected enclaves" for some statistical uses unrelated to

the purposes of the original data collection (pp. 280
Œ281).The report also argued for
enactment of a clear legal status as "protected enclaves" for selected statistical
and research agencies in the major departments, and for other clearly identified

statistical and research units within other agencies. The enclave must be

insulated from intervention and from unauthorized access to data. Employees

must be subject to strict ethical standards established with respect to data

handling and to penalties for voluntarily releasing identifiable data contrary to

law (p. 281).Such "protected enclaves" have not been established.
WHAT HAS CHANGED TO WARRANT A NEW STUDY?
Since 1980 many changes in the social and technical environment have
affected the federal statistical system. Those changes have caused increased

concern about the confidentiality of and access to statistical data and led to our

reexamination of these
THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY51
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.issues. Pertinent developments in the past decade include the following:
   advances in computer and communications technology,
   an expanding role for outside researchers in the use of federal data bases
for policy analysis,
   expanded use of matching (record linkage) for statistical and
nonstatistical purposes,   increases in the variety, number, and influence of organizations that have
a stake in confidentiality and data access issues,
   increasing difficulties in persuading data providers to participate in
censuses and surveys,
   initiation of cognitive research aimed at the improvement of informed
consent and notification procedures for surveys, and
   new developments in research on statistical disclosure limitation.
Below, we briefly describe each of these developments and indicate areas of
concern for the federal statistical system.
ADVANCES IN COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS
TECHNOLOGYRapid advances in computer and communications technology have resulted
in increased demands by data users for microdata (i.e., data on individual

subjects). In 1978, Statistical Policy Working Paper 2 (Federal Committee on

Statistical Methodology, 1978:41) noted the increased use of microdata files since

1960 and affirmed, "This development has significantly increased the utility of

statistical data bases created by Federal agencies from censuses, surveys and

administrative records and promises to do so even more." Beginning with the

introduction of personal computers in about 1981, the rapid proliferation of

computing power has radically altered the mainframe environment of the 1970s.
The increase in computational capability, the rapid decline in the cost of
computer data storage, the development of more sophisticated data base

software, the improvement of data transmission capabilities, and the development

of computerized data entry
Šall have made it possible to develop and access with
ease large data bases of personal records and thus made confidentiality issues

more salient. And although sophisticated techniques for disclosure limitation can

now be applied, analytic tools also exist that make it easier for a potential data

snooper to identify individual records.
THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY52
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OUTSIDE RESEARCHERSThe role of outside researchers in the use of federal data bases for policy
analysis has been expanding. These outside researchers include those who work

for other agencies, Congress, academic institutions, businesses, labor

organizations, and various other organizations. This expanded role is appropriate.

The task of analyzing the collected data in order to obtain maximum information

from them is enormous, and yet the statistical agencies necessarily face fiscal and

institutional constraints that limit the amount of analysis they can perform.
Outside researchers possess substantial capability for data analysis because
of their subject-matter knowledge, computing capability, and professional

motivation to obtain new insights from the data. Further, their independent

analysis of federal data can provide not only new research and policy

interpretations, but also uses that the various government agencies had not

envisioned. At the same time, the demands of outside researchers for access to

federal data raise additional confidentiality concerns for federal statistical

agencies.RECORD LINKAGEIn order to enhance their ability to answer complex policy-relevant
questions, researchers seek to match records in one statistical data base with

records from the same data provider in another data base. By matching records,

they can avoid having to ask data providers for information they have already

given to another data gatherer. The existence of abundant and available

computing capability makes matching a more viable option than in prior decades.
In general, record linkage can be an effective tool for statistical and
administrative purposes. In administrative procedures, records of federal student

loans, for example, can be linked to federal employment records in order to

identify federal employees who are delinquent in repaying their loans. In

statistical studies, data on federal student loans can be linked to federal

employment records to research the value added in human capital of federal loan

programs.For ethical and pragmatic reasons, as we argue in 
Chapter 1 and elsewhere inthis report, data collection for statistical purposes should be protected from

administrative uses. Thus, a survey of college graduates that purports to be

examining the value
THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY53
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of various sources of college financial aid should not be used to locate those who

are delinquent on federal student loans. This concept of functional separation is

fundamental to the integrity and effectiveness of a federal statistical agency.
ORGANIZATIONS CONCERNED WITH
CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESSIBILITY
Responding to the demands of an information-rich age, the variety, number,
and influence of organizations claiming a stake in confidentiality and data access

issues have mushroomed. As an illustration of the scope of this growth in just one

area, the Second Conference on Computers, Freedom, and Privacy was held in

March 1992, at George Washington University, one year after the first

conference. Sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery, the 1992

conference had 12 co-sponsors, ranging from the American Civil Liberties Union

to the Association of Research Libraries to the Committee on Communications

and Information Policy of the Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers

ŠUSA. In addition it had 10 patrons, including Bell Atlantic and the Computer
Security Institute. Given the evident range and depth of concern, federal

statistical agencies should be sensitive to the views of different stakeholders,

accommodate their conflicting needs to the extent possible, and help to inform the

public debate by making the various parties aware of each other's views.
PERSUADING DATA PROVIDERSMany data collectors face mounting difficulties in persuading data providers
to participate in censuses and surveys. There is a consensus that, generally,

respondent cooperation with survey activities is declining. Dalenius (1988)

describes a willingness to provide "self-disclosure" and a "survey-mindedness"

during the 1950s and the early 1960s that have since become weaker. Although

no U.S. examples of serious consequence have yet emerged, Dalenius cites a

European example that suggests caution. According to Dalenius, a 1986 debate

over Stockholm University's Project Metropolitan, a longitudinal study of some

15,000 people born in 1953, may have doubled the nonresponse rate to Statistics

Sweden's labor force survey. The key issue was the accumulation and linkage,

from several administrative and statistical sources, of highly sensitive data for

individuals, without their apparent
THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY54
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.knowledge. Although there was some notification of parents at the start of the

study, the subjects themselves were not contacted when they reached the age at

which they could make their own decisions (p. 5).
COGNITIVE RESEARCH
In recognition of the personal, and often sensitive, nature of the information
that surveys seek from individuals, federal statistical agencies have for many

years conducted a variety of survey experiments. More recently, they have

conducted cognitive and public opinion research. In the late 1970s, three major

studies of informed consent assurances were conducted with survey respondents.

In a paper prepared for the panel, Singer (1993) reviews these and other related

studies.The Bureau of Labor Statistics, Census Bureau, and the National Center for
Health Statistics have recently set up small units to conduct cognitive research.

Within a larger mandate of improving the design of questionnaires, the units have

addressed some issues related to confidentiality and data access. Specifically,

research studies have been conducted to gain a better understanding of how

survey respondents react to personal questions under differing confidentiality

pledges and informed consent and notification procedures. In addition, the

Internal Revenue Service has sought to elicit respondents' views on the sharing of

personal data among selected agencies.
Several public opinion surveys have also addressed privacy issues. For
example, a 1990 Louis Harris survey addressed the information practices of

business and government agencies (see Equifax Inc., 1990). The Internal Revenue

Service has sponsored a series of surveys on such topics as the use of information

from mandatory data sets (like income tax returns) for statistical purposes not

related to the purposes for which the data were collected (e.g., Internal Revenue

Service, 1984, 1987). We explore the impact of the various research activities in

Chapter 3.NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN RESEARCH ON
STATISTICAL DISCLOSURE LIMITATION
Various researchers in statistical agencies and in universities have developed
better theoretical frameworks for the construction of statistical disclosure

limitation techniques. New disclosure limitation techniques have been developed

for tabular data, public-use
THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY55
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.files of individual data, and data accessed from computer data bases. These

developments, which are explored in 
Chapter 6, are designed to make it possible
for statistical agencies to permit data access under conditions that protect

confidentiality and maintain the utility of the data for legitimate users.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCIES
In 
Chapter 1 we explored three guiding principles for federal statistical
agencies: democratic accountability, individual autonomy, and constitutional

empowerment. Each of these principles strongly relates to the responsibilities

agencies have to the public, data subjects and providers, data users, other

statistical agencies, and the custodians of administrative records regarding

confidentiality and data access.
RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE PUBLIC
The principle of democratic accountability highlights the responsibilities of
the federal statistical agencies to the public. On confidentiality and data access

issues, agencies should establish and maintain a reputation for trustworthy

stewardship of data. As an example, in a free enterprise economic system,

trustworthy stewardship ensures common availability of accurate economic

information. A statistical agency should have sufficient independence to be

insulated from political interference so that it can provide facts to public policy

debates, fairly and impartially. It should also respond promptly, efficiently, and

effectively to data needs in areas that are priorities on the public agenda. In

particular, it should provide data needed to evaluate the results of government

activity or lack of activity. Further, it should maintain a sufficiently high public

profile that its work is known to the public.
RESPONSIBILITIES TO DATA PROVIDERS AND DATA
SUBJECTSStatistical agencies have responsibilities to data providers and data subjects
that are congruous with the principle of individual autonomy. They should

observe fair statistical information practices. Those practices include (1)

protection of confidentiality, (2) nondisclosure of identifiable information for

administrative, regulatory, or enforcement purposes, (3) use of informed consent

in voluntary surveys, and (4) notification of the conditions of participation
THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY56
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in mandatory surveys. History suggests that statistical agencies should anticipate

and be prepared to contend with requests by government, the courts, and citizens

for individually identifiable data for nonstatistical purposes. Yet, some federal

statistical agencies lack the legislative protection they need to ensure the

confidentiality they promise. Additionally, congruous with the principle of

constitutional empowerment, statistical agencies should respect the willingness of

data providers to contribute to society by fairly representing the information they

provide and by making it available for appropriate uses (National Research

Council, 1992b:5).In the United States, beyond the decennial census, an individual's
cooperation with federal surveys is largely voluntary. Cooperation involves a

willingness to provide data and a good-faith effort to provide accurate data.

Cooperation is dependent on data providers sensing the value of providing

accurate data, having the time to respond, and believing that cooperation will not

harm them. These perceptions may be influenced by the particular assurances

they receive from the agency collecting the data (see Boruch and Cecil, 1979;

National Research Council, 1979; Singer, 1978, 1979; and Singer et al., 1990).
The panel believes that government has different ethical responsibilities to
data providers who are individuals or households versus data providers that are

organizations. This view derives from the fundamental role of the individual in

society, so that what rights organizations derive come from the individuals they

represent and to whom they are accountable. A number of questions about

appropriate confidentiality and data access policies for organizations cannot be

answered by immediate extrapolation from policies for individuals. What

confidentiality protection should organizations enjoy? Should tax-exempt

institutions, for example, merit less protection than privately held firms? For

establishments, is the basic concern access to proprietary and financial data by

competitors and regulatory agencies?
In exercising their responsibilities, federal statistical agencies need to be
confident that users of their data will not act irresponsibly toward the data

providers. Thus, they should subject users seeking access to mechanisms that

ensure their accountability about confidentiality. They might well make users

bear the liability for violation of confidentiality requirements. If data providers

can demonstrate harm resulting from such violations, they should have accessible

legal remedies.THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY57
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESPONSIBILITIES TO DATA USERS
In accord with the principle of constitutional empowerment, statistical
agencies have responsibilities to a wide range of data users. They should strive to

maximize the delivery of timely, accurate, and complete information, subject to

constraints on confidentiality and budget.RESPONSIBILITIES TO OTHER STATISTICAL
AGENCIESSharing of data with other statistical agencies can enhance efficiency and the
quality of information that is available for research and policy purposes. Data

sharing is consistent with the principles of democratic accountability and

constitutional empowerment. In developing policies for data sharing there is an

insistent tension with the principle of individual autonomy, and agencies must be

mindful of the expectations that data providers have of the uses to which their

data might be put. Additionally, as users of data collected by others, statistical

agencies are obligated to use those data responsibly. This issue is difficult

because different agencies operate under different legislative authority to protect

the confidentiality of their data. Thus, an agency with strong confidentiality

protection cannot be expected to be forthcoming with data to an agency that lacks
such confidentiality protection.
RESPONSIBILITIES TO CUSTODIANS OF
ADMINISTRATIVE RECORDS
In using administrative records, statistical agencies have an obligation to
maintain confidentiality. Further, based on the notion that personal records should

be accurate and complete, agencies using such records ought to provide feedback

that can improve the quality of administrative data bases.
NOTES1. This discussion of statistical use of tax records is based on Wilson and Smith (1983).

2. Duncan and Shelton (1978) provide a detailed account of the historical development of the federal

statistical system from 1926 to 1976. Duncan and Shelton (1992) provide commentary on some

developments in the federal statistical system from 1977 to 1992.

3. These groups include the American Statistical Association Ad Hoc Committee on Privacy and

Confidentiality (1977), Commission on

THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY58
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Federal Paperwork (1977a, b), Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology (various Statistical

Policy Working Papers, especially number 2, which was prepared by the Subcommittee on

Disclosure-Avoidance Techniques, 1978), Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards (1978),

President's Commission on Federal Statistics (1971), President's Reorganization Project for the

Federal Statistical System (1981), and Privacy Protection Study Commission (1977a, b, c).

THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY59
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE FRAMEWORK OF STUDY60
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Data Subjects
The principle of informed consent is, in essence, an expression of 
 belief in the need for
truthful and respectful exchanges between 
 statisticians and human subjects.
International Statistical Institute, 1986
''Telling the truth," therefore, is not solely a matter of moral 
 character; it is also a matter
of correct appreciation of real situations 
 and of serious reflection upon them.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer, 1965
The proposition that confidentiality can be protected by entirely 
 prohibiting interagency
transfers of identifiable data unless explicit 
 consent is obtained would eliminate many
valuable studies.
Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards, 1978
INTRODUCTIONGovernment statistical programs cannot function without the cooperation of
data subjects and data providers. Experience in several Western European

countries during the past two decades has shown clearly that even a mandatory

census of population is dependent on the willingness of most people to respond

and, to the best of their ability, provide accurate information (Butz, 1985a). Even

when statistics are produced from administrative records, such as tax returns, an

aroused public, through its elected representatives and advocacy groups, may

block those statistical uses of the records that they consider objectionable.
Statistical agencies have legal and ethical responsibilities toward the data
subjects and data providers who are the sources of data used in their statistical

programs. It is sometimes difficult for statistical agencies to decide just what

constitutes ethical treatment
DATA SUBJECTS61
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of data subjects and data providers, however. Legislation, especially the Privacy

Act of 1974, sets some minimum requirements. Beyond that, much depends on

the circumstances under which data are obtained from providers. When data are

collected directly for statistical purposes, appropriate rules or guidelines may

differ between mandatory censuses and surveys and those for which response is

voluntary. And the method of data collection
Štelephone, face-to-face interview,
or mail questionnaire
Šinfluences how the conditions of participation in a census
or survey are communicated to respondents.
Secondary uses of administrative records for statistical purposes raise
additional questions. How much should data providers, for example filers of tax

returns, be told about statistical uses of their data and how much control should

they have over such uses? Should they be notified of plans to use administrative

records for research not directly related to the program for which the records are

maintained and perhaps even given a chance to deny the use of their information

for such purposes?There are some important distinctions between individuals and organizations
as data subjects, and their concerns are likely to be quite different, as is the

legislation that governs the collection and use of information about them. Within

the broad category of organizations, for example, there is great diversity.

Reynolds (1993) distinguishes units of government, nonprofit organizations,

businesses, and voluntary organizations, such as political parties and religious

bodies. This chapter focuses mainly on individuals as data subjects and

providers. However, many of the considerations that apply to relationships

between statistical agencies and data providers apply equally to individuals and

organizations.This chapter explores the relationships of federal statistical agencies with
data subjects and providers. How do the former communicate with the latter? How

effective is the communication process? How can it be improved? In the section

that follows, we examine direct communication between agencies and individual

data subjects or providers through the use of informed consent and notification

procedures. We also examine issues related to statistical uses of data sets based

on information that individuals are obliged to provide to the government in order

to obtain benefits or comply with legal requirements.
Next, we review research relevant to the processes of communication
between statistical agencies and their data providers. Some experimental research

studies have explored the effects of variation
DATA SUBJECTS62
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in informed consent procedures. Recently, cognitive research techniques have

been used in laboratory settings to study respondent understanding of informed

consent statements. In addition, a few public opinion surveys have explored

people's attitudes about various uses of the data that are collected from them by

the government for statistical and other purposes.
Finally, we examine the public information and educational activities of
statistical agencies that focus on privacy and confidentiality issues. Such

activities are directed at the general public and at organizations that attempt to

represent the interests of data subjects and data providers.
INFORMED CONSENT AND NOTIFICATION
Ethics and law demand that data providers be told about the conditions
under which they are asked to supply information that will be used for statistical

and research purposes. If participation is voluntary, data collectors must let data

providers know this and give them enough information to make an informed

decision about whether to provide the information requested.
Throughout this report we make a distinction between 
informed consent andnotification. The former term is appropriate only when data providers have a
clear choice and will not be subject to penalties for failure to participate. The term

notification is more appropriate for the decennial census of population, for which
participation is mandatory, and for statistical and research uses of administrative

records, such as tax returns or applications for welfare benefits, where failure to

provide information needed for administrative purposes may expose individuals

to penalties or lead to denial of benefits to which they would otherwise be

entitled.HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF INFORMED
CONSENT AND NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES
Clinical experiments with human subjects provided the setting for much of
the early development of informed consent procedures. Reynolds (1993) cites

four criteria that were found to be necessary for active informed consent: (1) a

rational adult is making the decision, (2) full information is provided, (3) the

decision is obtained without coercion, and (4) the subject is aware of the

consequences. Some of these criteria might be regarded as less critical in

statistical surveys. Yet, as Mugge (1993:346) points out
DATA SUBJECTS63
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in a paper prepared for the panel, "Even in the most innocuous such survey a

subject may suffer inconvenience, time loss, embarrassment, or psychological

distress in giving an interview, and one may also suffer harm through the

disclosure, the misuse, or even the planned use of the data to be provided."

The Privacy Act of 1974
Prior to the passage of the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93
Œ579), there were no
general standards for informed consent and notification procedures in federally

sponsored data collection activities. The information given to data providers

varied widely from agency to agency. The Privacy Act, under the general heading

"Agency Requirements" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552 (a)(e)(3)), required that each
person asked to supply information be informed of the following:
   the authority under which the information is requested,
   whether provision of the information is mandatory or voluntary,
   the principal purposes for which the information is intended to be used,
   the "routine uses" that may be made of the information (routine uses
generally involve disclosure of individually identifiable information to

other agencies or organizations and must be described in a record

systems notice published in the 
Federal Register), and
   the effects on the person, if any, of not providing all or any part of the
requested information.
These requirements led to a much greater degree of uniformity in the
informed consent and notification procedures used by federal statistical agencies.

Legally, the Privacy Act requirements apply only to collection of data from

individuals, but statistical agencies have also applied them, for the most part, to

the collection of data from organizations. From 1974 on, agencies began to pay

closer attention to the content of their statements to data providers and, in many

instances, gave them more information than they did prior to the passage of the

Privacy Act.The process of improvement was evolutionary rather than immediate,
however. It would not be difficult to find some examples of informed consent and

notification statements used since 1974 that were incomplete or possibly

misleading or that failed to inform data providers of important potential statistical

uses of the data, such as the release of public-use microdata sets (see,
DATA SUBJECTS64
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.e.g., Boruch and Kehr, 1983). However, Mugge's (1993) recent review of selected

consent and notification procedures, conducted for the panel, found that federal

statistical agencies were doing a good job of complying with the requirements of

the Privacy Act (see below).

Professional Association Guidelines
The Privacy Act requirements were written in broad terms and did not
answer all possible questions about what information should be included in

informed consent and notification statements and how the information should be

communicated to data providers in different kinds of data collections. Since the

passage of the act, the American Statistical Association (ASA) and the

International Statistical Institute (ISI) have examined some of the issues and have

developed recommendations and guidelines.
The ASA's Ad Hoc Committee on Privacy and Confidentiality issued a
report with numerous recommendations in 1977. The committee did not make a

sharp distinction between informed consent and notification, but it did explore the

question of what people should be told about planned and potential statistical and

research uses of information supplied initially for administrative purposes. A

particularly controversial question for the committee was whether data providers

in voluntary surveys should be given specific information about planned linkages

of their data with data from other sources, such as income tax returns. According

to the committee's report (American Statistical Association, 1977:73), a majority

of the members believed that was not necessary:
In informing respondents of the uses of the data, it is sufficient to state that the
data will be used for statistical purposes only, if such is the case. It is neither

feasible nor necessary to spell out the possibly manifold ways, some of which

may not be known in advance, in which the statistics may be employed.
However, three members of the committee, including the chair, disagreed
with this finding. They believed that data subjects should be given specific

information about all linkages, whether planned at the time of data collection or

subsequently.For surveys from which public-use microdata sets were to be released, the
committee suggested a statement of purpose such as the following: "The data will

be used only for statistical purposes, in which individual reports will not be

identifiable." As
DATA SUBJECTS65
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Jabine (1986) subsequently pointed out, however, such absolute statements might

not be justified because there are no statistical disclosure limitation techniques

that could guarantee zero risk of disclosure.
In 1983, the ASA's Ad Hoc Committee on Professional Ethics published on a
trial basis its 
Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice
, which were formallyadopted by the ASA Board in December 1988 (see American Statistical

Association, 1983, 1989; see also Ellenberg, 1983). Two of the guidelines are

directly relevant to informed consent in "collecting data for a statistical inquiry."

The committee said that the data collectors should (American Statistical

Association, 1989:24)
2.B.inform each potential respondent about the general nature and sponsorship of

the inquiry, and the intended uses of the data;
2.C.establish their intentions, where pertinent, to protect the confidentiality of

information collected from respondents; strive to ensure that these intentions

realistically reflect their ability to do so; and clearly state pledges of

confidentiality and their limitations to the respondents.
The committee's ethical guidelines were aimed at statistical inquiries. The
committee did not explore the question of notification about planned or possible

statistical and research uses of information collected initially for administrative

purposes.At the international level, a 
Declaration on Professional Ethics
 was adoptedby the International Statistical Institute in August 1985 and published in 1986.

Section 4 of the declaration, "Obligations to subjects," is considerably more

detailed than the guidelines of the two ASA committees with respect to the

content of informed consent statements. Noting that "no universal rules can be

framed" (p. 235), the declaration suggests that data providers not be overwhelmed

with unwanted and incomprehensible details. On the other hand, it states

unequivocally that "information that would be likely to affect a subject's

willingness to participate should not be deliberately withheld'' (p. 235). The

declaration lists 12 topics that might be included in an informed consent

statement and says that "in selecting from this list, the statistician should consider

not only those items that he or she regards as material, but those which the

potential subject is likely to regard as such" (p. 236).
Other aspects of the treatment of informed consent and notification in the
ISI declaration are of special interest. First, it recognizes
DATA SUBJECTS66
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the difference between mandatory and voluntary data collections, saying that

"statisticians should attempt to ensure that subjects appreciate the purpose of a

statistical inquiry, even when the subject's participation is required by law" (p.

236). Second, the declaration approaches the question of statistical uses of

administrative data from an unusual perspective, that of minimizing intrusions on

data providers:One way of avoiding inconvenience to potential subjects is to make more use
of available data instead of embarking on a new inquiry. For instance, by making

greater statistical use of administrative records, or by linking records,

information about society may be produced that would otherwise have to be

collected afresh. Although some subjects may have objections to the data's being

used for a different purpose from that intended, they would not be adversely

affected by such uses provided that their identities are protected and that the

purpose is statistical, not administrative (p. 235).
The declaration also states that the guidelines are not meant to be limited to
persons. A footnote to Section 4 (p. 234) says, "This section of the declaration

refers to human subjects, including individuals, households and corporate
entities."
Matching Survey and Administrative Data
The practice of matching survey and administrative records for the same
individuals has become increasingly common over the past three decades. Such

linkages are performed for statistical purposes, most commonly to enhance a

survey data base with additional information for the same persons (for an

example, see the description of the 1973 Exact Match Study in 
Chapter 6).Advances in computer power, combined with widespread use of Social Security

numbers as personal identifiers by units of government at all levels, have

increased the economic and technical feasibility of matching individual records

from different sources.
During this same period, the trend has been toward the inclusion of more
explicit information about planned linkages in informed consent or notification

statements. If Social Security numbers are requested in survey interviews, it

becomes a virtual necessity, regardless of any legal or ethical imperatives, to tell

data providers how they will be used. Some survey respondents will surely want

to know why the numbers are needed.
DATA SUBJECTS67
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WaiversSometimes a statistical agency may want to use data gathered for statistical
purposes in ways that are not ordinarily permitted under their statutes or policies.

Such uses may or may not be contemplated when the data are obtained from data

providers. If the uses are known at the time, the permission of data providers can

be requested as part of the informed consent procedures. If they are not known

when the data are being collected and the informed consent statement does not

provide for unanticipated research use of the data, some kind of recontact may be

necessary later. We use the term 
waiver for this process because it involves
asking data providers to waive confidentiality or data access provisions that

would normally apply to their data.
In some instances, confidentiality statutes have been interpreted to deny data
providers the right to waive the relevant provisions. We provide one example

here that relates to data for persons. This example was provided in one of the case

study workshops (see Appendix A) that were organized by the Committee onNational Statistics and the Social Science Research Council to provide

background information for the panel.
The Longitudinal Retirement History Survey (LRHS) was conducted for the
Social Security Administration by the Census Bureau, under the authority of Title

13 of the U.S. Code, using a sampling frame based partly on data from the 1960

decennial census. From 1969 to 1979, interviews were conducted at two-year

intervals with a sample of persons who had been close to retirement age at the

time the survey started. Social Security earnings data from administrative sources

were added to the data base containing the survey information for persons in the

sample. In addition to published reports and analyses, a public-use microdata file

containing matched survey and administrative record data was released.
In the late 1980s, the National Institute on Aging (NIA) wanted to fund a
follow-up study in which surviving members of the LRHS sample would be

interviewed one or more times. Additional administrative record data for them,

from various sources, would be added to the data set; for those who had died, the

year and cause of death would be determined by means of a match to the

National Death Index.The NIA, however, was willing to fund the study only if the resulting linked
data files could be released to researchers working under NIA grants. Census

Bureau policies for release of
DATA SUBJECTS68
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.microdata, which had been revised subsequent to the initial survey, precluded

releases of such linked data sets on the basis of the belief that there was a

significant risk of reidentification of individuals by the agency holding the

administrative data. A possible alternative was for the Census Bureau to approach

the persons in the sample to see if they would waive certain of the protections

provided to their data under Title 13. Such waivers would make it possible to

conduct the follow-up survey under a different authority (e.g., the authority given

the Commerce Department by Title 15 of the U.S. Code) that would allow the

resulting linked data set to be released to researchers.
The Census Bureau conducted a test of waiver procedures with a cohort of
the National Longitudinal Survey sample (this group of persons had also been

surveyed under the authority of Title 13). The test revealed that about two-thirds

of the persons approached were willing to sign a waiver. Subsequent to the test,

however, Office of Management and Budget (OMB) lawyers ruled that Census

Bureau employees could not release such data, even though waivers had been

obtained. Consequently, the NIA abandoned its effort to fund follow-up

interviews and to add information from administrative record sources (for

additional details, see Jabine, 1993a). The agency subsequently funded a new

longitudinal study, the Health and Retirement Study, which is being conducted

under arrangements that will permit the release of microdata files containing

linked survey and administrative record data for persons who have provided

written consent. However, an opportunity to enhance the utility of an existing and

uniquely valuable data set had to be forgone.
CURRENT POLICIES AND PRACTICES
Mugge (1993) reviewed the informed consent or notification statements for
15 data collection programs of federal statistical agencies, plus the statement

included with individual income tax forms. He also reviewed three examples of

informed consent procedures used in connection with the collection of Social

Security numbers in statistical surveys. He checked each statement for

conformance with Privacy Act requirements and the inclusion of a confidentiality

pledge. He also reviewed the formats used and other features of interest.
Mugge concluded that the statements for the 15 statistical surveys were
scrupulous in their compliance with Privacy Act requirements, when applicable.

Most of the requirements were
DATA SUBJECTS69
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.also met for economic surveys in the group, even though not called for by the

act. However, he questioned the adequacy of the statement in the tax return

package, which tells filers that their information will be disclosed to other federal

agencies and to state and local governments "as provided by law." The statement

contains little information about the kinds of disclosures that will be made, and it

makes no specific mention of statistical uses or linkages with other records.
When a government agency asks individuals to disclose their Social Security
number, the Privacy Act requires that the agency "inform that individual whether

that disclosure is mandatory or voluntary, by what statutory or other authority

such number is solicited, and what uses will be made of it" (P.L. 93
Œ579, Sec. 7
(b)). Mugge found that these requirements were followed, in different ways, in

each of the three examples he reviewed. However, two of the three questionnaires

did not have provisions for distinguishing whether the absence of a Social

Security number meant that the respondent refused to provide it, the respondent

did not know it, or the data subject did not have one. Lacking this information, an

agency that wanted to follow a policy of not linking data when the number was

refused (recommended in Jabine, 1986) would be able to attempt linkages only

for those cases for which Social Security numbers were reported by respondents.
Finally, Mugge found that notification statements were delivered to survey
respondents in several different ways, including a transmittal letter, a separate

Privacy Act notice, a question-and-answer sheet, a brochure describing various

aspects of the survey, separate instructions for completing the questionnaire, and

on the face sheet of the questionnaire itself. In several instances a multitiered

approach was used; that is, the information was supplied at more that one stage,

and a telephone number, frequently toll-free, was provided for use by respondents

wanting more information.
Special techniques have been developed for telephone surveys, because it is
not always possible to meet the Privacy Act requirement that the notification

statement be on the questionnaire form or on a paper to be retained by the data

provider. Lawyers at the Department of Health and Human Services have

approved the procedure developed by the National Center for Health Statistics of

having telephone interviewers sign a statement that they have read the full

notification statement to the respondent or, for computer-assisted surveys, enter

information to that effect in the computer.
Evaluation studies, especially those in which census or survey
DATA SUBJECTS70
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.responses are matched with administrative records and vice versa, pose special

problems for the use of informed consent procedures. For example, what

information about linkages should be given to participants in ethnographic

studies designed to investigate factors associated with undercoverage in the

census of population or to respondents to a postcensal household survey of

census response behavior? What about a survey of voting behavior (voting tends

to be overreported in household interviews) in which the survey responses are to

be matched with voting records or the sample of respondents has been selected

from voting records? The dilemma in such instances is that full disclosure of the

purposes and procedures of the study may prejudice the accuracy and utility of

the results. Social scientists have wrestled with such questions (see, e.g.,

Beauchamp et al., 1982:Pt. 3), but, insofar as we have been able to determine,

federal statistical agencies that undertake or sponsor such studies do not have any

generally accepted set of guidelines to refer to in developing their informed

consent procedures.MANDATORY DATA SETS: CONTROLLING
INFORMATION ABOUT ONESELF
We turn our attention now to one of the more difficult questions we faced, as
well as some of our predecessors: When individuals are required by law to

provide personal information to the government, to what degree should they be

allowed to control uses of that information for purposes other than the immediate

ones for which they were required to furnish it?
For voluntary surveys, maintaining control over one's own information is
fairly straightforward if the agency collecting the data provides accurate,

complete, and clear information about the voluntary nature of the survey and the

uses that will be made of the data. If appropriate informed consent procedures are

used and the agreed conditions of use are followed, data providers have full

control over the information they supply. Prospective data providers who do not

like the conditions associated with the survey may decline to participate. They

may sometimes be asked for their reasons, but they cannot be required to give

any.When provision of information is mandatory, however, data providers no
longer have full control over the uses that will be made of their information. For

most persons, the consequences of failing to file a tax return or refusing to

provide information needed to establish eligibility for Social Security benefits are

too unpleasant
DATA SUBJECTS71
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to consider. Failing to respond to the decennial census may be less likely to have

serious repercussions; nevertheless, there is a strong possibility of being subjected

to pressure from a census field supervisor and there is a small possibility of being

prosecuted.Even though society, through its legislators, has determined that reporting
for a particular purpose shall be mandatory, there is still the question of whether

individuals should have any control over uses of the same information about them

for other purposes. Our concern here focuses on cases in which those other uses

are for statistical or research purposes. The trade-offs we examine are between

individuals' interest in controlling use of their own information and the public

interest in obtaining information that can be used to improve public policy and

advance science and knowledge of the society.
The Privacy Act of 1974 included among its goals the following:
(b) The purpose of this Act is to provide certain safeguards for an individual
against an invasion of personal privacy by requiring Federal agencies, except as

otherwise provided by law, to 
–(2) permit an individual to prevent records pertaining to him obtained by such
agencies for a particular purpose from being used or made available for another

purpose without his consent;
–
(5) permit exemptions from the requirements with respect to records provided
in this Act only in those cases where there is an important public policy need for

such exemption as has been determined by specific statutory authority (P.L.

93Œ579).These general principles are clearly stated, but, as we explain in 
Chapter 5,their interpretation in specific instances is seldom obvious. By and large,

individuals do not have control over statistical uses of identifiable information

about themselves that they or others supply to agencies like the Internal Revenue

Service, the Social Security Administration, or the Health Care Financing

Administration (the operating agency for Medicare) for administrative purposes.

To the extent that statistical uses of administrative data are permitted by statutes

and regulations, the data subjects and providers are usually not asked for their

consent, and as noted above, in some instances they are not even given any

notification of such uses.
The issue of individuals' control over statistical and research uses of data
about themselves in administrative record systems was addressed explicitly in a

document titled 
A Framework for DATA SUBJECTS72
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Planning U.S. Federal Statistics for the 1980's, issued in 1978 by the Office of

Federal Statistical Policy and Standards (OFSPS). The preface to the document

stated that it was not a statement of official agency policies; rather, it was

"expected to serve as a background for decisions concerning individual

programs, so that these decisions can take place in the context of the entire

statistical effort of the Federal Government" (p. v).
The OFSPS document specifically rejected the proposition that individual
consent should be obtained for any interagency transfers of individually

identifiable administrative data for statistical and research purposes. "The price of

that approach 
– is great, leading to biased data, increased public expenditure,
and the failure or impossibility of some valuable statistical and research

studies" (p. 259). The following recommendation, which has not been

implemented, was made at the end of the chapter on "Confidentiality of

Statistical and Research Data":
4. Administrative data sets should be accessible to statisticians and
researchers in "protected enclaves" for some statistical uses unrelated to the

purposes of the original data collection (p. 281).
The concept of protected enclave used in the OFSPS document is closely
related to that of functional separation as we defined the latter in 
Chapter 1. Thegoal in either instance is to prohibit nonstatistical uses of data obtained for

statistical purposes, regardless of their source.
With respect to notification, OFSPS recommended the use of "a statement at
the time of data collection about the 
general character of potential statistical
uses" (p. 281). It also recommended that the power to authorize interagency

transfers be lodged in a review agency such as OFSPS (the equivalent at that time

of the OMB Statistical Policy Office) and that the review agency use a clear set

of criteria to determine when such transfers were sufficiently in the public

interest to justify them.
As we explained earlier in this section in connection with waivers, lack of
informational control can work in both directions. Respondents to the

Longitudinal Retirement History Survey were, in the final outcome, not allowed

to waive any of the confidentiality protections that were given to their

information as required by the Census Bureau's Title 13 authority.
What balance should be struck between the data needs of society and
individuals' control over information about themselves that they are required to

provide to government agencies? The
DATA SUBJECTS73
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.following factors should be considered in searching for a reasonable answer:
   The degree to which statistical and research uses are related to 
 theadministrative purpose for which the data were obtained
: One wouldexpect that very few people who receive Social Security benefits would

have any objection to their covered earnings and benefit data being used

to conduct statistical analyses of the characteristics of beneficiaries and

the relationships between earnings and benefits for different age cohorts

and other population subgroups. Given that society has agreed to have

various programs of benefits, taxation, licensing, and regulation, most

people would agree that good information is needed to monitor and

improve those programs.
   The potential benefits to society of the proposed statistical and 
 researchuses: It can be argued that individuals' control over uses of their
information should extend to those activities that offer little promise of

important benefits to society, even if such uses can bring no harm to the

data subjects.   The effectiveness of the confidentiality protections associated 
 with thestatistical and research uses of the data
: Do the intended uses require
transfer of individually identifiable records to other agencies,

organizations, or individuals? Do they require matching with data for the

same persons from other data sets? If so, will the confidentiality of the

records be adequately protected?
   The definition of the population whose data are wanted for statistical 
and research uses
: Should a distinction be made between records
generated for programs with wide general coverage and records for

needs-tested entitlement programs and other programs for specially

defined groups? What about criminal records?
   The feasibility and cost of using informed consent procedures to 
 coversome types of statistical and research uses of administrative 
 records:Some records, like Social Security files containing date of birth, sex, and

until recently, race-ethnicity, are being created at the time of the data

subject's birth, so that some kind of proxy procedure would be necessary

to obtain consent to any uses deemed to require it. Would such consent

remain in force during the individual's lifetime or would it be revocable?

What would be the additional cost to custodians of such records of

labeling each record according to its current availability status for

voluntary research and statistical uses?
   Alternative sources of data
: If the records from mandatory data sets
cannot be used, are there other feasible methods for
DATA SUBJECTS74
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.acquiring the data needed for statistical analyses and research? Will it be

necessary to ask some of the same individuals for information they have

already supplied for other purposes?
Whatever general principles may be developed for statistical and research
uses of mandatory data sets, their application in specific instances will require the

establishment of an orderly and fair process that takes into account the interests

of data subjects, users, and custodians. Judgments will be necessary concerning

the importance to society of the proposed uses, whether they are relevant to the

program for which the data were collected, the adequacy of confidentiality

protections, and whether there are reasonable alternative methods for obtaining

the information. In 
Chapter 8 we discuss alternative mechanisms for making suchjudgments.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 3.1
 Federal statistical agencies should follow a flexible,
multilayered approach to informing data providers of the conditions under which

they are being asked to provide information.
Basic information should be given to all data providers. Those who want
more information should have the opportunity to obtain it directly from

interviewers or by other means, such as supplementary written statements or

toll-free telephone inquiries to the agency. The goal should be to give each data

provider as much information as is necessary to make his or her consent as

informed as he or she wishes it to be.
Recommendation 3.2
 Basic information given to all data providers requested
to participate in statistical surveys and censuses should include
(a) for data on persons, information needed to meet all Privacy Act
requirements. Similar information is recommended for data on

organizations, except that the requirement to inform providers about

routine uses (as defined by the Privacy Act) is not applicable.
(b) a clear statement of the expected burden on the data providers,
including the expected time required to provide the data (a

requirement of the Office of Management and Budget) and, if

applicable, the nature of sensitive topics
DATA SUBJECTS75
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.included in the survey and plans for possible follow-up interviews of

some or all respondents.
(c) no false or misleading statements. For example, a statement that
implies zero risk of disclosure is seldom, if ever, appropriate.
(d) information about any planned or potential 
nonstatistical uses of the
information to be provided. There should be a clear statement of the

level of confidentiality protection that can be legally ensured.
(e) information about any planned or anticipated record linkages for
statistical or research purposes. For persons, this notification will

usually occur in conjunction with a request for the data subject's

Social Security number.
(f) a statement to cover the possibility of unanticipated future uses of the
data for statistical or research purposes.
(g) information about the length of time for which the information will
be retained in identifiable form.
To meet the requirements of item (b), agencies must determine which of the
data they plan to collect may be considered sensitive by data providers. As the

authors of Statistical Policy Working Paper 2 concluded, there are no general

rules for establishing whether data are sensitive. That decision involves

community standards and generally must be made on a case-by-case basis.

However, financial data
Šlike income and assets
Šand data on illegal or ethically
questionable behavior are typically understood to be sensitive.
In preparing an informed consent or notification statement, a statistical
agency should carefully review the purposes and design of the data collection

activity, especially when multiple contacts with respondents or linkages with data

from other sources are planned or may prove to be desirable. Agencies should

seek expert opinions as to what kinds of data are currently or may in the future be

relevant to the goals of the statistical or research activity. Even experts, however,

cannot foresee all future needs. Item (f) is intended to allow for unanticipated

statistical and research uses of the data that are not inconsistent with provisions

of the initial statements to data providers.
With regard to item (g), some statistical records, such as those from the
decennial censuses of population, may be retained permanently in identifiable

form. The subject of archiving of statistical records is covered in 
Chapter 6.In general, similar information about statistical uses should
DATA SUBJECTS76
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.be given to persons or organizations that are asked to provide information about

themselves for compliance or programmatic (administrative purposes, whenever

there is a possibility that their data will also be used for statistical purposes. In

such instances, it is likely that the major concern of data providers will be with

the nonstatistical uses of their data, so that the basic notification statement should

emphasize that aspect, rather than statistical uses. However, full information on

statistical uses should be available to data providers who want it.
As discussed earlier in this section, the panel believes that there have been
instances in which unnecessarily strict interpretation of some confidentiality

statutes has precluded the use of waiver procedures to enhance the utility of

policy-relevant data sets.
Recommendation 3.3
 In keeping with the objective of giving individuals
control over their own information whenever societal needs do not clearly take

precedence, data subjects or data providers should be allowed to waive certain

aspects of confidentiality protection that would usually be accorded to the

information they provide. Agencies should take special care to ensure that any

such waivers are based on fully informed consent.
The panel considered a broad set of options with respect to individuals'
control over statistical and research uses of data they are 
required to provide foradministrative purposes. At one end of the spectrum, individual data subjects

would have total control
Šthey would be allowed to opt out of any or all such
uses. At the other end, they would have no control
Šany uses permitted by law
and considered appropriate by the custodians of the data would be acceptable.

There are many intermediate options under which data subjects would retain

control over some uses but not others. Also at issue were the questions of how

much information should be given to data subjects about such uses and, if they

are to be given the opportunity to opt out in some instances, whether the

mechanism should require affirmative informed consent or simply notification of

their right to opt out (passive consent).
Not surprisingly in view of past experience, the panel was unable to reach a
consensus on this issue. Where individuals came out depended largely on their

personal views about how best to resolve the conflicts among the requirements of

the three fundamental principles that were presented in 
Chapter 1
. In this
DATA SUBJECTS77
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.instance, the trade-offs are between democratic accountability and constitutional

empowerment on one side and individual autonomy on the other.
One proposed solution was supported by most of the panel members, but
three members preferred different solutions, two in the direction of greater

democratic accountability and constitutional empowerment and one in the

direction of greater individual autonomy. We present first the majority position

and an explanation of its features, followed by the views of those who did not

fully agree with it.
The majority view was that data subjects should be allowed control over
research and statistical uses of data they are required to provide for administrative

purposes when
1. they are required to provide the data as a condition for participation
in needs-tested entitlement programs that provide benefits to special

population groups, 
and2. the proposed uses are not clearly related to the mission and function
of the agency or system that collected the data.
This position represents an attempt to reconcile the rights of individuals to
control uses of their data with the rights of society to obtain the information it

needs for efficient design and management of programs and policies designed to

promote the general welfare. The position is deliberately stated in broad terms,

and those who supported it did not try to spell out the implications of its

provisions in every circumstance. Programs like Food Stamps and Aid to

Families with Dependent Children would clearly be covered by provision 1;

Medicare and Social Security retirement benefits would not. Provision 2 would

not necessarily give data subjects control over all transfers of identifiable

information about them to other agencies. It would apply only if the proposed use

of the data by the recipient was not clearly related to the purpose for which they

were collected.Whenever provisions 1 and 2 both apply, those who supported this position
believe that data subjects should be clearly informed of their option to withhold

their data from certain kinds of statistical and research uses and that no pressure

should be applied to dissuade them from exercising that option. They believe that a

passive consent mechanism, which assumes consent except for data providers

who, when given the opportunity, express their desire not to have their

information used for such purposes, would be adequate to protect the interests of

individuals.One consideration that led to this proposed solution was the
DATA SUBJECTS78
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.absence of any clear mechanism, independent of the agencies directly involved

and representing the interests of data subjects and data users, for reaching

decisions on what kinds of statistical and research uses of mandatory data sets are

appropriate and under what circumstances data subjects should be allowed to opt

out. In 
Chapter 8, where we discuss the management of confidentiality and data
access functions in the federal statistical system, the panel expresses its support

(Recommendation 8.5) for the creation of an independent federal advisory body

that would be responsible for promoting enhanced protection for all federal data

about persons and responsible data dissemination for statistical and research

purposes. If such a body is created, it could play a very constructive role in

decision making on specific uses of mandatory data sets.
Two panel members preferred a different method of treating proposed
statistical and research uses not directly related to the mission and function of the

agency or system that collected the mandatory data. They believe that all such

uses, regardless of the nature of the population groups affected, should require

review and approval by an organization or institution other than the data

collecting agency and the agency, organization, or individual desiring to use the

data. For approval of a proposed use, three conditions would have to be met:
1. The intended use is to provide evidence pertinent to a general social
concern, scientific discovery, or significant public policy issue.
2. The intended analyses cannot be demonstrated to be incapable of
providing such evidence.
3. The intended analyses would not compromise the dignity and
personal freedom of the data providers.
Notification statements to data providers would include information about
any such uses approved prior to the time of data collection. They might also

mention the possibility that additional statistical and research uses might be

approved and would describe the process that would govern such determinations.
One panel member expressed a preference for more restrictive conditions on
statistical and research uses of mandatory data sets than those provided in the

majority position. This member believes that persons providing data for

administrative purposes should have control over 
all such uses that are not clearly
relevant to the program for which the data were collected, without regard to the

kind of population covered by the program. In effect, the first
DATA SUBJECTS79
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.condition attached to the majority proposal would be eliminated. A ''passive

waiver" procedure would be acceptable, that is, the data could be shared if the

data provider did not explicitly forbid it after being notified of the proposed uses.

This position was taken based on the member's subjective weighing of the value

of individual autonomy and control over information about oneself compared

with the value of more nearly complete and economically obtained data.
RESEARCH RELATED TO CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA
ACCESSCONTROLLED SURVEY EXPERIMENTS
Three major U.S. studies have conducted included experiments on informed
consent procedures for a statistical survey of the general population. In the late

1970s, the Committee on National Statistics (National Research Council, 1979)

conducted a face-to-face survey in which the confidentiality assurances given to

respondents were systematically varied. Five separate versions were studied: (1)

assurance of confidentiality in perpetuity, (2) assurance of confidentiality for 75

years, (3) assurance of confidentiality for 25 years, (4) no mention of

confidentiality, and (5) a statement that replies could be given to other agencies
and the public. Participation rates decreased monotonically with decreasing

assurances of confidentiality, but the observed spread among the five versions

was less than three percentage points. Further, two-thirds of the refusals came

from persons who declined to participate before the interviewer had a chance to

read the introduction to the survey. For those who did participate, nonresponse

and underreporting to the income question, which was the most sensitive one

included in the survey, were greater when weaker confidentiality assurances were

given.In an experiment that was also part of a face-to-face survey, Singer (1978)
investigated the effects of more versus less information about sensitive subject

matter in survey introductions, varying assurances of confidentiality, and

requiring or not requiring a signature to document consent. Varying the

information given to respondents about the content of the survey had no

observable effect on participation rates or the quality of survey response, nor

were participation rates affected by varying assurances of confidentiality.

However, response rates to sensitive questions were higher for those who had

been given absolute assurances of confidentiality.
DATA SUBJECTS80
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Asking respondents to sign a consent form would have caused a significant
drop in participation rates for the survey if it had been required in order to

conduct the interview. However, signing the consent form was not required and

most of the respondents who refused to sign were still willing to be interviewed.
In a telephone survey, Singer (1979) investigated the effects of variations in
information about survey content and the purpose of the study on participation

rates and response rates to individual questions. She found no significant

differences.Singer (1993) has prepared a comprehensive review of the above and other
related studies, including some conducted in Germany. The review, originally

prepared for the panel, includes some studies of passive consent procedures

whereby data subjects or providers are notified that some step will be taken (e.g.,

their children will be enrolled in a school-related research study) unless they

notify the researchers of their disapproval. Some of the studies, in addition to

varying treatments experimentally, asked participants directly about their

attitudes and perceptions on matters related to informed consent, privacy, and

confidentiality.The results of the various studies do not always agree but, taken in all, they
provide the basis for some tentative conclusions:
   Behavior does not necessarily mirror expressed concerns. Most persons,
when asked directly, thought that assurances of confidentiality would

make people more willing to answer questions, but experiments

embedded in surveys of the general public showed only small

differences in participation rates between those given strong assurances

and those given weak assurances or none at all. Moreover, some recent

experiments have shown that elaborate assurances of confidentiality can

reduce willingness to participate (Singer et al., 1990).
   When potential survey respondents are contacted without prior notice,
such as an advance mailing, most refusals to participate occur before the

interviewer has had a chance to explain the confidentiality protections

that will be given to survey responses.
   Requiring a signature to document consent significantly reduces survey
participation rates.
   To a point, verbal assurances of confidentiality appear to result in less
nonresponse and more accurate responses to questions on sensitive
topics, like income. In some instances, however, especially when the

assurances immediately preceded the sensitive question, there were more

refusals to answer.
DATA SUBJECTS81
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Studies involving technical means of ensuring confidentiality, such as
randomized responses, have sometimes yielded higher estimates of

sensitive behavior, but the lack of significant changes in some studies or

for some variables indicates that the conditions required for this to occur

are not clear.
   There is evidence that many people do not hear, understand, or
remember precisely what is said in the introduction to an interview

(Singer, 1979).COGNITIVE RESEARCH
The past decade has seen increasing recognition of the contributions that the
cognitive sciences can make to survey research (see, e.g., Tanur, 1992). Three

federal statistical agencies, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Census Bureau, and

the National Center for Health Statistics, have established small units to

undertake laboratory and field studies of the cognitive processes of respondents

who are asked to comprehend survey questions, retrieve relevant information

from memory, and make judgments about how to answer the questions. Most of

the research has been aimed at improving questions on specific topics. However,

the Behavioral Sciences Research Group at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, with

support from the Statistics of Income Division, Internal Revenue Service (IRS),

has recently begun a program of research on how providers of personal data

understand and interpret words and phrases contained in informed consent and

notification statements (van Melis-Wright et al., 1992).
The research at the Bureau of Labor Statistics has two components. An
initial investigation will identify and evaluate people's perceptions of the

language, terms, and concepts that might be used in assurances of confidentiality.

The second phase will investigate the effect of various terms and concepts on

participation decisions in order to determine which of them may be effectively

and ethically used to promote participation and truthful answers in surveys. The

analyses will include terms and concepts related to data providers' willingness to

have the information they provide shared in identifiable form with another

organization.PUBLIC OPINION RESEARCH
Several U.S. public opinion surveys have addressed privacy questions, and a
few have been devoted entirely to such issues, notably a series of surveys

conducted by Louis Harris and Associates
DATA SUBJECTS82
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in recent years. However, these surveys have focused primarily on privacy and

confidentiality issues related to uses of information about individuals by the

private sector, and they provide only limited information on public attitudes

about government statistical activities. A 1990 survey in the series was sponsored

by Equifax Inc. (1990), a provider of consumer and business information

services. Most of the questions were about information practices of commercial

organizations and government agencies in general. One item asked respondents

about how much they trusted several different organizations, including the
Census Bureau, to collect information about them and treat it responsibly. The

proportion who had high or moderate trust in the Census Bureau (81 percent, with 2

percent not sure) was as large as that for any other organization and considerably

larger than most (e.g., 67 percent for the Internal Revenue Service, with 1 percent

not sure).
The Internal Revenue Service (1984, 1987) has sponsored several national
surveys of taxpayers to study their opinions and attitudes about IRS personnel,

programs, and activities. Some of the results are relevant to the questions

discussed earlier in this chapter concerning the use of information from

mandatory data sets (such as those based on income tax returns) for statistical

purposes not directly related to the purposes for which the information was

obtained. Most of the taxpayer opinion surveys, for example, included questions

about statistical and other nontax uses of information provided on tax returns. The

most recent survey, the 1990 Taxpayer Opinion Survey, included questions on

knowledge of tax laws and policies governing sharing of tax data, views on what

the provisions of those laws and policies 
should be, views on sharing tax data for
specified purposes, and the possible use of IRS and Social Security

Administration records in future population censuses.
The 1990 survey data (see 
Table 3.1) indicated that most taxpayers had
limited knowledge of the relevant laws and policies and had not read or thought

much about the sharing of tax data with other parts of the government.

Nevertheless, the majority said they had substantial interest in the subject. When

asked in general terms for their views about policies for sharing tax data, the

majority of respondents took a fairly restrictive view. For example, 64 percent

agreed strongly or agreed that the IRS should never release information about

people's income to other government agencies under any circumstances.

However, when respondents were subsequently asked about several kinds of

releases ofDATA SUBJECTS83
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tax data to particular agencies 
for specific purposes, their reactions were quitedifferent, as shown in 
Table 3.1. For example, when taxpayers were asked what
they thought about the use of certain kinds of administrative records in the

decennial census in order to reduce the cost of the census and the burden on

respondents, 70 percent favored the use of Social Security information on date of

birth and sex, and 61 percent favored the use of IRS information on place of

residence and income.
TABLE 3.1 Taxpayer Attitudes on Specific Releases of Tax Data

Agency and PurposeFavorOpposeNot SureThe Department of Justice
Šfor major criminal
investigations (such as drugs and organized crime)
77211
The Veterans Administration
Šfor determiningwhether veterans are eligible to receive benefits

because they are unable to work
70273
The Census Bureau
Šfor identifying where people
have moved in order to study population trends

(statistical use)65333
The Department of Agriculture
Što maintain an up-
to-date list of farms for crop and livestock surveys

(statistical use)59374
State governments
Šfor improving state collection
of taxes from businesses
56422
State governments
Šfor improving state collection
of taxes from individuals
44524
Members of CongressŠfor any use they consider
appropriate13843SOURCE: Tabulations from the 1990 Taxpayer Opinion Survey provided by the Research Division,

Internal Revenue Service.Data from the 1990 and earlier taxpayer opinion surveys should be used with
caution, for several reasons. First, the wording and format of the questions about

sharing tax information differed significantly from one survey to the next.

Second, the data reflect only the opinions of the member of each tax-filing family

(asDATA SUBJECTS84
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.defined for individual income tax purposes) considered to be most knowledgeable

about that family's tax-filing practices. Third, most respondents to the 1990

survey had little knowledge of laws and policies governing nontax uses of their

return information and had not given much thought to such matters. Subject to

these caveats, the survey results suggest that the majority of taxpayers support the

idea of sharing their tax information with other agencies for statistical purposes.

However, minorities of taxpayers, generally in the range of 15 to 20 percent, are

strongly opposed to such data sharing.
At the time this report was being prepared, the full IRS report and the
public-use data file from the 1990 Taxpayer Opinion Survey had not been

released. When these outputs become available, it will be possible to analyze how

the demographic and social characteristics of taxpayers are associated with their

attitudes toward statistical and other nontax uses of their tax return information.
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Statistical agencies need to "know their respondents." How do data
providers interpret concepts like privacy, confidentiality, disclosure, data sharing,

and statistical purposes? How well do they understand informed consent and

notification statements, and how are their decisions on survey participation

influenced by different formats and modes of presentation? What kinds of

information about themselves do they consider to be most sensitive? What do

they think about the linkage of their information from two or more sources? How

do their reactions vary by race-ethnic group, gender, and socio-economic status?
The research described in this section has begun to provide useful answers to
some of these questions. Such research should continue because it is not complete

and because public opinion about statistical data collection activities may vary

gradually over time as a result of changes in the technological, social, and

political environments in which public surveys are undertaken. Moreover, sudden

changes in the environment for conducting public surveys are possible in

response to highly publicized incidents involving improper disclosure and uses of

confidential personal data in connection with nonstatistical activities, either in the

public or private sector.
DATA SUBJECTS85
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendation 3.4
 Statistical agencies should undertake and support
continuing research, using the tools of cognitive and survey research, to monitor

the views of data providers and the general public on informed consent, response

burden, sensitivity of survey questions, data sharing for statistical purposes, and

related issues.PUBLIC INFORMATION ACTIVITIES OF STATISTICAL
AGENCIES AND ORGANIZATIONS
CURRENT PRACTICES
Statistical agencies explain their positions on confidentiality questions and
fair information practices to individual data providers through the use of informed

consent procedures and notification statements. They also attempt to

communicate their positions on such matters to the general public or to particular

groups and organizations through various kinds of public information activities.

The motivation for some of these activities is to enlist the support of the public

and various organizations for specific programs, such as the decennial census. In

other instances, public information activities develop as responses to specific

allegations or suggestions that data collected for statistical purposes are not being

kept confidential.
Following are some examples of constructive public information activities
that have come to the attention of the panel:
   The Bureau of the Census (1985) has developed a general-purpose
brochure, How the Census Bureau Keeps Your Information Strictly
Confidential , which succinctly describes the legal and physical security
protections that are provided for information collected by the Census

Bureau. The brochure cites favorable comments from several

newspapers and other sources about the confidentiality provided to

Census Bureau data.
   The Census Bureau discussed the application of statistical disclosure
limitation techniques (see discussion of these techniques in 
Chapter 6
) tosmall-area tabulations from the 1990 census with representatives of

several organizations, including the American Civil Liberties Union

(ACLU), to determine their views, as data users and privacy advocates.

In the discussions, the ACLU representatives had to balance their

privacy concerns against their interest in ensuring that minority groups

receive proper voting representation. In this instance, the latter concern

won out. It was
DATA SUBJECTS86
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.agreed that the exact counts of persons aged 18 and over by race or

ethnicity should be published and that the planned use of techniques to

reduce disclosure risks would be applied only to other variables.
   The American Statistical Association's (1991) Committee on Privacy and
Confidentiality has developed a brochure on 
Surveys and Privacy
 toanswer questions about privacy and confidentiality, clarify the

responsibilities of survey takers, describe a respondent's reasonable

expectations, and encourage survey response. In addition to survey

respondents and survey takers, the intended audience for the brochure

includes "the public, the media, and Congress." The committee obtained

funding from four statistical agencies to print and distribute a large

number of the brochures.
An example of unfavorable publicity requiring a response or clarification of
the Census Bureau's confidentiality policies is provided by the announcement,

early in 1990, by the Lotus Development Corporation and Equifax of plans to

market a CD-ROM product called Lotus Marketplace: Households. Prospective

purchasers were offered a data base containing information on 80 million U.S.

households, including names, address, gender, marital status, income, buying

preferences, and even "psychographic categories," such as "cautious young

couple" or "inner-city single.''
The sales brochure for Lotus Marketplace: Households mentioned the
Census Bureau as one of the product's important sources of data. A quick reading

of the brochure might have given the impression that household incomes were

being obtained directly from individual census returns (some press reports

conveyed this impression; see, e.g., Lewis, 1991). They were not. As was made

reasonably clear in the technical portion of the brochure, the household income

values were model-based estimates obtained by using small-area data from the

decennial census plus household size and other variables from other sources.

Nevertheless, the Census Bureau received some indignant inquiries as to why

individual census information was being made available for a commercial data

base.Because of strong objections about the privacy and confidentiality aspects of
this data base by many organizations and individuals, Lotus Marketplace:

Households was withdrawn from the market early in 1991. A particular objection

to the product was that the CD-ROM format would preclude the possibility of

corrections to individual data items. However, similar data bases in
DATA SUBJECTS87
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.other formats are being developed and sold. Small-area data from the decennial

census and geocoding systems developed and released by the Census Bureau are

likely to be used in many of these systems. Statistical agencies can expect more

questions to be raised about their relation to such commercial enterprises, and

they must face the possibility that objections to them might have a spill-over

effect on public willingness to participate in government surveys.
RECOMMENDATIONSThe panel believes that the risks of major or deliberate violations of privacy
or confidentiality are extremely low in the federal statistical system. The risks are

somewhat higher for federal administrative records, as illustrated by recent

revelations of sales of Social Security records to private investigators (see

Washington Post
, December 28, 1991:A1; 
Baltimore Sun
, February 29,1992:1A), and probably highest of all for private sector record systems, as

illustrated by the Lotus Marketplace example. The public, however, does not

always distinguish among these different types of records, and there is a danger

that violations not involving statistical data bases can create moral outrage and

have damaging spill-over effects on federal statistical programs.
Recommendation 3.5
 Federal statistical agencies should continue to develop
systematic informational activities designed to inform the public of their ability

to maintain the confidentiality of individually identifiable information, including

use of legal barriers to disclosure and physical security procedures, and their

intentions to minimize intrusions on privacy and the time and effort required to

respond to statistical inquiries.Recommendation 3.6
 Agencies should be prepared to deal quickly and
candidly with instances of "moral outrage" that may be directed at statistical

programs from time to time as a result of actual or perceived violations of

pledges of confidentiality given to data providers by data collectors. The

agencies should be prepared to explain the purpose of specific data collection

activities and the procedures used to protect confidentiality. They should accept

full responsibility if a violation occurs and should announce measures to prevent

future violations.DATA SUBJECTS88
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendation 3.7
 As part of the communication process, statistical
agencies should work more closely with appropriate advocacy groups, such as

those concerned with civil liberties and those that represent the rights of

disadvantaged segments of the population, and with specialists on ethical issues

and human rights.Some agencies may want to include members of such groups on their
advisory committees.DATA SUBJECTS89
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SUBJECTS90
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Data UsersPlease, sir, I want some more.Charles Dickens, Oliver TwistStatistical agencies serve as intermediaries and mediators between data
providers and data users. In 
Chapter 3 we asserted that the federal statistical
system could not function without the cooperation of data providers. It is equally

true that the system would be in serious trouble if it was not able to satisfy, to a

reasonable degree, the needs of a broad array of users inside and outside

government. Failing this, it would not be fulfilling its purpose and would not

deserve to be supported with public funds. Data users would have to place greater

reliance on commercial data sources, which could have potentially undesirable

consequences for the scope, cost, and quality of data available to them.
In addition, feedback from a wide data user community is essential for
maintaining and improving the quality of federal statistics. It is an effective way

to find errors and uncover anomalies in the data and to assess data quality.
In this chapter, we examine the relationships between federal statistical
agencies and the persons and organizations that use their statistical products. The

chapter has three sections. In the first, we set the stage by defining basic concepts

associated with data access. Next, we consider the expectations that data users

have about access to federal statistics and the extent to which those expectations

are being and should be met. Finally, we examine the ethical and legal

responsibilities of data users. At present, users' formal responsibilities extend

almost entirely to the statistical agencies, but in a broader sense data users also

have ethical and pragmatic responsibilities to data subjects and to society at

large.DATA USERS91Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BASIC CONCEPTS RELATED TO DATA ACCESS
The data products of statistical agencies are released to other agencies,
organizations, and individuals for statistical and research uses. These uses include

end uses, such as policy analysis, commercial and academic research, advocacy,
and various educational applications in the private and public sectors. They also

include 
intermediate 
 uses, such as the development of sampling frames for
surveys, the enhancement of existing data sets by adding information from other

sources, and the evaluation of data quality by comparing aggregate data or

individual records (microdata) from different sources.
Most releases of publicly collected data for intermediate statistical uses are
to other government agencies and their contractors or grantees. The spectrum of

end users is very broad, however, especially in the private sector. In government,

it includes policymakers, policy analysts, program planners and evaluators,

researchers, and educators. In the private sector, it includes all of the foregoing,

plus advocacy groups, market analysts, and the media.
Depending on users' requirements, the products released to them may
consist of aggregate data or individual records, with or without explicit

identifiers, such as name, address, and Social Security or Employer Identification

number. Media for release may be hard copy or electronic, and the latter may

assume various forms, such as tapes, diskettes, CD-ROM, or direct on-line

transmission. On-line access may be in the form of transmission of complete data

sets or outputs resulting from queries of in-house data sets.
A significant attribute of data access, the term for 
release when seen from
the user's side, is whether access is 
unrestricted or 
restricted . We consider data
access to be unrestricted if aggregate data or microdata are available to anyone

who wants them (and is willing to pay any user fees that may be required),

without restrictions or conditions of any kind on the uses to be made of the data.

Access is restricted whenever any conditions on use are imposed.
Restricted access is important for two reasons. The first relates to end uses
of the data. In preparing data for unrestricted access, agencies may have to limit

severely the amount of information included in statistical summaries or

individual records in order to comply with requirements to preserve the

confidentiality of individually identifiable information. Such limitations may
DATA USERS92Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.prevent users from performing the analyses best suited to their needs. As a result,

returns from the investment of public funds in data collection and processing may

not always be as great as they otherwise would be. The use of various forms of

restricted access can overcome some of the limitations by allowing access to

more detailed data, under controlled conditions, for selected users outside the

producing agency.It is also important that there be data sharing for intermediate statistical
uses. In the decentralized federal statistical system, in order to improve the

quality and consistency of information collected by different agencies and to

avoid costly duplication of effort, data are sometimes shared among statistical

agencies. Such data sharing cannot be unrestricted, however, because it usually

requires access to individually identifiable information.
EXPECTATIONS OF DATA USERS
BACKGROUNDIncreasing Demands for Access
Demand for access to federal statistical data increased at an extraordinary
rate in the 1980s and will surely continue to do so in the 1990s. This demand has

been fueled by the development of powerful, widely accessible computers and

sophisticated analytic software, improved data transmission capability, the

creation of large-scale administrative data sets with numerical identifiers, and

favorable user experience with public-use microdata sets based on statistical and

administrative data collections.
Some of the demand for access is being satisfied. Data users have access to
federal data that they could scarcely have imagined 50 years ago. Nevertheless,

potential users inside and outside government continue to assert that they have

important needs that are not being met. Are they like spoiled children, never

satisfied with what they receive, always wanting more, or is there some

legitimacy to their complaints? Are statistical agencies being sufficiently

receptive to user needs, or could they do more? Below we summarize the

evidence that we have obtained and draw some conclusions on these complicated

questions.
Meeting User Needs: Successes and Failures
The picture over the past two decades is mixed. Overall, there can be little
doubt that user access to data has increased,
DATA USERS93Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.but so has demand. Some new restrictions have also been imposed. To convey the

flavor of developments during this period and a sense of the current situation, we

present examples of movement in both directions. (These examples apply only to

data on persons. User access to data on businesses and other organizations is

discussed in 
Chapter 7.)Following are some developments that signify a potential for greater user
access:   substantial growth in the use of public-use microdata sets issued by
federal statistical agencies;
   increased in-house access to more detailed microdata files for
researchers participating in the American Statistical Association/

National Science Foundation (ASA/NSF) fellows program and other

similar arrangements; in addition, some statistical units, like the

National Agricultural Statistics Service and the Statistics of Income

Division of the Internal Revenue Service, have made arrangements for

researchers to use such data under controlled conditions in the unit's

state or regional offices;
   increased use of formal user licensing agreements by government
agencies and nongovernment organizations that have developed

important research data bases with federal funding
Šthese agreements
provide for access, at the user's work site, to detailed microdata sets

under controlled conditions;
   initiation of the release, by the National Center for Education Statistics
(NCES), of encrypted microdata files in CD-ROM format with built-in

software for analysis
Šthis mode of release may permit more widespread
dissemination of microdata sets that link survey and administrative data

on persons;   the undertaking of research to explore the possibility of releasing
microdata sets that do not contain data for any specific individual but

would allow users to draw valid inferences from the data (see 
Chapter 6and Rubin, 1993, for details); and
   increased use of formal agreements for interagency sharing of
identifiable data about persons for statistical and research purposes.

Until recently, for example, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the

primary funding agency for the Census Bureau's Current Population
Survey, had access only to tabulations and public-use microdata files

from the survey. However, the Census Bureau and BLS have recently

concluded an interagency agreement that allows the latter to have

access, for use in special analyses and methodological research, to

nonpublic microdata from the Current Population Survey. (
Chapter 6provides details on this and other examples.)
DATA USERS94Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.On the other side of the ledger, the following are instances in which attempts
to arrange for interagency sharing of data or access by nongovernment users for

legitimate and often potentially important statistical uses have not succeeded:
   Gates (1988) provides several examples of user requests for Census
Bureau demographic microdata that were denied because of

confidentiality concerns. The topics that the users had hoped to study

included a disparity in Social Security benefits between adjacent cohorts

of retirees, the economic well-being of persons living outside

metropolitan areas, racial segregation in the United States, and the

outcomes of the Selective Service draft lotteries held in the 1970s.
   The Tax Reform Act of 1976 ended presidential authority to allow
access to tax return information through executive orders (Wilson and

Smith, 1983). The act specified which organizations could have access to

tax return data and for what purposes. It created new barriers to access,

for statistical and research purposes, to employee earnings data and

other tax return information, such as taxpayers' current addresses.

Among the consequences of this legislation have been (1) almost

complete denial of external access to the Social Security

Administration's (SSA's) Continuous Work History Sample, (2)

increased difficulty in tracing study populations in epidemiologic

follow-up studies, (3) increased difficulty in developing arrangements

for the sharing of lists of businesses among federal statistical agencies,

and (4) barriers to the linkage of survey and tax return data for studies of

the income distribution of the general population or selected subgroups.
   For many years, the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) used a
sampling frame based on address lists from the decennial census for its

National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), a continuing national sample

survey on health topics, for which the sample selection and field work

are done by the Census Bureau. However, the confidentiality provisions

required of the Census Bureau (Title 13 U.S.C.) prevented NCHS from

using the sample of households derived from census addresses for other

surveys in which data were to be collected for NCHS by private

contractors. In the early 1980s, NCHS abandoned the use of decennial

census address lists and, at a very substantial cost, switched to a

sampling procedure that required independent listing of addresses in

sample areas by field workers. The Census Bureau continues to select

the sample and, using the new frame, collect the NHIS data for NCHS;

because the survey is now conducted under the provisions
DATA USERS95Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of Title 15 U.S.C., the Census Bureau is able to share identifiable

information with NCHS for the latter's statistical uses in other surveys

and analyses. Release of data to other users is governed by NCHS

confidentiality requirements, as stated in Title 42 U.S.C.
   As a result of recent arrangements between SSA and state vital statistics
offices for joint issuance of birth certificates and Social Security

numbers, SSA no longer receives race-ethnic information for most

births. Information on the race-ethnic status of the parents is recorded on

birth certificates, but it is not being made available to SSA. While the

immediate consequences are limited, in the longer run this practice will

make it difficult or impossible for SSA to analyze the effects of its

programs on different racial-ethnic groups and for the Census Bureau to

provide reliable intercensal population estimates by race. It will also be a

negative factor in considering a possible shift to greater reliance on

administrative records in conducting the decennial censuses of

population.   Although some researchers are gaining restricted access to microdata
sets at agency sites through fellowship programs and similar

arrangements, many other potential users of such data sets cannot be

accommodated or could work more effectively at their home sites

because of the reduced cost and better access to computing facilities. As

noted, a few agencies (e.g., NCES) are offering off-site access under

licensing agreements, but others either lack the legal authority

(especially the Census Bureau) or do not choose to offer such

arrangements.   As discussed in 
Chapter 3, the Office of Management and Budget
recently issued a legal opinion that the Census Bureau's data subjects and

providers cannot waive their entitlement to confidentiality under Title

13. The ruling caused the National Institute on Aging to abandon efforts

to conduct a potentially valuable follow-up study of surviving panel

members from the Longitudinal Retirement History Survey, which had

been conducted in the 1970s for the SSA by the Census Bureau under

the authority of Title 13.
Because of legal restrictions or other concerns about the confidentiality of
the data requested, most federal statistical agencies, unlike the Census Bureau, do

not systematically document cases in which they have denied data user requests

or provided only part of the data requested. If they did, and the panel believes

they should, we probably could have presented similar examples from several

other agencies.DATA USERS96Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Factors that Affect Agency Decisions on Access
In deciding what kinds of releases of personal data can and cannot be made,
federal statistical agencies must first ensure that they comply with all relevant

statutory requirements and honor all pledges made to data subjects and providers.

Failure in either respect could seriously compromise their ability to carry out

their mission. Many agency officials believe that in addition to adhering to legal

requirements and honoring commitments to respondents, they must be 
perceivedby the public as doing so (see, e.g., Butz, 1985b). On the other hand, to survive,

statistical agencies must be perceived by the public and especially by the

executive and legislative branches of government as fulfilling their basic mission

by providing information that is relevant to important social and economic policy

questions and that can be used in ways that benefit society.
Federal statistical agencies must also consider the costs associated with
various forms of dissemination. All forms of dissemination have some costs, but

restricted access procedures tend to be more resource intensive. Even if users are

willing to pay some of the costs, agencies with employment ceilings must give

priority to their primary data collection, processing, and dissemination activities,

as opposed to, say, undertaking special tabulations on a reimbursable basis,

providing staff support and computer services for an ASA/NSF fellow, or making

a site visit to a licensed user to ensure that all access conditions are being

observed.
User Influence on Agency Decisions
To what extent and by what means are users able to influence agency
decisions on access? Few mechanisms are available specifically for this purpose.

The panels that have been established at the Census Bureau and the National

Center for Education Statistics to determine how much information can be

included in microdata files that are released to nonagency users do not include

any representatives of nongovernment data users. The Census Bureau, we

understand, has been considering an arrangement whereby outside advisors

representing data subjects and data users would review decisions of its Microdata

Review Panel twice a year and recommend whatever changes in release policies

they consider appropriate.
Users have opportunities
Šat meetings of the American Statistical
Association, the Association for Public Data Users, the Council
DATA USERS97Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of Professional Associations on Federal Statistics, and other professional

organizationsŠto discuss dissemination procedures with other users and with
agency representatives. Discussions of this kind influenced the Census Bureau's

choice of statistical disclosure limitation procedures for summary tape files from

the 1990 decennial census. The bureau switched from the cell suppression

procedures used in previous censuses, which had caused many problems for

users, to a new procedure that did not require any cell suppression.
Another topic that is often discussed in such settings is the population size
cutoff for the smallest geographic areas that can be identified for individual

records in public-use microdata sets. The Census Bureau lowered its general

cutoff from 250,000 to 100,000 in 1981, but some users would like to see it

lowered further.
A few users who have been denied data they want have requested access to
the data under the Freedom of Information Act. However, most regular users of

federal data for research and statistical purposes are reluctant to take such a step

because of concerns, whether justified or not, that their ongoing dealings with the

statistical agencies might be prejudiced.
Another option might be to seek changes in the statutes that restrict access to
data. Given the complexity of existing confidentiality statutes and the legislative

process in general, it is hard to predict the outcome of attempts to change the

rules for data access through changes in legislation. (The confidentiality

legislation now in force and the pros and cons of seeking changes are discussed in

Chapter 5.)FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Data Sharing Within Government
A substantial amount of data sharing occurs between agencies for statistical
and research purposes. Nevertheless, some of the laws that govern the

confidentiality of statistical data prohibit or severely limit interagency sharing of

data collected by some agencies. Laws that control access to administrative

records, such as tax returns and earnings records, restrict their use for important

statistical applications. As noted by the Council of Economic Advisers (1991),

barriers to data sharing for statistical purposes have led to costly duplication of

effort, inconsistencies among related data sets, and excessive burden on

individuals and organizations
DATA USERS98Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.who are asked to supply information. They have also made it difficult or

impossible to develop data sets needed for policy analysis on important topics,

such as trends in income distribution and the long-range consequences of

occupational and other environmental exposures to suspected carcinogens.
Recommendation 4.1
 Greater opportunities should be available for sharing
of explicitly or potentially identifiable personal data among federal agencies for

statistical and research purposes, provided the confidentiality of the records can

be properly protected and the data cannot be used to make determinations about

individual data subjects. Greater access should be permitted to key statistical and

administrative data sets for the development of sampling frames and other

statistical uses. Additional data sharing should only be undertaken in those

instances in which the procedures for collecting the data comply with the panel's

recommendations for informed consent or notification (see Recommendations

3.2 and 3.3).
The panel supports the proposal of the Council of Economic Advisers
(1991:6) that legislation be developed that would permit ''limited sharing of

confidential statistical information solely for statistical purposes between

statistical agencies under stringent safeguards."

Access to Data by Nongovernment Users
Because of legitimate concerns about the possibility of disclosure of
individual information, statistical agencies have limited the amount of detailed

data provided to nongovernment users in tabulations and public-use microdata

files. This lack of detail limits the ability of users to do research that could

contribute to the understanding and resolution of significant economic and social

problems. Some agencies have developed mechanisms for providing access to

more detailed information on a restricted basis, but existing arrangements are far

from meeting all legitimate needs.
Recommendation 4.2
 Federal statistical agencies should seek to improve the
access of external users to statistical data, through both legislation and the

development andDATA USERS99Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.greater use, under carefully controlled conditions, of tested administrative

procedures.We believe that this can be done without sacrificing confidentiality
protection for data subjects and providers. As discussed further in 
Chapter 5
,legislation should not pose unnecessary barriers to interagency data sharing for

statistical and research purposes. It should extend legal sanctions for violations of

confidentiality to include data users who are not employed by the agency that

produced the data. Among the administrative procedures, the panel believes that

licensing agreements that allow users to analyze data sets at their own work sites

are a particularly promising solution.
It is difficult to evaluate the trade-offs between confidentiality of and access
to data without better information on the numbers and types of user requests for

data that are being denied for confidentiality reasons. Without such information it

is hard to define the problems that inhibit data access.
Recommendation 4.3
 All federal statistical agencies should establish
systematic procedures for capturing information on a continuing basis about

user requests for data that have been denied or only partially fulfilled. Such

information should be used for periodic reviews of agency confidentiality and

data access policies.Better information on denied requests, however, will not fully reveal the
extent to which important uses of data are not made because the data are not

accessible. Users who already know that certain data sets are not available are

unlikely to make much effort to develop plans for analyses that would require

access to such data.
LEGAL AND ETHICAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF DATA USERS
BACKGROUNDLegal Responsibilities of Users
Users given restricted access to personal data are asked and sometimes
required by law or written contracts to comply with various conditions relating to

their use and disposition of the data. Such conditions may include the following:
DATA USERS100Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   use of the data solely for purposes specified in an access agreement,
   use of the data only at specified physical locations,
   allowing access only to specified individuals,
   observing limitations on further releases of the initial data set or the
products produced from it,   observing provisions for eventual disposition of the data and outputs,
   application of statistical disclosure limitation techniques and physical
security measures to protect the data from unintended disclosure, and
   execution of a written agreement between the releasing agency and the
recipient and formal extension of the agreement to all individuals who

will have access to the data.
In some instances users who violate conditions associated with their access
to the data are subject to criminal or civil penalties.
The features of arrangements for providing restricted data access vary
according to the uses that will be made of the data. Intermediate statistical uses

generally involve transfer of data with identifiers from one agency to another,

based on formal interagency agreements covering all or most of the conditions of

use listed above. A basic principle of such agreements is that there must be full

compliance with the legal confidentiality requirements of both agencies at all

times. For releases of Census Bureau data, this is accomplished by having

persons in the receiving agency who will have access to identifiable data take

oaths as special sworn employees of the Census Bureau, which makes them

subject to the same penalties as regular Census Bureau employees for any

improper release or disclosure of identifiable information.
The conditions associated with restricted access for end uses and the
penalties for violations are much more varied, especially when the recipients of

the data are not other federal agencies. Among the more restrictive conditions are

those associated with access obtained by individual researchers under a ASA/NSF

fellows program that has been in operation since 1978. For research requiring

access to potentially identifiable records, fellows must usually work on-site at one

of the federal agencies that participate in the program, and they are subject to the

same penalties as regular agency employees for violation of confidentiality

requirements. In addition, ASA/NSF fellows usually have access to the data only

for the term of their appointment.
Less restrictive procedures are used by the National Center
DATA USERS101Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for Health Statistics (NCHS) in its release of microdata files based on the

National Health Interview Survey and other surveys. Prior to release of the file,

which can be used at the recipient's work site, NCHS applies standard statistical

disclosure limitation techniques to the files, but it recognizes the impossibility of

reducing the risk of disclosure of individually identifiable information to zero.

Thus, each recipient is required to sign a document (see 
Figure 4.1
) indicating
acceptance of restrictions on how the data will be used and on re-release of the

file to other organizations. Recipients must agree not to attempt to identify

individual units in the file and, if a unit should be inadvertently identified, notify

the NCHS and refrain from disclosing the discovered identity to others. If NCHS

learns that the agreement has been violated in any way, the user responsible

would probably be denied further access to NCHS microdata files.
The NCHS has recently begun to release some of its microdata files on CD-
ROMs, without requiring a signed data release agreement. Whenever the CD-

ROM is used, the user is presented with an on-screen notification of the data

restrictions, which are essentially the same as those shown in 
Figure 4.1. Thisscreen cannot be bypassed and the striking of a specific key is taken as the

indication that the user has read and agreed to the restrictions and recognizes the

penalties (National Center for Health Statistics, 1992a).
The National Center for Education Statistics is experimenting with a form of
restricted access that occupies an intermediate position with respect to conditions

of use. Under a licensing agreement, researchers in organizations and agencies

are allowed to use confidential NCES data at their own sites for statistical

purposes. The agreement incorporates several provisions designed to maintain the

confidentiality and physical security of the data, including agreement by the users

to be subject to unannounced inspections of their work site. All persons who will

have access to the data must sign affidavits of nondisclosure and are subject to

severe penalties for violation of their oath.
Licensing agreements are also being used by university-based research
organizations to allow restricted access to detailed microdata sets based on

federally funded surveys. Jabine (1993a) provides two examples, one relating to

the Panel Study of Income Dynamics and the other to the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth. The conditions are similar to but somewhat less rigorous than

those of the NCES licensing agreement just described. One of the organizations

involved includes a hidden unique identifier in each
DATA USERS102Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA USERS103Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of the data sets it releases so that it would be able to determine the origin of
any copy found in unauthorized hands. Both of the agreements carry financial

penalties for violations.
This brief account portrays some of the steps that have been taken in recent
years to accommodate the needs of users for data sets that are too detailed to

release without any conditions of use attached to them. The sentiment is growing

among government statisticians that producers and users of statistical data should

share responsibility for adherence to the confidentiality pledges given to data

subjects and providers and that violations of that understanding by users, like

violations by agency staff, should be subject to penalties. At present, the nature

of the penalties and the legal authority for assessment of penalties on users

varies, and there does not appear to be a consensus on what would be most

effective.The idea that data users should be held legally responsible for the
confidentiality of the data to which they have access is not new; it was advanced

by the ASA's Ad Hoc Committee on Privacy and Confidentiality in its 1977

report. The committee encouraged the dissemination of microdata sets by

statistical agencies and said that they should be released without restrictions or

conditions, provided all explicit identifiers had been removed and "it is virtually

certain that no recipients can identify specific individuals in the file" (American

Statistical Association, 1977:75). The committee recommended that data sets 
notmeeting the second requirement be made accessible for research and statistical

uses only if a specific set of conditions on use were agreed to in advance, in

writing, by the recipient. They recommended further that the releasing agency

assume responsibility for ensuring that users are observing these conditions and

that "both the recipient and the agency staff are subject to enforceable penalties

for failure to observe the agreed conditions of use" (p. 75).
A less detailed recommendation about release of microdata files was
included in the Bellagio principles, which were developed at a 1977 international

conference on Privacy, Confidentiality, and the Use of Government Microdata

for Research and Statistical Purposes (see Flaherty, 1978). The Bellagio

principles support widespread dissemination of data, including microdata, for

research and statistical purposes, subject to confidentiality controls. A specific

recommendation was that users of microdata should be required to agree in

writing to protect the confidentiality of the files. No reference was made,

however, to sanctions for users who violate confidentiality requirements.
DATA USERS104Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Ethical Responsibilities of Users
In a search for material related to the obligations and responsibilities of
external users of data, that is, users not directly associated with the agencies or

organizations that developed the data sets, the panel reviewed guidelines and

standards established by several professional associations and other groups. As

described in 
Chapter 3, the American Statistical Association and the International
Statistical Institute have developed detailed guidelines covering the

responsibilities of agencies and organizations that collect data and, in some

instances, use their own data for analyses. However, we found that those and

other guidelines of professional societies had relatively little to say about the

ethical obligations of those who use data provided by other organizations.
One exception comes from the Bellagio principles. Principle 14 (Flaherty,
1978:277) reads as follows:
Professional or national organizations should have codes of ethics for their
disciplines concerning the utilization of individual data for research and

statistical purposes. Such ethical codes should furnish mutually agreeable

standards of behavior governing relations between providers and users of

governmental data.
The report of the ASA's Ad Hoc Committee on Privacy and Confidentiality
recommended that "training in ethical standards and in privacy safeguards should

be incorporated into the statistics and survey research curricula at colleges and

universities" (American Statistical Association, 1977:76). This would be a useful

step, but to reach a larger part of the ever-growing population of external users

one would need to ensure the inclusion of similar training in curriculums for

sociology, economics, and other disciplines whose members are likely to be

secondary users of federal and other data sets.
What appears to be an unnecessarily rigorous requirement for data access is
included in the ASA's 
Ethical Guidelines for Statistical 
 Practice. Arecommendation to data collectors was to
ensure that, whenever data are transferred to other persons or organizations,
this transfer conforms with the established confidentiality pledges; and require

written assurance from the recipients of the data that the measures employed to

protect confidentiality will be at least equal to those originally pledged

(American Statistical Association, 1989:24).
Since the term "data" was not defined, this recommendation seems to
suggest that no data, whether in aggregate or microdata form,
DATA USERS105Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.with or without identifiers, should be transferred for any purpose without

obtaining written assurance from recipients that they will protect confidentiality.

We suspect this was not really the intent of the recommendation. Perhaps the

committee meant the recommendation to apply only to data in explicitly or

potentially identifiable form. If this supposition is correct, the committee's

position and the panel's recommendations below would be consistent.
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Secondary data users tend to be impatient with restrictions that inhibit access
to data they want for their research, and they may occasionally attempt to

circumvent such restrictions. The panel strongly urges all data users to recognize

that the continued ability of federal statistical agencies to meet user needs

depends on scrupulous observance of confidentiality pledges given to data

subjects and data providers. Users must be willing to accept responsibility for
appropriate use of data entrusted to them. They must abide by agency-imposed

confidentiality requirements that include features such as licensing agreements,

bonding, access only at authorized sites, and legal sanctions for failure to abide by

agreed conditions of use. If they believe that restrictions on access to some kinds

of data are unnecessarily stringent, the ethical course is to work through existing

institutions to change the rules, not to seek ways to circumvent the rules.
Recommendation 4.4 
 All users of federal data, regardless of the formal
conditions of access, should subscribe to the following principles for responsible

data use:(a) Conscientiously observe all conditions agreed to in order to obtain
access to the data. Allow access to the original data set only by those

permitted access under the agreed conditions of recipiency and

ensure that all such persons are aware of the required conditions of

use.(b) Make no attempt to identify particular individuals or other units
whose data are considered to be confidential.
(c) In the event that one or more individuals or other units are identified
in the course of research, notify the organization that provided the

data set, and do not inform anyone else of the discovered identities.
DATA USERS106Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendation 4.5
 To promote knowledge of and adherence to the
principles of responsible data use,
(a) Federal statistical agencies should ask all recipients of federal
microdata sets to submit to the releasing agency, in writing, their

agreement to observe the above principles, plus any other conditions

deemed necessary for specific data sets.
(b) Professional societies and associations that have ethical codes,
standards, or guidelines should incorporate these principles in them.
(c) The principles and the justifications for them should be included in
academic and other training for disciplines whose members are likely

to be users of federal statistical data.
Other potentially relevant types of controls are in place in universities and in
some government settings, such as the National Institutes of Health. For

example, investigators planning research involving human subjects must have

their research proposals approved by the local institutional review board. A more

recent development is the establishment of procedures for promoting scientific

integrity and investigating allegations of fraud and misconduct in university-

based research. Such oversight mechanisms, with suitable definition of their

scope to cover research uses of federal data sets, could serve to reassure

custodians of federal data that adequate controls are in place to monitor

compliance with data protection rules and regulations by users in the research

community. The panel applauds the development of local institutional

mechanisms to promote ethical behavior in the research community and hopes

that they will include fair statistical information practices and compliance with

the data protection requirements of statistical agencies among their concerns.
DATA USERS107Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA USERS108Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5LegislationInformation maintained and used solely for statistical or research 
 purposes is not treated
uniformly under existing law.
Commission on Federal Paperwork, 1977
The Commission believes that existing law and practice do not adequately 
 protect the
interests of the individual data subject.
Privacy Protection Study Commission, 1977
– to change or make a law involves a long, cumbersome process, while 
 technologies and
social conditions sometimes change very fast.
Edmund Rapaport, 1988
Legislation in large part determines and constrains federal policies and
practices affecting data subjects and data users. For federal statistical agencies,

pertinent statutes determine when response to surveys is mandatory, who can

have access to individually identifiable information collected for statistical and

research purposes, the conditions of access, and the penalties for unlawful uses

and disclosures of the information. Statutes also determine who can have access

to administrative records for statistical and research purposes.
Two kinds of legislation provide the framework for federal policies and
practices with respect to confidentiality and data access: government-wide and

agency-specific legislation. In the former category, the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L.

93Œ579) is the most important, and the Freedom of Information Act of 1966 (P.L.

89Œ487) and the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (P.L. 96Œ511) are also

relevant. In the latter category, several federal statistical
LEGISLATION
109
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.agencies, for example, the Bureau of the Census, the National Agricultural

Statistics Service (NASS), the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES),

and the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), are subject to laws that go

beyond the government-wide statutes in specifying the confidentiality and data

access policies they must follow. Among legislation that affects the statistical and

research uses of administrative records, the Tax Reform Act of 1976 (P.L. 94
Œ455) is of special significance.
In its consideration of the legislation that regulates statistical and research
uses of federal records, the panel benefited greatly from the endeavors of earlier

commissions and other groups and individuals who have explored these issues,

including Cecil (1993), the Commission on Federal Paperwork (1977a, b),

Flaherty (1979, 1989), Newton and Pullin (1990, 1991), the Office of Federal

Statistical Policy and Standards (1978), and the Privacy Protection Study

Commission (1977a, b, c). The problems we identified were well documented by

our predecessors, and they proposed reasonable solutions to them. Most of the

problems persist, however, and their significance has only increased because of

the changes since the late 1970s in the environment in which federal statistical

agencies operate.The regulatory structure provided by the government-wide and agency-
specific statutes mentioned above is exceedingly complex. There is little

uniformity in the treatment of confidentiality and data access questions, and the

ability of federal statistical agencies to protect the confidentiality of individually

identifiable records is not always backed by suitable statutory provisions.

Conversely, in some instances excessive restrictions on access needlessly limit

opportunities to share records across agencies for statistical purposes and to make

detailed microdata sets available to potential users.
This chapter has three sections. We describe the main features of the
relevant government-wide information statutes in the first section and agency-

specific statutes for some of the major statistical agencies in the second. In the

third section we present findings and recommendations.
The general plan of this report has been to deal primarily with issues relating
to data for individuals in Chapters 
1 through 6 and to address issues relating to
data for organizations in 
Chapter 7. However, this chapter constitutes an
exception to the general plan because many provisions of agency-specific

legislation apply equally to both kinds of data.
LEGISLATION
110
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GENERAL REGULATION OF FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND
RESEARCH RECORDSThe Privacy Act of 1974 is the most prominent feature of a general system
of regulation that also includes the conflicting demands of the Freedom of

Information Act of 1966, the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, and the

Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988 (P.L. 100
Œ503). The
Freedom of Information Act specifies the conditions under which the disclosure

of federal agency records, including statistical records, may be compelled. The

Paperwork Reduction Act is intended to reduce unnecessary requirements for

paperwork by federal agencies, and it permits review of data collection requests

by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). The Computer Matching and

Privacy Protection Act regulates the use of computer matching of federal records

subject to the Privacy Act. Matches performed for statistical purposes are

specifically excluded from the coverage of the act, however.
Below we summarize two components of this general system of regulation,
the Privacy Act and the Freedom of Information Act. Our focus is the impact of

each act on federal data used for research and statistical purposes. The Privacy

Act applies only to data on identifiable individuals; the Freedom of Information

Act applies to data on individuals and organizations.
THE PRIVACY ACT
The administrative abuses of data held by the federal government that
occurred in the early 1970s eroded public trust and confidence and led to the

passage of the Privacy Act of 1974 and the Tax Reform Act of 1976. The Privacy

Act was the first attempt by Congress to provide comprehensive protection of an

individual's right to privacy by regulating the collection, management, and

disclosure of personal information maintained by government agencies (Title 5
U.S.C. § 552a).1  It specifies a general system of regulation for individuallyidentifiable federal records.
Before the Privacy Act was passed, federal policy on data management
practices encouraged data sharing among agencies in order to reduce the burden

and expense of reporting. This open-access policy was restricted only when

statutes provided for the confidentiality of specific sensitive record systems. In

1974, the Privacy Act reversed this general policy by recognizing the right of

individuals to control dissemination of information they provided
LEGISLATION
111
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.about themselves to federal agencies. The Privacy Act sought to strike a balance

Što preserve individuals' interests in controlling identifiable information while
recognizing the legitimate uses of that information.
2Briefly, the general provisions of the Privacy Act require that federal
agencies (1) grant individuals access to their identifiable records maintained by

the agency, (2) ensure that existing information is accurate and timely and limit

the collection of unnecessary information, and (3) limit the disclosure of

identifiable information to third parties. This third provision of the Privacy Act,

which forbids the disclosure of any identifiable record without the prior written

consent of the individual (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(b)), is the crux of the right of
privacy provided by the act.
The term 
statistical record
 is defined in the Privacy Act as "a record in a
system of records maintained for statistical research or reporting purposes only

and not used in whole or in part in making any determination about an identified

individual, except as provided by 
§ 8 of Title 13 (which governs the Census
Bureau)" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(a)(6)).The Privacy Act defines a 
system of records
 as "a group of any records
under the control of any agency from which information is retrieved by the name

of the individual or by some identifying number, symbol, or other identifying

particular assigned to the individual" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(a)(5)).3  Anenforceable informed consent requirement in the act could thwart the disclosure

of identifiable information for purposes that the individual never considered and

would not approve. As described below, however, numerous exceptions are

possible.The Privacy Act seeks to enforce its standards through civil and criminal
penalties. Employees of agencies and their contractors who knowingly and

willfully disclose personal information contrary to the requirements of the act

may be fined up to $5,000 and the agency may be sued for "actual

damages" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(g)(1)(D),(i)(1)). Because of the need to show
that the agency acted in a willful and intentional manner and the need to

demonstrate actual damages, there have been few successful lawsuits (Flaherty,

1989:342Œ343; Lodge, 1984). Consequently, the effectiveness of these penalties
has been questioned (see, e.g., Coles, 1991).
Twelve categories of exceptions to the consent requirement of the Privacy
Act are intended to accommodate legitimate needs for individually identifiable

information. For instance, an agency may, at its discretion, disclose identifiable

records without prior written consent to officers and employees of the agency

who have a need for the record in the performance of their duties. While such an

exemption is certainly necessary, several federal organizations have interpreted

the term agency quite broadly, thereby restricting the protections of the Privacy
Act. For example, the Department of Health and Human Services has defined the

entire department as a single "agency" under the terms of the Privacy Act, thereby

permitting exchange of identifiable information throughout the department as

long as there is a job-related need for such information (National Center for

Health Statistics, 1984). Other exceptions include disclosures that are required by

the FreedomLEGISLATION
112
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of Information Act (see below); exceptions granted to the Bureau of the Census

(for planning or carrying out a census, survey, or related activity under Title 13

of the U.S. Code), the General Accounting Office (to permit auditing of federal

programs), and the National Archives; and disclosure in emergency

circumstances involving the health and safety of an individual. The Privacy Act

also permits disclosure of identifiable information without written consent to

other federal agencies for authorized civil or criminal law enforcement activities

and disclosure pursuant to a court order
Šdisclosures to which individuals would
most likely decline to consent.
Of special interest to data users is an exception that permits access to records
that are not individually identifiable upon "written assurance that the record will

be used solely as a statistical research or reporting record" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(b)(5)). The Privacy Act poses no barrier to the dissemination of anonymous

information; if the research objectives can be accomplished with nonidentifiable

data, rendering the data anonymous satisfies the standards of the Privacy Act and

the information can be disseminated. In fact, as Cecil (1993) notes in a paper

prepared for the panel, this exemption offers very little, because a record that is

not individually identifiable is not a "record" within the definition of the Privacy

Act (see note 3) and therefore is not subject to the restrictions on disclosure

imposed by the act.
Obtaining data from individually identifiable federal records for statistical
purposes can be difficult for data users, even those in other federal statistical

agencies. The restrictions of the Privacy Act can bar the disclosure of identifiable

records unless the disclosure is brought within one of the exemptions. In an ideal

situation, data collectors would be able to anticipate such disclosure needs and

obtain the informed consent of data subjects at the time the information is

gathered. When the need for statistical or research access to agency records was

not anticipated or when the initial consent becomes invalid, a data collector may

have to recontact the data subjects to obtain proper consent. Recontacting data

subjects who participated in an earlier statistical or research study imposes

special difficulties, however. For example, some target populations are highly

mobile, and thus addresses and telephone numbers that were obtained at the time

the individuals were originally contacted may be outdated. Recontacting such

data subjects is also likely to be expensive and subject to self-selection biases.
One of the Privacy Act exemptions permits disclosure of an
LEGISLATION
113
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.identifiable record for a "routine use," that is, "for a purpose that is compatible

with the purpose for which it was collected" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(a)(7)). An
agency may choose to designate statistical analysis as a routine use of all or a

selected portion of its record systems (see note 3). This enables the agency to give

outside data users access to data from identifiable records for statistical purposes

without first gaining the consent of the data subjects to whom the records pertain.

Instead of obtaining data subjects' consent prior to disclosure for such a "routine

use," the agency must only publish a notice of the anticipated routine uses of the

record in the 
Federal  Register and accept comments from the public for a period
of 30 days (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(e)(4)(D),(e)(11)). Such routine uses must also
be explained to data subjects when similar information is gathered in the future.
A great many agency notices in the 
Federal Register allow disclosure for
statistical and research purposes as a routine use. For instance, the Department of

Health and Human Services has been particularly thorough in identifying record

systems that have research potential and publishing notices permitting research as

a routine use (O'Neill and Fanning, 1976:171
Œ188). One version of the
department's routine-use notice requires an assessment of the risks and potential

benefits of the research and requires the data user to sign an agreement to protect

the records from subsequent disclosure. This is one instance in which the

discretion delegated to agencies by the Privacy Act has been used to fashion a

specific set of standards to permit data users from outside the agency to analyze

data contained in individually identifiable records for statistical purposes while

maintaining safeguards appropriate to the information. However, the need to rely

on the routine-use exemption to overcome the failure of the statute to provide for

statistical and research access to identifiable records is an awkward solution to

the problem. Without a statutory policy concerning access to federal records for

statistical and research purposes, individual agencies are free to develop

regulations that may either be too restrictive or fail to offer adequate protection to

the identifiable information provided by data subjects.
It is important to note that the Privacy Act, which applies indiscriminately to
statistical and administrative records, offers little protection from improper

disclosure of statistical records for nonresearch purposes. An agency could

conceivably use the routine-use exemption to the act to diminish the protection
for such records by designating audit and enforcement as routine uses after the

data are gathered. Also, the Privacy Act places no obligation
LEGISLATION
114
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.on outside data users to maintain the confidentiality of the records or limit

subsequent disclosure; once the records are released to a data user who is not

under the jurisdiction of the act there is no assurance that the data subject's rights

will be protected. The restrictions of the Privacy Act extend to contractors only

when "an agency provides by a contract for the operation by or on behalf of the

agency of a system of records to accomplish an agency function" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§552a(m)).In summary, the Privacy Act's failure to distinguish statistical and research
purposes from administrative purposes in restricting access to individually

identifiable records can pose a major obstacle for data users who want to analyze

such information for statistical or research purposes. Regulation of administrative

records is based on the awareness that the records may be used to make decisions

regarding individuals, such as the award or termination of benefits. Such a system

of regulation does not recognize dissimilar analytic uses of data for statistical or

research purposes in which the information is not used to make decisions

regarding individual data subjects. Data users have become adept at framing their

statistical or research needs, and the associated data protections, within the

standards developed for administrative records. In some instances, it may be

possible to anticipate the statistical or research purposes and obtain consent for

disclosure of identifiable data at the time they are collected. Otherwise, the data

user must structure a request for statistical or research use of individually

identifiable data to fit within one of the exceptions to the consent requirement of

the Privacy Act, such as the routine-use exception.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
The Freedom of Information Act of 1966 (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552) alsoregulates the disclosure of research and statistical records. The act permits public

access to records maintained by federal agencies unless the request for access

falls within one of nine specific exemptions. Statistical records maintained by

federal agencies, even those developed by private parties, are subject to

disclosure under the act if not otherwise exempt. For example, records concerning

differences in breast-fed and formula-fed infants that were collected by a group

of nonprofit, church-related organizations and deposited with a federal agency for

statistical analysis were ordered disclosed when producers of infant formula

requested copies of the data from the agency under the act (see 
St. Paul's LEGISLATION
115
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Benevolent Educational and Missionary Institute v. U.S.
, 506 F. Supp. 822 (N. D.
Ga. 1980)). If the research records are not maintained by the federal agency, the

act does not compel disclosure, even if the agency funded the research and relies

on the results in setting public policy. For example, the Supreme Court declined

to order the disclosure of research records developed under an extended research

grant awarded to a group of private physicians and scientists studying the

effectiveness of treatments of diabetes. Even though the Food and Drug

Administration relied on the controversial findings of the study to restrict the

labeling and use of certain drug treatments and refused to make the data available

for independent reanalysis, the Court determined that the act does not reach

records maintained by grantees (see 
Forsham v. Harris, 445 U.S. 169 (1980)).
Two exemptions to the general disclosure mandate of the Freedom of
Information Act are of concern to researchers. First, an exemption under the act

may be appropriate for identifiable records if such records will yield sensitive

information about individual research participants. Exemption 6 of the act

restricts disclosure of "personnel and medical and similar files the disclosure of

which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy" (Title

5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(6)). This exemption is intended to protect sensitive information
identifiable to an individual, including research and statistical information, from

unwarranted disclosure. If the court determines that disclosure of identifiable

agency records "can reasonably be expected to invade [a] citizen's privacy,"

disclosure will not be ordered (see 
D.O.J. v. Reporters Committee for Freedom ofthe Press, 489 U.S. 749 (1989); 
New York Times Co. v. N.A.S.A.
, 920 F.2d 1002(D.C. Cir. 1990) (en banc)). Although there have been a few cases in which

identifiable research records have been the object of a request, evolving standards

of protection and different standards of protection across federal circuits result in

considerable uncertainty regarding the degree of protection under this

exemption.4  Nonetheless, the proprivacy provisions appear to be a strong
protection.Second, research information with commercial or financial value may be
withheld under exemption 4 of the Freedom of Information Act, which extends

protection to "trade secrets and to information which is commercial or financial,

obtained from a person, and privileged or confidential" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552(b)(4)). Such records need not be individually identifiable and may include records

of organizations. This exemption, however, has been narrowly construed, which

has made it difficult for most research and statistical
LEGISLATION
116
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.records to qualify. To qualify for the exemption, the research records must be of

commercial or financial value that will be diminished by disclosure. Further, the

research records must qualify as "privileged or confidential." A promise of

confidentiality when the research data were collected will be given some weight

in determining if this standard is met, but such a promise alone will not be

sufficient to protect the data. Exemption 4 has been granted only when there has

been a further demonstration that disclosure of information would result in

competitive harm to a commercial enterprise (see 
Public  Citizen Health Research
Group v. Food and Drug Administration
, 539 F. Supp. 1320 (D. D. C. 1982)) or
that release of such information is likely to "impair the government's ability to

obtain necessary information in the future" (see 
National Parks Conservation
Association  v. Morton, 498 F.2d 765, 770 (D.C. Cir. 1974)). These standards
were recently interpreted to recognize a greater interest in maintaining the

confidentiality of information that is provided the government on a voluntary

basis if it is of a kind that the provider would not customarily release to the public

(Critical Mass Energy Project v. 
 N.R.C., 1992 U.S. App. Lexis 19336 (D.C.
Cir., 1992), (en banc)). This categorical exemption for information supplied to the

government on a voluntary basis is intended to ensure its continued availability.
AGENCY-SPECIFIC LEGISLATION
As with the government-wide statutes, agency-specific legislation is not
uniform in specifying the conditions of access to individually identifiable data for

statistical and research purposes and the requirements for maintaining the

confidentiality of such data. To implement agency-specific legislative provisions,

federal statistical agencies have developed administrative policies, practices, and

procedures, some of which we cover in this section. We provide a more thorough

discussion of the administrative mechanisms used by the federal statistical

agencies in 
Chapter 6.In this section, we first summarize the agency-specific legislation that
governs three major federal statistical agencies (Bureau of the Census, National

Center for Education Statistics, and National Center for Health Statistics). We

also discuss the impact on federal statistical activities of the Tax Reform Act of

1976, the legislation that governs access to the data collected by the Internal

Revenue Service (IRS). Our presentation is not meant to be an exhaustive

discussion of agency-specific legislation; other federal
LEGISLATION
117
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.statistical agencies, such as the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) and the

National Agricultural Statistics Service, have statutes that protect the

confidentiality of their data, and we refer to selected provisions of those statutes

in presenting our findings and recommendations.
Next, we address issues raised by the fact that federal statistical agencies
without adequate statutory protection for the confidentiality of their data must

rely on administrative policies that have no statutory basis. We use the Bureau of

Labor Statistics (BLS) and the Energy Information Administration (EIA) to

illustrate the difficulties that agencies have encountered and the strategies they

have employed when protection of data in their custody is not addressed by

statute. We conclude this section with a discussion of the legislation for two new

statistical agencies, one established by statute in the Department of Transportation

in 1991 and another that has been proposed for environmental statistics.
Most of the background material for this section was provided by the
agencies discussed in response to the panel's request for information about their

current statutory requirements, policies, and practices. We appreciate the

agencies' willingness to help by providing this material.
BUREAU OF THE CENSUS
In contrast to the lax protection of statistical records under the Privacy Act
of 1974, the statutory protection of statistical information collected by the Census

Bureau under Title 13 of the U.S. Code is extremely rigorous. It allows few

opportunities for those outside the agency to use individually identifiable records

for statistical purposes. In recent years the Census Bureau has made some effort

to develop standards and procedures that would permit greater access to

information that it maintains (Gates, 1988). But the statutory standards, and

interpretation of those standards by the Supreme Court, still pose a formidable

barrier to the release of data outside the Census Bureau in a form that permits the

range of statistical analyses desired by sophisticated data users.
The Census Bureau is governed by legislation that permits the bureau to (1)
use census information only for statistical purposes (with one limited exception,

an agreement with the National Archives, which is discussed in 
Chapter 6
), (2)
publish data only in a way that prevents the identification of individuals, and (3)

prohibit anyone from examining information that identifies an individual
LEGISLATION
118
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.unless they are Census Bureau employees sworn to uphold the confidentiality

provisions of Title 13 (U.S.C. 
§ 9(a)). In addition, this statute allows the Census
Bureau to employ temporary staff to do work authorized by Title 13 provided

they are sworn to uphold the confidentiality provisions specified in the legislation

(see Title 13 U.S.C. 
§ 23). Such "special sworn employees" may be employed in
another government agency. Violation of Title 13 standards by employees or

special sworn employees carries a penalty of a fine of $5,000 or five years in

prison, or both (Title 13 U.S.C. 
§ 214). The statute also permits the Census
Bureau to furnish "tabulations and other statistical materials which do not

disclose the information reported by, or on behalf of, any particular respondent"

and to "make special statistical compilations and surveys, for 
– [parties outside
the Census Bureau] upon the payment of the actual or estimated cost of such

work" (Title 13 U.S.C. § 8(b)).The statutory standards governing the Census Bureau are among the few
that have the benefit of an interpretation by the Supreme Court. In 
Baldrige v.
Shapiro (455 U.S. 345 (1982)) the Court considered the extent to which master
address lists, compiled as part of the decennial census, can be made available

outside the Census Bureau. Several cities challenged the 1980 census count of

their populations, contending that the census had erroneously counted occupied

dwellings as vacant, and they sought to compel disclosure of a portion of the

address lists used by the Census Bureau in conducting its count in their respective

jurisdictions. Although the case involved access to this information for purposes

other than research, in ruling on the case the Court also offered an interpretation

of Title 13 that clarifies the limits of the discretion of the Census Bureau to

release statistical information that is individually identifiable.
The district court had ordered the Census Bureau to make the address
register available, reasoning that the confidentiality limitation is "solely to require
that census material be used in furtherance of the Bureau's statistical mission and

to ensure against disclosure of any particular individual's response." The Supreme

Court reversed this decision, interpreting the standards of Title 13 to suggest that

the release of 
any microdata, even microdata not identifiable to an individual, is
inconsistent with the standards of Title 13. The Court cited the constitutional

purpose of the census in apportioning representation among the states and the

importance of public cooperation in obtaining an accurate census. According to

the Court, the confidentiality protections of
LEGISLATION
119
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Title 13 are intended to encourage public cooperation by explicitly providing for

the nondisclosure of certain census data, and "[n]o discretion is provided to the

Census Bureau on whether or not to disclose the information referred to in 
§§ 8(b) and 9(a)" [of Title 13] (
Baldrige v. Shapiro, 455 U.S. 355 (1982)).
The cities that sought the master address lists had argued that the
confidentiality protections were intended to prohibit disclosure of the identities of

individuals who provided census data. The Court, however, rejected the

contention that the confidentiality provisions protect raw data only if the

individual respondent can be identified, thereby raising questions regarding the

authority of the Census Bureau to release individual census data even when the

identification of individuals is not possible:
[Various parties] vigorously argue that Sections 8(b) and 9(a) of the Census
Act are designed to prohibit disclosure of the identities of individuals who

provide raw census data; for this reason, they argue, the confidentiality

provisions protect raw data only if the individual respondent can be identified.

The unambiguous language of the confidentiality provisions, as well as the

legislative history of the Act, however, indicates that Congress plainly

contemplated that raw data reported by or on behalf of individuals was to be held

confidential and not available for disclosure (
Baldrige v. Shapiro, 455 U.S. 355
(1982)).The Census Bureau has not interpreted the Title 13 standards as broadly as
this language would permit and has continued to release unidentifiable microdata

for statistical purposes. The Court's opinion, while speaking of "data" and

"statistical uses," is in fact about the authority of states and municipalities to

audit the findings of the Census Bureau, a purpose that was specifically precluded

when the statute was passed. Further, access to address lists would imply access

to any individuals living at the addresses, so characterization of the research data

as "unidentified" seems misplaced. Nevertheless, the language of the Supreme

Court suggests that the Census Bureau is limited in its discretion to release data to

persons who are not sworn to uphold the confidentiality provisions of Title 13.
The restrictions discussed above extend to all data collections undertaken
under the authority of Title 13. The Census Bureau also may undertake survey

research under alternative authority, such as Title 15, that allows it to conduct

specific studies for other organizations, thereby avoiding the restrictions of Title

13 on release of identifiable information. Growing demand for identifiable

information that can be used in conducting follow-up surveys
LEGISLATION
120
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.or linked with administrative data has resulted in the Census Bureau's conducting

under Title 15 authority an increasing number of reimbursable surveys sponsored

by other agencies. There are two primary differences in the way the Census

Bureau conducts such surveys. First, the bureau cannot use the decennial census

as a sampling frame if identifiable microdata from the survey are to be shared

with the sponsoring agency. Second, when seeking the consent of respondents to

participate in a Title 15 survey, the bureau makes clear that it is collecting the

information as an agent of the sponsoring agency and that the sponsor, not the

Census Bureau, will be responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of the

information.NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATION STATISTICS
Statistical data collected by the National Center for Education Statistics is
governed by legislation that follows closely the pattern of protection for data

gathered by the Census Bureau. In April 1988, Public Law 100
Œ297, theAugustus F. Hawkins-Robert T. Stafford Elementary and Secondary School

Improvement Amendments of the General Education Provisions Act (GEPA),

was passed. The Hawkins-Stafford amendments (U.S.C. 
§ 1221e-1) established a
rigorous system of protection of educational statistical data collected and

maintained by NCES. The system (1) prohibits the use of "individually

identifiable information" for purposes other than the statistical purposes for which

it was supplied, (2) prohibits the publication of information that will permit the

identification of an individual, (3) permits examination of individually

identifiable reports only by persons authorized by the NCES commissioner, and

(4) limits access to individually identifiable data to those who take an oath not to

disclose such data. The amendments allow NCES to use temporary employees to

analyze individually identifiable data for statistical purposes if such persons are

sworn to observe the limitations described above.
Information collected as part of the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP), one of the ongoing studies of NCES, is subject to a separate

confidentiality requirement under the Hawkins-Stafford amendments. To

maintain the confidentiality of NAEP records, the amendments state that
the Commissioner shall ensure that all personally identifiable information
about students, their educational performance, and their families and that

information with respect to individual schools
 remain confidential, in
accordance with section 552a of
LEGISLATION
121
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.title 5, United States Code (emphasis added) (P.L. 100
Œ297, 
§ 3403(a)(i)(4)(B)(i)).This section of the amendments cites the Privacy Act of 1974 as the standard
for maintaining confidentiality of the information, even though the Privacy Act

applies only to individuals, not to institutions and organizations such as schools

(see Newton and Pullin, 1990). The provision requiring that school information

remain confidential poses particular difficulty for those who wish to use NAEP

data to study the effects of programs in schools with certain characteristics.
In 1990 the statutory framework governing NCES records was further
confused by the passage of amendments to GEPA that specifically exempted from

the protections of the Hawkins-Stafford amendments data gathered as part of

several longitudinal studies of individuals at the postsecondary level and

financial aid surveys (see 
§ 252 of the Excellence in Mathematics, Science and
Engineering Act of 1990, P.L. 101
Œ589). It appears that these data are governed
now by the comparatively lax protections of the Privacy Act. The resulting

exceptions to the general provisions of the Hawkins-Stafford amendments

provide a fragmented pattern of regulation that is likely to leave data subjects and

providers uncertain of the extent to which their information will remain

confidential.Inadvertent disclosure is an especially difficult problem. The educational
research community has developed a number of data sets with identifiable

information that are beyond the reach of this legislation, some of which include

information gathered by NCES prior to the Hawkins-Stafford amendments. The

possibility of matching survey data to existing records, thereby inadvertently

disclosing information that can be associated with specific data subjects, is much

greater for educational records than for individual Census Bureau records. Thus,

when the individual is the unit of analysis and similar surveys exist that would

permit the linking of information, an NCES policy statement (National Center for

Education Statistics, 1989) directs NCES staff to examine common variables and

distributions of responses to minimize the risk of disclosure. Staff of NCES also

review non-federal data files to ensure that such files will not present an

opportunity for a match with NCES data that would yield individually identifiable

information. Other information that NCES staff must take into consideration

before releasing a public-use data file is set forth in
LEGISLATION
122
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.''Standard for Maintaining Confidentiality" (see Standard IV-01-92 in National

Center for Education Statistics, 1992:39
Œ41).Files in which data on individuals are nested within assessments of
institutions and organizations (e.g., school, district, state) require additional

scrutiny. Many educational research programs rely on such nested research

designs to assess the effectiveness of classroom-and school-based programs. If

data on individual students or teachers are associated with specific schools, the

released data cannot include schools that can be uniquely identified. According to

the policy statement,
the assumption is made that school and school district administrators will
know which students or teachers were interviewed in the survey, regardless of

any procedures used to disguise the identity of these individuals or attempts to

keep this information from the administrators. Therefore, if a school or district

can be identified in a file, that file cannot be linked to student or teacher records

(National Center for Education Statistics, 1989:5).
While the legislation governing release of NCES statistical information is
similar to the restrictive legislation governing the Census Bureau, NCES has

developed policies that permit greater access to statistical data. For example, the

center has disseminated microdata in encrypted CD-ROM format and developed

licensing agreements that allow researchers to use data at their own work sites

(see Chapter 6 for a discussion of such techniques). The center has more freedom
to develop such policies because it is free of the restrictive statutory regulations

governing the Census Bureau. But, in other ways its task is even more difficult.

Its system of nested surveys of individuals and organizations complicates the

protection of schools, teachers, and students. Publicly available information on

individual schools and districts, in addition to a network of sophisticated

educational researchers who are familiar with existing data sets, increases the

opportunity for inadvertent disclosure beyond that faced by the Census Bureau.

These differences result in considerable tension when legislative protection

patterned after the Census Bureau is extended to NCES.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR HEALTH STATISTICS
Statutes protecting health records collected, maintained, and disseminated by
the National Center for Health Statistics offer another example of how the

inadequate protection provided by the Privacy Act can be supplemented through

specific statutoryLEGISLATION
123
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.authority. Section 308(d) of the Public Health Service Act (P.L. 85
Œ58) restrictsuse of data obtained by NCHS to the purposes for which they were originally

obtained (42 U.S.C. 
§ 242m(d)). When NCHS requests information, it informs
the person or organization supplying the data of the general anticipated uses,

which are usually limited to statistical research and reporting, and subsequent

uses of the information are then so limited. Section 308(d) further indicates that

such information may not be disclosed outside the agency in identifiable form

without the advance, explicit consent of the person or establishment to which they

relate.A number of manuals, policy statements, and publications expand on these
requirements (see Mugge, 1984; National Center for Health Statistics, 1978,

1984). For instance, the 
NCHS Staff Manual on Confidentiality
 (National Center
for Health Statistics, 1984) provides a thorough discussion of how the

requirements are to be interpreted.
5  The most noteworthy aspect of NCHS's
policy is the explicit recognition that there is some risk of disclosure of

individually identifiable information with the release of published tables and

public-use data files and that such risks must be balanced against the importance

of sharing statistical information. This is one of the very few instances in which

explicit recognition of this fact appears in an official agency policy statement.
Showing the center's awareness of the difficulty in ensuring confidentiality
of data when publishing tables with small cell sizes, the manual presents guidance

for avoiding inadvertent disclosure. It states that "mitigating circumstances in a

given situation which may make it acceptable to publish data that, strictly

speaking, could result in 'disclosures'" would justify a "special exception" to the

guidelines (p. 17). For example, if data are based on a sample that is a small

fraction of the universe, it might be assumed that disclosure will not occur

through published tables. Errors in the data or incomplete reporting may also

reduce the likelihood of disclosures taking place to a point that would justify

permitting publication of otherwise revealing tables. Similarly, in discussing the

standards for the development of public-use microdata files, the manual

recognizes that
the only absolutely sure way to avoid disclosure through microdata tapes is to
refrain completely from releasing any microdata tapes, but this would deprive

the Nation of a great deal of very important health research. Therefore, the

Center must make a determination as to when the public's need is sufficiently

great to justify the risk of disclosure. It is the Center's policy to release
LEGISLATION
124
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.microdata tapes for purposes of statistical research only when the risk of

disclosure is judged to be extremely low (p. 18).
In assessing the acceptability of the risk, NCHS considers the extent to
which the data involve a sample of the universe of relevant individuals or

establishments, the extent and availability of outside information necessary to

identify an individual or establishment, the expense of undertaking such an

effort, and the sensitivity of the information provided.
According to the NCHS manual, one exception to the above standards that
did not require a "special exception" involved the publication of vital statistics.

For example, a table could be published that indicated that within a specific

county during a specific period there was one infant death or two deaths from

rabies. Such exceptions were permitted because of "a long-standing tradition in

the field of vital statistics not to suppress small frequency cells in the tabulation

and presentation of data" and because such publication "rarely, if ever, reveals

any information about individuals that is not known socially'' (p. 17). However, in

1989 NCHS began to reexamine its policy on the release of vital statistics data

because the publication of statistical tables by county or the release of detailed

public-use microdata files might inadvertently reveal a cause of death, such as

acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), that was not "socially known" in

the community. The center and the states were concerned about controlling

inadvertent disclosure in the public-use microdata files because the center had

been releasing county-level data in its vital statistics.
The center obtains its vital statistics data from state health departments
under a contractual arrangement that assures that no information will be released

that could permit the identification of a specific individual or institution.

However, two court cases (a 1987 case involving the 
Atlanta Constitutional
Journal and the State Health Department of Georgia, and another in 1991
involving the American Civil Liberties Union and the State of Illinois) raised the

concern of the states, as well as NCHS, that the center was releasing data in

public-use microdata files that might result in the inadvertent disclosure of

individuals.6  As part of its policy reexamination, NCHS held a special session at
the July 1991 Public Health Conference on Records and Statistics to discuss the

issues and a variety of alternative solutions with its data users.
As a result of its reexamination, NCHS changed its policy beginning with
the release of the 1989 natality and mortality public-use
LEGISLATION
125
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.microdata files, which were released in the fall of 1992 (see National Center for

Health Statistics, 1992b). According to this new policy, NCHS will release

public-use microdata files in three versions:
1. 
Single-year format
: This format will be for a single calendar year and
include data for cities, counties, and metropolitan areas with a

population of 100,000 or more. Certain dates (date of the event and

date of birth of mother, father, and/or decedent) will be excluded

from the file. This file will be distributed by the National Technical

Information Service (NTIS).
2. 
Multiyear format: This second format will contain data for a three-
year period (e.g., 1987
Œ1989) for all counties and metropolitan areas
and for cities with a population of 50,000 or more. Again, certain

dates (date and year of the event as well as date of birth of mother,

father, and/or decedent) will be excluded from the file. This file will

also be distributed by NTIS.
3. 
Special formats
: NCHS will consider releasing vital statistics
microdata files to data users whose needs cannot be met by either the

single-year or multiyear format. Such users must contact NCHS and

explain their additional data needs. Users who obtain specially

formatted data files from NCHS will be required to sign a more

extensive agreement on data use than the one that NCHS typically

requires, an agreement that provides additional guidelines on

avoiding inadvertent disclosure (see 
Figure 4.1 and the discussion of
NCHS's data use agreement in 
Chapter 4).NCHS will reevaluate its new policy on the release of vital statistics data
after it has been in effect for one year.
The NCHS standards address in a straightforward manner the difficult issue
of deductive disclosure of information. Any disclosure is viewed as entailing

some degree of risk, and NCHS is frank in acknowledging this in balancing the

degree of risk against the benefit to the public that is likely to arise from the

research. The NCHS has a number of advantages that may permit it the latitude to

develop such policies. First, it is an agency that recognizes its primary role as

being research, thereby avoiding the difficulties that arise when trying to design a

system for handling records that are used for administrative purposes as well.

Further, it collects much of its own information and does not require the

cooperation of agencies that may follow more restrictive practices. (The NCHS

vital statistics program is an exception to this point; this program must rely on

statistical information reported by state registrars and is subject to varying state

restrictions. Since
LEGISLATION
126
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NCHS began relying on information the Census Bureau collects for it under the

authority of Title 15, rather than Title 13, it has avoided the more onerous

restrictions regarding disclosure of information by the Census Bureau.) Finally,

NCHS maintains a staff of skilled researchers, which enables it to conduct some

of the more sensitive analyses within the agency. Nevertheless, its data collection

and dissemination activities provide an opportunity to examine the consequences

of having policies that recognize the possibility of an inadvertent disclosure of

identifiable information and attempt to minimize that risk while releasing

information that permits statistical research and reporting goals to be

accomplished.INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE
Income information is perceived by many as among the most sensitive and
most useful information collected by the federal government. Studies based on

levels and changes in levels of reported income address a wide range of economic

issues. The staff of the Statistics of Income Division, IRS, uses data from income

tax returns and other sources to prepare publications and studies on a wide range

of topics (see Wilson and Smith, 1983). When the success of such studies

requires the use of individually identifiable information from other agencies, such

data can sometimes be made available within the standards of the Privacy Act.

However, the policy of the Census Bureau is that identifiable census records

cannot be transferred to the IRS for statistical purposes even if the IRS employees

who will have access to the records are special sworn employees of the Census

Bureau.7Difficulties also arise when outside agencies require income information for
the conduct of studies. Although no abuses of income information released for

statistical purposes are known to have occurred, the Tax Reform Act of 1976

sharply limited outside access to IRS income information for statistical purposes.

The passage of this act and the subsequent restrictions on existing research

practices illustrate how reforms directed at abuses of administrative records may

inadvertently hamper statistical and research uses of such records.
Prior to 1976 a number of executive orders permitted outside agencies to use
IRS income information if they followed certain standards in maintaining the

confidentiality of the information. However, in 1976 the Congress, partly in

response to the publicized disclosure of income tax information to the White

House,LEGISLATION
127
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.passed the Tax Reform Act of 1976 (see Wilson and Smith, 1983; U.S. Code

Congressional and Administrative News, 1976:2897
Œ4284, P.L. 94
Œ455). Thisact denied tax return information to the President and other executive agencies (
§6103(j) of the Internal Revenue Code) and expanded the definition of tax return

information to include a broader range of Social Security earnings reports. As a

consequence, access to income information for statistical and research purposes

was sharply restricted.
The Internal Revenue Code, as amended by the Tax Reform Act of 1976,
provides that tax returns and "return information" are confidential and not to be

disclosed except as authorized by law (
§ 6103(a)). "Return information" is
extensively defined to include virtually every aspect of information filed with the

IRS, including a taxpayer's identity and address and the fact that a return was filed

(§ 6103(b)(2)). As a result, most releases of filing information to other federal
agencies for purposes of statistical research must be in anonymous form.

Exceptions are made for specified statistical and research uses by other units of

the Treasury Department, the Census Bureau, the Bureau of Economic Analysis,

and by a subsequent amendment (P.L. 95
Œ210), the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (
§ 6103(j) and 
§ 6103(m)(3)). The IRS may
undertake special statistical studies at the request of another agency, even

merging IRS records with records from the other agencies (
§ 6108). Such
opportunities, however, may be limited by the resources and interests of the IRS,

as well as the need of the requesting agencies for access to detailed and

potentially identifiable data used in such studies.
A serious loss of important statistical products, as well as significant
increased costs, was imposed on the federal statistical system as a consequence of

the Tax Reform Act. For example, external uses of the Social Security

Administration's Continuous Work History Sample were substantially curtailed,

as was access to IRS name and address information for medical follow-up and

epidemiologic studies (see 
Chapter 6 for details). And, as a result of the act,
federal statistical agencies faced a new obstacle in their efforts to promote sharing

of business lists (see 
Chapter 7).AGENCIES LACKING EXPLICIT STATUTORY
PROTECTION OF ESTABLISHMENT DATA
With few exceptions, the statutory protection of information on
establishments and other organizations that is collected for statistical purposes is

far weaker than the statutory protection of
LEGISLATION
128
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.personal data. Although we address the uses of statistical data on organizations in

Chapter 7, we mention them here to provide a contrast with the regulatory
schemes for personal records. Several agencies that collect statistical information

primarily from establishments and organizations do not have statutes that

explicitly protect the confidentiality of such information.
The experience of the Energy Information Administration in attempting to
maintain the confidentiality of statistical information collected from oil

companies illustrates the problem. At the time the data were gathered, the EIA

assured the companies involved that the information would be used only for

statistical reporting purposes. The EIA relied on its statutory authority to

administer this statistical program to develop regulations that were intended to

guard against administrative uses of such information (see the Department of

Energy policy statement contained in the 
Federal Register, 45(177):59812
Œ59816). However, conflicting statutory authority requires the disclosure of such

information to other federal agencies for official use upon request. Specifically,

Title 15 U.S.C. 
§ 771(f) states that "information [referred to in section 1905 of
Title 18] shall be disclosed by 
– the [secretary of energy], in a manner designed
to preserve its confidentiality
Š(1) to other Federal Government departments,
agencies, and officials for official use upon request
–."When the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice sought identifiable
information to aid in two investigations of price gouging, the EIA resisted and the

matter was referred to the Office of Legal Counsel in the Department of Justice,

which ruled that EIA must produce the information requested by the Antitrust

Division. Protracted negotiations regarding the precise nature of the data to be

released ensued; the Justice Department eventually closed the cases without

having received any proprietary data. The Justice Department, however,

continues to hold that it is legally entitled to such data (U.S. General Accounting

Office, 1993; see 
Chapter 7 for additional detail).
The Bureau of Labor Statistics also collects extensive statistical information
on establishments and other organizations, much of which is reported voluntarily,

without specific statutory protection to preserve the confidentiality of identifiable

information. However, BLS has been more successful than EIA in fashioning a

protective shield for such information. Based on a combination of regulations and

lower court decisions, BLS has developed policies that enable it to honor the

pledges of confidentiality that are given when it collects establishment data.
LEGISLATION
129
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The basic philosophy of BLS is to protect the confidentiality of the data that
it collects. This fundamental position is articulated in a series of policy directives

that set forth procedures for safeguarding sensitive BLS information. The

secretary of labor has authorized the commissioner of BLS to develop policies to

govern the disclosure of all data collected by BLS (U.S. Department of Labor,

1972). These policies are intended to ensure that "data collected or maintained

by, or under the auspices of, the Bureau under a pledge of confidentiality shall be

treated in a manner that will assure that individually identifiable data will be

accessible only to authorized persons and will be used only for statistical

purposes or for other purposes made known in advance to the

respondent" (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1980:6).
This pattern of regulation was upheld by a federal district court when
employment data from unemployment insurance (UI) reports that would identify

individual establishments were sought under the Freedom of Information Act (see

Hufstead v. Norwood
, 529 F. Supp. 323 (S. D. Fla. 1981)). The reports had been
voluntarily supplied to BLS by a state employment security agency, which was

required by state law to keep such reports confidential, and BLS had pledged to

keep the reports confidential. The court refused to order disclosure, finding the

information to be exempt from the disclosure provisions of the Freedom of

Information Act because such disclosure "would impair the Bureau of Labor

Statistics' ability to collect that data in the future." More specifically, the court

found that BLS met the test for an exemption from disclosure under exemption 4

of the Freedom of Information Act (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552(b)(4)), established in
National  Parks and Conservation Ass'n v. Morton
, 498 F.2d 765, 767 (D. C. Cir.
1974), 529 F. Supp. at 326. In addition, because each state has laws and

regulations protecting the confidentiality of its UI data, BLS is given extra

protection. That is, if UI data are requested, BLS cannot release the data without

conforming to the states' laws and regulations.
While BLS has been successful in honoring pledges of confidentiality
without formal statutory protection, it has had relatively few legal tests of its

pledge. Will promises of confidentiality be honored if the secretary of labor

should revoke the delegation of authority to BLS's commissioner and begin to use

this information in enforcement proceedings, or share some of it with the

Department of Justice for investigatory purposes? Without clear statutory

protection, the adequacy of the protection for confidential information on

business establishments may be constrained
LEGISLATION
130
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.by the policies of successive administrative officials and varying interpretations

of courts of different jurisdiction.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics has, on occasion, sought statutory protection
for the confidential statistical information that it collects. For instance, a letter

from Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Dole to the Hon. Thomas Foley, Speaker of

the House of Representatives, dated June 21, 1990, describes a proposed Labor

Statistics Confidentiality Act. As of early 1993, however, no action had been

taken on such legislation.
NEW STATISTICAL AGENCIES
Legislation passed late in 1991 established a new statistical agency, the
Bureau of Transportation Statistics, in the Department of Transportation. Also in

1991, legislation was considered, but not passed, that would have created a

Department of the Environment, with a Bureau of Environmental Statistics as one

of its components. The roles of the two agencies, one already authorized and the

other being considered, differ somewhat from the common conception of what a

federal statistical agency does. Instead of their collecting data on relevant topics

directly from persons or organizations, it is apparently intended that each of the

two agencies will accomplish its mission primarily by compiling, analyzing, and

publishing data collected by other components of its parent department.
The Bureau of Transportation Statistics was created by Section 6006 of the
Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (P.L. 102
Œ240). The
only provision of the act that relates to confidentiality and data access is the

following short paragraph:
(e) PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN DISCLOSURES.
ŠInformation compiled
by the Bureau shall not be disclosed publicly in a manner that would reveal the

personal identity of any individual, consistent with the Privacy Act of 1974 (5

U.S.C. 552a), or to reveal trade secrets or allow commercial or financial

information provided by any person to be identified with such person (
§ 111).The above provision mentions only public disclosure. It does not establish a
clear basis for full functional separation of data that might be received by the

Bureau of Transportation Statistics from other statistical agencies or from

administrative sources and used by it for statistical and research purposes. The

Conference Report on the legislation goes somewhat further in this direction,

stating thatLEGISLATION
131
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the conferees intend that the Director establish such procedures as necessary
to ensure that all Bureau data are collected and stored in such a way that they

cannot be used to prosecute individuals or reveal business information that could

harm persons or corporations (102nd Cong. 1st session, Conference Report

102
Œ404:461
Œ462).
At this time, it is difficult to predict what kinds of problems the Bureau of
Transportation Statistics is likely to have in managing its confidentiality and data

access functions given this less-than-comprehensive statutory basis.
8The key portion of the confidentiality provision drafted for the proposed
Bureau of Environmental Statistics is a statement almost identical to the one cited

above from the transportation legislation. One is left with the overall impression

that in drafting confidentiality legislation for new statistical agencies the drafters

have given relatively little attention to what can be learned from experience.

What statutory provisions are needed to maintain the principle of functional

separation of administrative and statistical or research data and to maximize the

dissemination of useful data while protecting confidentiality? How can demands

for access to individually identifiable statistical data for nonstatistical purposes be

successfully resisted? How does the statutory language affect the agency's ability

to share identifiable data with other federal agencies for statistical and research

uses? A look at the experiences of the statistical agencies whose legislation we

have described in this chapter (and the experiences of the Energy Information

Administration described in 
Chapter 7) would have provided valuable insights
into what has worked well and what has not.
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Current legislation impedes the constructive exchange of data for statistical
and research purposes while failing to provide adequate protection of the

confidentiality of statistical and research records. The panel notes two major

inadequacies of the current situation.
First, many agencies not covered by specific confidentiality legislation have
to rely on the Privacy Act to protect identifiable data on individuals. There are

serious limitations to the protections provided by the Privacy Act for data from

individuals, however. The panel notes three related limitations to the Privacy

Act:LEGISLATION
132
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1. Although the Privacy Act does provide for separate treatment and
disclosure of anonymous statistical data, it does not distinguish

between administrative uses of data and statistical uses. Thus, it does

not provide for the separate treatment of identifiable statistical data

and identifiable data from administrative record systems.

Distinctions between statistical and administrative data correspond to

the purpose for which the data were collected and the assurances

offered to the respondent. (The panel strongly supports the principle

of functional separation of statistical and administrative data; see

discussion in 
Chapter 1.)2. The Privacy Act does not prohibit administrative and regulatory uses
of individually identifiable data obtained for statistical purposes.

Exceptions to the informed consent requirement may permit

statistical data to be used for administrative and regulatory purposes,

in violation of assurances given the individual at the time the

information was collected that the information would be used for the

exclusive purpose of conducting research or statistical analysis.
3. The Privacy Act requires agencies to inform individuals of the
anticipated routine uses that will be made of their data at the time the

data are collected. However, the routine-use exemption permits

exchange of identifiable information for an unanticipated purpose if

that purpose is "consistent" with the original purposes mentioned

when the information was collected. Loose standards for defining a

consistent use may diminish the protection afforded statistical

records by permitting the release of identifiable research records for

administrative, enforcement, and other nonresearch purposes that

may jeopardize the interests of data subjects (see Coles, 1991).
Second, there is wide variation among statistical agencies in the degree of
confidentiality protection that is afforded by legislation. Among the agencies

reviewed in this chapter, protection varies greatly, from the rigorous protection

provided for data collected under Title 13 by the Census Bureau, to the currently

uncertain protection of data collected by the Energy Information Administration,

to the absence of specific statutory protection for the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

The panel notes three major effects of this variation:
1. The degree of data protection often is determined by the statutes
governing the specific agency maintaining the information. As a

result, the same kind of information may receive greater
LEGISLATION
133
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.or lesser protection depending on the agency that maintains it, and

without regard to the sensitivity of the information.
2. Variation in protection among agencies may thwart the exchange of
information across agencies. Those agencies that are required by law

to maintain an especially high degree of confidentiality are not able

to transfer data to agencies that do not have the same level of

protection. For example, the National Agricultural Statistics Service

(NASS) transfers lists of farms to the Census Bureau for the latter's

use in developing a mailing list for the Census of Agriculture.

However, NASS cannot obtain the complete mailing list for the

Census of Agriculture for use in developing a sampling frame for its

own surveys. Instead, it must develop its own sampling frame at

considerable additional cost, even though both agencies collect data

from essentially the same universe.
3. Differing levels of statutory protection across agencies may cause
confusion for data subjects and providers who do not pay close

attention to subtle differences in the assurances of confidentiality

that accompany agency requests for information. These assurances

often are carefully drafted to correspond with the unique level of

protection provided by each agency. But the distinctions may

become blurred or lost when data providers respond to requests for

information from several agencies. As a result, data providers may

place too much trust in agencies with limited means of protecting

data used for statistical and research purposes, and they may not

know which agencies have a sound legal basis for offering more

rigorous protection.Recommendation 5.1
 Statistical records across all federal agencies should be
governed by a consistent set of statutes and regulations meeting standards for the

maintenance of such records, including the following features of fair statistical

information practices:
(a) a definition of statistical data that incorporates the principle of
functional separation as defined by the Privacy Protection Study

Commission,(b) a guarantee of confidentiality for data,
(c) a requirement of informed consent or informed choice when
participation in a survey is voluntary,
(d) a requirement of strict control on data dissemination,
(e) a requirement to follow careful rules on disclosure limitation,
LEGISLATION
134
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(f) a provision that permits data sharing for statistical purposes under
controlled conditions, and
(g) legal sanctions for those who violate confidentiality requirements
(see Recommendation 5.3 for further discussion of this requirement).
The panel believes that such legislation should be crafted so that it does not
require renewal in short intervals. The confidentiality legislation for the National

Agricultural Statistics Service, for example, is contained in the Food Security Act

of 1985 (P.L. 99
Œ198, § 1770), which must be renewed every five years. We
believe that all statistical agencies should have permanent confidentiality

legislation so as to meet the legitimate expectations of respondents for

confidentiality.The seven features listed above are intended to be an integrated package, not a
shopping list of possible options. While the list contains the minimum standards,

the panel does not wish to discourage the high standards on confidentiality that

are already in place for some agencies. Existing and proposed legislation should

balance such competing values as data protection and data dissemination.
9To attain the proposed standard for the maintenance of statistical records, the
panel sees two complementary approaches:
1. The standards might take the form of new government-wide
legislation, a "Federal Statistical Records Act," that would protect the

confidentiality of records used for statistical purposes across the

entire federal government. Such an act would (1) distinguish between

administrative and statistical records on the basis of use, (2) establish

and mandate functional separation between administrative and

statistical records, (3) encourage disclosure of statistical records for

statistical uses, and (4) restrict disclosure of statistical records for

nonstatistical uses. The legislation would complement the Privacy

Act and perhaps be incorporated in it. However, amending the

Privacy Act, which extends protection only to individuals, will not be

a suitable means of addressing concerns regarding statistical data

maintained by federal agencies on establishments and organizations.

(See Chapter 7 for the panel's recommendations concerning
statistical data on organizations.)
2. A second approach would be to incorporate the standards in agency-
specific confidentiality legislation, adapting them to the specific

mission and programs of each statistical agency. For this approach,

the panel suggests that specialized legislative provisions be

developed that apply the standards outlined above to the specific
LEGISLATION
135
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tasks of each statistical agency. Thus, there would be two levels of

protection: first, the Federal Statistics Records Act and, then, specific

legislation governing each agency.
These approaches are not mutually exclusive, and some combination of
strategies may be appropriate. For instance, the Privacy Act could be amended

while model legislative provisions were being developed.
Statutory standards that prohibit disclosure of statistical data if there exists
any possibility of association with a specific individual or organization place an
unnecessarily strict limitation on exchange of data for research. Although

statutory requirements for nondisclosure (other than those in government-wide

statutes such as the Privacy Act of 1974) vary considerably from one agency to

another, most are stated in absolute terms to the effect that no information can be

released if it can be associated with a specific individual or organization. For

example, the Census Bureau's Title 13 prohibits the publication of any data from

establishments or individuals collected under this statute if the data can be

identified. Similarly, legislation governing the National Center for Education

Statistics prohibits the publication of data that would permit the identification of

an individual.If taken literally, requirements of "zero disclosure risk" would virtually
eliminate the dissemination of statistical data, especially in the form of public-use

microdata. Removal of explicit identifiers (such as name, address, and Social

Security number) and careful application of statistical techniques to protect

confidentiality (see 
Chapter 6) are not enough to protect individually identifiable
data from ever becoming known. There is almost always some residual risk,

which cannot be easily quantified, that a diligent "snooper" who wanted to do so

might identify one or more data subjects included in a tabulation or microdata

file.In practice, many of the statutory requirements that are expressed in absolute
terms have been interpreted to mean that unrestricted access to a particular data

set requires that a reasonable effort be made to keep the risk of disclosing

individually identifiable information at an acceptably low level. Agency officials

exercise judgments to decide what statistical disclosure limitation procedures

must be applied in order to keep disclosure risk acceptably low. Judgments are

required because no one can have full knowledge of the externally available data

sets and other factors that might lead to disclosure and because the concept of

what constitutes an acceptably low risk of disclosure is inherently
LEGISLATION
136
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.subjective. Also, the incentive for "snooping" will vary greatly across different

data sets, thus affecting risk.
The implementing regulations for the Privacy Act allow federally supported
researchers to disseminate project findings that do not contain information that

could reasonably be expected to be identifiable. A criterion of a "reasonably low

disclosure risk" has been used by OMB in its interpretation of the Privacy Act. In

providing executive branch agencies with guidelines for implementing the

Privacy Act, OMB defines the phrase "not individually identifiable" to mean that

"the identity of the individual can not reasonably be deduced by anyone from

tabulations or other presentations of the information" (
Federal Register, 40(132):28954).Recommendation 5.2
 Zero-risk requirements for disclosure of statistical
records are, in practice, impossibly high standards. Regulations and policies

under existing statutes should establish standards of reasonable care. New

statutes should recognize that almost all uses of information entail some risk of

disclosure and should allow release of information for legitimate statistical

purposes that entail a reasonably low risk of disclosure of individually

identifiable data.
Few sanctions for improper dissemination of research records are designed
to extend beyond federal agencies to contractors, grantees, and nonagency

researchers. In most of the statistical agencies the panel reviewed, employees take

an oath or sign an affidavit to indicate that they are aware of the statutory

confidentiality provisions associated with the data and the penalties for violating

those provisions.Among the federal statistical agencies included in our review, only the
National Center for Education Statistics and the Bureau of Justice Statistics have

legislation that includes penalties for violation of confidentiality provisions by

nonemployees. For NCES, such penalties are for data users who have access to

data from a subset of surveys that were listed in the 1990 amendment to the

Hawkins-Stafford amendments (see 
§ 252 of the Excellence in Mathematics,
Science and Engineering Act of 1990, P.L. 101
Œ589). The statute for BJS is much
broaderŠcontractors and grantees are subject to a maximum fine of $10,000 for
violating the confidentiality provisions of BJS's legislation (42 U.S.C. 
§ 3789g(a)).Legislative sanctions for violating confidentiality provisions are desirable
for all data users, within and outside a federal agency.
LEGISLATION
137
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Currently, some penalties for violating confidentiality have the force of law,
but others do not. Informal penalties, such as declining to provide additional data

to users who fail to observe agency confidentiality standards, are among the few

options currently available to agencies that do not have statutory provisions for

penalizing such users. Such practices could be effective for users whose

statistical activities require frequent use of federal data sets. However, they would

be unlikely to deter those who want to identify individual units in a data set

merely to satisfy their curiosity or to embarrass the agency that released the data.
Legislative sanctions and informal penalties for violating confidentiality
have not been widely applied. This could be due to the fact that there have been

few violations, that violations have occurred without agencies' knowledge, or that

agencies have been reluctant to impose sanctions for violations due to the adverse

publicity that might result. Nevertheless, it is clear that sanctions authorized by

legislation can play an important role in protecting the confidentiality of

statistical data by raising the consciousness of data custodians and data users.
As noted in 
Chapter 4, data users are pressing agencies to provide greateraccess to statistical data. Currently, federal agencies are the ones who "suffer" the

consequences when confidentiality violations occur. They fear such negative

outcomes as lower response rates or decreased cooperation from respondents and

are understandably cautious about broadening access to confidential statistical

data since it merely increases the risk for them. Nonemployees who are data users

must also share responsibility for maintaining the confidentiality of data. Data

users must recognize their responsibilities and data providers need the assurance

that sanctions bring to users' responsibilities.
Recommendation 5.3
 There should be legal sanctions for all users, both
external users and agency employees, who violate requirements to maintain the

confidentiality of data.
This recommendation is tied to the panel's position discussed in 
Chapter 4,that is, that users must be prepared to accept legal and contractual sanctions for

violations.Contractual sanctions for violating confidentiality might also be broadened
to include the data user's organization. One enforcement device that has been used

in federally supported survey research is the requirement that the user's

organization deposit a specified sum of money before the data user can obtain the

microdata.LEGISLATION
138
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The money is forfeited if the data user fails to live up to the specified
provisions of the agreement on data release. This approach has been used by the

University of Michigan's Survey Research Center in releasing detailed microdata

files from longitudinal surveys conducted with grant support from the National

Science Foundation (see Jabine, 1993a).
NOTES1. This discussion of the Privacy Act is taken, in part, from Cecil (1989).

2. For a more detailed discussion of the origins of the Privacy Act, as well as a discussion of the way

in which it is inappropriate to contemporary recordkeeping practices, see Flaherty, 1989:306-314,

366-370.
3. The Privacy Act defines a 
record as "any item, collection, or grouping of information about an
individual that is maintained by an agency, including, but not limited to, his education, financial

transactions, medical history, and criminal or employment history and that contains his name, or the

identifying number, symbol, or other identifying particular assigned to the individual, such as a finger

or voice print or a photograph" (Title 5 U.S.C 
§ 552a(a)(4)).The term 
statistical record is defined in the Privacy Act as "a record in a system of records
maintained for statistical research or reporting purposes only and not used in whole or in part in

making any determination about an identified individual, except as provided by 
§ 8 of Title 13 (which
governs the Census Bureau)" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(a)(6)).The Privacy Act defines a 
system of records
 as "a group of any records under the control of any
agency from which information is retrieved by the name of the individual or by some identifying

number, symbol, or other identifying particular assigned to the individual" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(a)(5)).
4. For an example of the differing standards that have been adopted under this exemption for

disclosure of names and addresses contained in files held by federal agencies, see Rubin (1990). For a

discussion of the evolving nature of this exemption, see Andrussier (1991).

5. See "Requirements Relating to Confidentiality and Privacy in Data Collection Contracts" and

Requirements Relating to Confidentiality and Privacy in Data Processing Contracts," Appendixes 
Aand B, respectively, in National Center for Health Statistics (1984).
6. The cases are 
The Atlanta Journal et al. v. Ledbetter et al.,
 Superior Court of Fulton County, State
of Georgia, Civil Action File No. D-40588 (1987) and 
Jane Doe II et al. v. Lumpkin,
 United StatesDistrict Court, Central District of Illinois, Case No. 89-1224 (1991).

7. One of the requirements of Title 13 is that the Census Bureau not

LEGISLATION
139
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.publish results from data collected under this authority that could be used to identify respondents. In

its effort to reduce the risk that a respondent to a Title 13 survey could be identified, the Census

Bureau has adopted a microdata protection criterion that precludes release of information that is

obtained from or matchable to administrative records systems. (For more information, see Gates,

1988.)
8. Late in 1992, toward the end of the Bush administration, Secretary of Transportation Andrew H.

Card, Jr., announced the formation of the Bureau of Transportation Statistics and appointed Robert

Knisely as deputy director (U.S. Department of Transportation, 1992). As of early 1993, the first

director of the Bureau of Transportation Statistics had not been appointed.

9. The panel is not the first group to find statutory inadequacies and to recommend the passage of

government-wide legislation that would protect the confidentiality of federal statistical records.

Among those recommending the passage of such legislation were the Privacy Protection Study

Commission (PPSC), which was created by the Privacy Act of 1974, and the 1978-1979 President's

Reorganization Project for the Federal Statistical System. One of the PPSC's key recommendations

for statistical records was that government-wide legislation be passed that established the principle of

functional separation (Privacy Protection Study Commission, 1977a). The President's Reorganization

Project for the Federal Statistical System (1981:203) concluded that "existing legislation did not

provide a consistent framework for the protection of statistical confidentiality" and similarly

recommended the passage of government-wide confidentiality legislation for statistical records.

LEGISLATION
140
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6Technical and Administrative Procedures
The federal government has led the way in the development of statistical 
 methodology –
to protect the confidentiality of respondents, usually 
 called disclosure-avoidance
techniques.Barbara Bailar, 1990
The disclosure control to be applied to the release should ideally 
 be based on information
about – i. the degree of protection provided 
 by a specific scheme; and ii. the amount of
loss of information introduced 
 by that scheme.
Tore Dalenius, 1991
VA officials acknowledged their Income Verification Match project 
 had gone awry. A
computer malfunction in Chicago caused more than 
 650 veterans to receive another
veteran's income tax information.
Washington Post, 
May 27, 1992
INTRODUCTIONThe general and agency-specific information statutes discussed in 
Chapter 5provide the framework for the confidentiality and data access policies and

practices of federal statistical agencies. Within this broad and complex

framework, the agencies have substantial latitude to develop and apply specific

technical and administrative techniques in order to achieve wide dissemination

and use of publicly collected data while protecting the confidentiality of

individual information.Statistical agencies have two main options for protecting the confidentiality
of released dataŠproviding 
restricted data and providing 
restricted 
 access. The
first option entails restricting the content of data sets or files to be released.

Before releasing a microdata
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES141
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.file, for example, an agency would usually remove explicit identifiers (e.g.,

name, address, and Social Security number) and might further curtail the

information in the file (e.g., by giving people's ages in five-year intervals rather

than by exact date of birth). The second option entails imposing conditions on

who may have access to agency data, for what purpose, at what locations, and so

forth. (A similar distinction was made by Marsh et al. (1991b) in a paper about

data dissemination practices in the United Kingdom. Instead of 
restricted  dataand restricted access, they used the terms 
safe data and 
safe  setting.) Microdata
sets that are released with no restrictions on access (but typically with many

restrictions on content) are commonly referred to as 
public-use data sets.There is an inverse relationship between restrictions on data and restrictions
on access: as data restrictions increase, fewer restrictions on access are needed

and vice versa. Some user needs cannot be met with restricted data, however,

because the data transformation required to ensure data confidentiality is so

extreme that the restricted data are useless for inference purposes. In response, an

agency may allow more restricted access to less restricted data. Conversely, to

ensure confidentiality, access may have to be so restricted that a legitimate user

cannot, as a practical matter, obtain the data. Again in response, an agency may

allow less restricted access to more restricted data. Neither restricted data nor

restricted access alone is a panacea. To make effective use of data while

protecting confidentiality, both options are needed, often in combination. On the

other hand, without assurances of adequate confidentiality shields, data collection

may be stymied. A study of draft evaders who fled to a neutral country, for

example, was never conducted because researchers were unable to convince the

potential respondents that their anonymity could be ensured (Sagarin, 1973).

Thus, the comment by Dalenius quoted at the beginning of this chapter is to the

point. Confidentiality protection shields must be both effective and faithful to the

original data. The goal of technical and administrative shields is to protect

confidentiality adequately while leaving the statistical agency sufficiently

unencumbered that it can furnish faithful data. The criterion for faithful data is

simple and compelling: "The user expects to be the peer of the data collector in

answering a research question" (David, 1991:94).
This chapter has two main sections. In the first section we discuss statistical
techniques for protecting the confidentiality of data on persons and other data

subjects included in released data sets. It is widely accepted that it is virtually

impossible to releaseTECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES142
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.data for statistical use without incurring some risk that one or more persons can

be identified and information about them disclosed, especially if substantial

resources are used in a deliberate attempt to do so. The goal of using statistical

disclosure limitation techniques (mathematical methods that depend on statistical

characteristics of the data) prior to releasing data is to reduce the magnitude of

that risk.1In the second section of the chapter, we discuss agency policies and
procedures for providing restricted access to data on persons. We also present

examples of several kinds of restricted access, including data sharing between

agencies for statistical purposes and access by end users outside the government.

One of the examples includes the release of microdata in encrypted form.

Encryption is a technical procedure, but it is not generally thought of in the

context of statistical disclosure limitation techniques, and so we include it in our

discussion of restricted access procedures.
RESTRICTED DATA: STATISTICAL TECHNIQUES FOR
PROTECTING CONFIDENTIALITYIn this section we focus on the search for statistical techniques that restrict
statistical data so as to protect the confidentiality of the data while maintaining

utility to the legitimate data user. Although the topic is technical, our treatment is

not. Nor do we provide a primer on available techniques. That would only

duplicate concurrent work of the Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology

(1993), Subcommittee on Disclosure Limitation Methodology, which is chaired

by Nancy Kirkendall. We do describe the key concepts of the approach, evaluate

its value for confidentiality protection and data access, and present our

recommendations. In so doing, we address four topics: the nature of disclosure

risk and statistical procedures for disclosure limitation; current statistical

disclosure limitation practices of federal statistical agencies; the impact of

increased computer and communications capability on disclosure risk; and

current statistical disclosure limitation research.
DISCLOSURE RISK AND STATISTICAL DISCLOSURE
LIMITATION TECHNIQUES
As defined in 
Chapter 1
, a 
disclosure occurs when a data subject is identifiedfrom a released file (
identity disclosure), sensitiveTECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES143
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information about a data subject is revealed through the released file (
attributedisclosure), or released data make it possible to infer the value of an attribute of a
data subject more accurately than otherwise would have been possible

(inferential disclosure
). Inferential disclosure may involve either identity
disclosure or attribute disclosure.
2  The most general of these concepts is
inferential disclosure, which was defined by Dalenius (1977), supported by the

Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology (1978), and summed up by Jabine

et al. (1977:6) in the following statement: "If the release of the statistic 
S makes it
possible to determine the (microdata) value more closely than is possible without

access to S, a[n inferential] disclosure has taken place." As discussed in 
Chapter 5,the only way to have zero risk of inferential disclosure is not to release any data.

In practice, the extent of disclosure can only be limited to below some acceptable

level. Indeed, in Recommendation 5
Œ2 the panel suggested that new legislation
should recognize this fact and allow for release of information for legitimate

statistical purposes when it entails a reasonably low risk of disclosure.
Fellegi's (1972) view that disclosure requires identity disclosure 
andattribute disclosure is closest to what is commonly understood by 
disclosure andprovides a reasonable basis for legislative language. On the other hand, the

concept of inferential disclosure is useful to statistical agencies developing and

analyzing statistical disclosure limitation techniques. Also, inferential disclosure

encompasses a broader range of confidentiality risks that an agency should

examine.Statistical disclosure limitation techniques involve transformations of data to
limit the risk of disclosure. Use of such a technique is often called 
masking thedata, because it is intended to hide characteristics of data subjects. Some

statistical disclosure limitation techniques are designed for data accessed as tables

(tabular data), some are designed for data accessed as records of individual data

subjects (microdata), and some are designed for data accessed as computer data

bases. Common methods of masking tabular data are deleting table entries (cell

suppression) and altering table entries (random error, or noise introduction).

Common methods of masking microdata are deleting identifiers, dropping

sensitive variables, releasing only a small fraction of the data records,
3  andgrouping data values into categories (as in topcoding, whereby data values

exceeding a certain level are assigned to the top category). As discussed below,

direct access of computer data bases, a recent phenomenon, may involve either

tabular data or
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES144
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.microdata, but it raises new statistical disclosure limitation issues.
Prior to releasing statistical data, a statistical agency removes from the data
records any explicit identifiers (such as name, address, Social Security number,

telephone number) of data subjects that are not needed for statistical purposes. In

many situations, however, this obvious step of deidentification or anonymization

is not adequate to make the risk of disclosure reasonably low.
4  To go beyond ad
hoc measures to reduce the risk of disclosure, it is necessary to have ways of

measuring the nature and extent of disclosure possible in specified

circumstances. In the context of inferential disclosure, Duncan and Lambert

(1986) measure the extent of disclosure in terms of the change in uncertainty

about a shielded value prior to data release and after data release. Common

disclosure limitation policies, such as requiring the relative frequencies of

released cells to be bounded away from both one and zero, are equivalent to

disclosure rules that allow data release only if specific uncertainty functions at

particular predictive distributions exceed a limit. This effort generalizes work of

Cassel (1976) and Frank (1976, 1979) and demonstrates the analytic power of the

inferential disclosure formulation.
A seemingly different approach was taken by Bethlehem et al. (1990), who
focus on the number of unique individuals in a population, and so use identity

disclosure limitation. To illustrate how surprisingly often individuals prove to be

unique based on just a few common variables, they noted that a certain region of

the Netherlands contained 83,799 households. Of those households, 23,485 were

composed of a father, mother, and two children. Looking only at ages of the

father and mother and ages and sexes of the two children (all ages in years),

16,008 of the 23,485 households (68 percent) were unique. If a microdata file

was released containing this key information on ages and gender plus other

sensitive information, confidentiality could easily be compromised in most cases

by any individual having only basic background information about a household.

At least that would be the case if confidentiality was attacked broadly, for

example, by an individual who simply sought to identify any one household

among all households rather than some specific household. Such "fishing

expeditions," although presumably rare in practice are a concern to agencies

worried that someone might seek to discredit their confidentiality policies.
A disclosure risk analysis based on the number of unique entities can be one
element of the Duncan and Lambert (1986) framework.
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES145
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Release of a microdata file in which key variables are generally widely
available in the external world could permit linking data for all of the unique

households. This would raise the disclosure risk drastically for the shielded

sensitive information.5When disclosure risk is too high, data can be masked prior to release. As
noted above, different statistical masking techniques are used for public-use

microdata files and tables. In the case of a public-use microdata file, statistical

disclosure limitation techniques can be classified into five broad categories

(Duncan and Pearson, 1991):
1. 
Collecting or releasing only a sample of the data
: For example, the
Bureau of the Census first released a public-use microdata file with a

1-in-1,000 sample from the 1960 Census of Population and Housing;

microdata products from the 1980 census included one based on a 1

percent sample and another based on a 5 percent sample.
2. 
Including simulated data
: This technique has not been implemented,
but it is conceptually akin to including several identical limousines in

a motorcade under threat of terrorist attack.
3. 
''Blurring" of the data by grouping or adding random error to 
individual values: Presenting subjects' ages in 10-year intervals is an
example of grouping. For an example of addition of random error,

the Census Bureau prepared a microdata file for researchers at the

National Opinion Research Center from the 1980 census that

contained census tract characteristics (e.g., percentage of blacks and

Hispanics, unemployment rate, median house value). Because the

tract characteristics had unique combinations and those

characteristics could readily be learned from Census Bureau

publications, the records could be linked to the actual tract of

residence. That would have violated the Census Bureau policy of not

identifying a geographic area with fewer than 100,000 residents. To

reduce this risk, tract characteristics were masked by adding random

error, or noise (see Kim, 1990).
4. 
Excluding certain attributes
: An agency might provide a subject's
year of birth but not the month and day, or quarterly employment

data could be replaced with yearly summaries.
5. 
Swapping of data by exchanging the values of just certain variables 
between data subjects
: For example, the value for some sensitive
variable in a record could be exchanged for that in an adjacent

record.For data released as tables, the blurring and swapping techniques described
above have been used. Three other statistical
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES146
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.disclosure limitation techniques are unique to tables (see Cox, 1980, 1987;

Sande, 1984):
1. Requiring each marginal total of the table to have a minimum count
of data subjects.
2. Using a "concentration" rule, also known as the (
N,K)-rule, where 
Nentities do not dominate 
K percent of a cell; for example, requiring
that the reported aspects of the two dominant businesses in a cell

comprise no more than a certain percentage of a cell.
3. Using controlled rounding of table entries to perturb entries while
maintaining various marginal totals.
The more sophisticated the masking technique, the less accessible the data
and their analysis will be to many social scientists and policymakers. The

statistical disclosure limitation approach that creates the least problems for

analysts is masking through sampling because (at least with simple random

sampling) standard statistical inference tools readily apply. However, for public-

use microdata files, other statistical disclosure limitation techniques, such as the

addition of noise, present measurement error or errors-in-variables problems for

the user of the masked data (see, e.g., Sullivan and Fuller, 1989).
6  This canintroduce bias in the inferences that are drawn.
7  In general, the choice of an
appropriate statistical disclosure limitation method depends on the statistical

procedure to be used to analyze the data.
SELECTED STATISTICAL DISCLOSURE LIMITATION
PRACTICES OF FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCIES
Some federal statistical agencies
Šnotably the Census Bureau
Šhavedevoted considerable attention to the development and implementation of

statistical disclosure limitation techniques.8  In an enduring contribution, the
Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology (1978) issued Statistical Policy

Working Paper 2, 
Report on Statistical 
 Disclosure and Disclosure-AvoidanceTechniques. The report summarized the practices of seven federal agencies,
9 presented recommendations regarding statistical disclosure limitation techniques,

and discussed the effects of disclosure on data subjects and users and the need for

research and development in this area. Because of their continued relevance, the

panel endorses certain key recommendations from Statistical Policy Working

Paper 2 in presenting its own recommendations below. Attention to this area is

perhaps even more justifiable today because most
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES147
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.statistical disclosure limitation methods that are employed in practice lack

theoretical roots (see Duncan and Lambert, 1986; Greenberg and Zayatz, 1992).

Their ad hoc nature leads to criticism by potential users that they are excessively

conservative. For decades, for example, the Census Bureau used an area size

cutoff of 250,000 residents to limit the disclosure risk based on geographic

specification, a cutoff that was lowered to 100,000 residents for most surveys and

censuses after systematic studies were conducted (see Greenberg and Voshell,

1990a,b).
Procedures Used for Tables
Several statistical agencies have applied disclosure limitation to tabular
data. In practice, most agency guidelines provide for suppressing the values in the

cells of a table based on minimum cell sizes and an (
N, K
) concentration rule.
Minimum cell sizes of three are almost invariably used, because each member of a

cell of size two could derive a specific value from the other member. A typical

concentration rule specifies that no more than 
K = 70 percent of a cell value is
attributable to 
N = 1 entity. Often, the particular choice of 
N and K is not revealed
to data users. Cell suppression in tables always results in a loss to the data user of

some detailed information. Because cell sizes are typically small in geographic

areas with small populations, geographic detail is often lost (see below).

Procedures for Microdata Files
Only about half of the federal statistical agencies that replied to the panel's
request for information included materials that documented their statistical

disclosure limitation techniques for microdata. Some that did merely indicated

that the statistical disclosure limitation techniques for surveys they sponsored

were set by the Census Bureau's Microdata Review Panel because the surveys had

been conducted for them by the Census Bureau.
Major releasers of public-use microdata (that is, the Census Bureau, the
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), and more recently the National

Center for Education Statistics, or NCES) have all established formal procedures

for review and approval of new microdata sets. In general those procedures do

not rely on parameter-driven rules like those used for tabulations. Instead, they

require judgments by reviewers that take into account such factors as the

availability of external files with comparable
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES148
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.data, the resources that might be needed by a "snooper" to identify individual

units, the sensitivity of individual data items, the expected number of unique

records in the file, the proportion of the study population included in the sample,

and the expected amount of error in the data.
Since locating a data subject geographically increases disclosure risk, a
common disclosure limitation method is to coarsen geographic detail. The Census

Bureau and NCHS specify that no geographic codes for areas with a population

of less than 100,000 can be included in public-use microdata files. If a file

contains a large number of variables, a higher cutoff may be used. The inclusion

of local-area characteristics, such as the mean income, population density, and

percentage of minority population of a census tract, is also limited by this

requirement because if enough variables of this type are included, the local area

can be uniquely identified. For example, in the Energy Information

Administration's Residential Energy Consumption Surveys, local weather

information has had to be masked to prevent disclosure of the geographic location

of surveyed households. Lack of geographical coding may have limited effect on

certain analyses of national programs, like Food Stamps. Yet expunging state of

residence of a sampled household, as is done in the public-use microdata files of

the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), precludes many useful

analyses of programs (e.g., Aid for Families with Dependent Children) for which

eligibility criteria vary by state.10THE IMPACT OF IMPROVED COMPUTER AND
COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY
The President's Commission on Federal Statistics reported in 1971 that
the development of new methods of storing and recalling information by
computer has generated considerable confusion in the public mind about the

government's need for personal information about individuals, and apprehension

about the use of such information (pp. 198
Œ199).This comment remains emphatically legitimate today, over 20 years after the
publication of the report of the presidential commission. The public fears that the

government's amassing of large data bases will reach into the private lives of

citizens (see, e.g., Burnham, 1983; Flaherty, 1989).
The computer revolution that caused concern in 1971 is still
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES149
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ongoing. In the 1960s and 1970s mainframe computers were available to

comparatively few individuals. Beginning with the mass introduction of personal

computers by International Business Machines (IBM) in 1981, significant

computing power became available on the desks of most researchers. Because of

improvements in computer and communications technology, the prevailing mode

for data storage today is a computer data base, and a frequent mode of access is

through remote telecommunications. The latter permits large data bases to be

developed and maintained according to strict quality control standards while

allowing easy access by a widely dispersed group of data users. In the

commercial field the growth of airline reservation systems is a prototypical

example of this phenomenon. In the area of research and policy analysis, this

technology allows rich data bases to be assembled, provides access without a

special trip to the site where the data are stored, and in some cases enables

researchers to use their own software in analyzing the data. An often-cited

example of such an arrangement is the Luxembourg Income Study (Rain-water

and Smeeding, 1988), which maintains microdata sets containing measures of

economic well-being for many developed countries. The key consideration for

custodians of remotely accessed data bases is to provide the benefits of this easy

access while ensuring confidentiality. Only statistical aggregates, such as

tabulations, should be obtainable. The ability to download individual records

should be precluded. Further, and this is more difficult, the data user should not

be able to inter the information contained in individual records from permitted

queries about aggregates.Data base security has both administrative and technical aspects.
Administratively and at a systemwide level, the institution maintaining the data

base must create an environment in which passwords are not shared and the use

that individuals can make of secure data is subject to periodic audit and review.

Technically and at the data base level, reliance on access control procedures, such

as the use of passwords, is not fully adequate. All modern data bases are designed

to provide security against direct query of certain attributes. In this way, any user

can be allowed to access only a restricted part of a data base. Such a multilevel

data base basically stores data according to different security classifications and

allows users access to data only if their security level is greater than or equal to

the security classification of the data. Unfortunately, this simple device does not

preclude the existence of what is called an 
inference channel (see Denning andTECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES150
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Lunt, 1988). An inference channel is said to exist in a multilevel data base when a

user can infer information classified at a high level (to which the user does not

have access) based on information classified at a lower level to which the user

does have access. Such a channel may be hard to detect because it may involve a

lengthy chain of inference and combine information that is explicitly stored in the

data base and other, external information.
Further, a data user may have legitimate access to statistical aggregates, such
as averages and regression coefficients for such sensitive attributes as medical or

salary information, while not being permitted access to information that is

identifiable to a specified individual. In such situations, inferential disclosure

control is usually implemented through query restriction (Fellegi, 1972) or

response modification (Denning, 1980). In query restriction, certain queries, such

as those pertaining to a few entities in the data base, are not answered. In

response modification, the answers to certain queries are modified, for example,

by adding random error or rounding. In either instance, a problem stems from the

fact that the data base can be repeatedly queried. Each individual query may be

innocuous, but the sequential queries may be sufficient to compromise the data

base. This particular problem is an area of ongoing research (see Adam and

Wortman, 1989; Duncan and Mukherjee, 1991, 1992; Keller-McNulty and

Unger, 1993; Matloff, 1986; Tendick, 1991; and Turn, 1990). To date, research

suggests that (1) user demand for data access through remote querying of

relational data bases is inevitable and (2) modern data bases give rise to special

problems in protecting confidentiality that require new disclosure limitation

techniques.RECENT RESEARCH ON DISCLOSURE LIMITATION
Until recently agencies had little theoretical justification for the statistical
disclosure limitation tools they employed (see Cox, 1986; Duncan and Pearson,

1991). The tools of this field are not only statistical but also come from the fields

of mathematics, computer science, numerical analysis, linear and integer

programming; and operations research (see Brackstone, 1990; Greenberg 1990,

1991). Much of the research on disclosure limitation has taken place in federal

agencies, especially the Census Bureau (Bailar, 1990). Recently, statistical

disclosure limitation has begun to attract the attention of university researchers as a

field of inquiry. Below we describe a few recent studies of statistical disclosure

limitation techniques.TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES151
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Systematic Frameworks
Duncan and Pearson (1991) describe some general techniques for limiting
disclosures from microdata through a process of matrix masking. A statistical

agency would disseminate a transformed file rather than the original file. By a

process of matrix multiplication, the records can be transformed, the attributes

can be transformed, or both. By a process of matrix addition, the individual data

values can be displaced. Such matrix masking makes uses of well-known

disclosure limitation methods. Among record-transforming masking techniques

are aggregation across records, suppression of certain records, release of statistics

for ordinary least squares regression, release of a sample of records, and

multiplication of records by random noise. Among displacing masking

techniques are addition of random noise and addition of deterministic noise. In

his discussion of the Duncan and Pearson paper, Cox (1991) suggests how certain

generalizations of matrix masks can also make use of other disclosure limitation

methods, such as random rounding, grouping, and truncation.

Papers Commissioned by the Panel
To aid its deliberations, the panel commissioned a series of papers dealing
with a range of issues bearing on confidentiality and data access (see 
Appendix A
for a list of the papers). Below we briefly identify the contributions of the

commissioned papers that dealt most directly with statistical disclosure

limitation.Fuller (1993), in his paper 
Use of Masking Procedures for Disclosure 
Limitation, examines the confidentiality protection provided by adding random
error to data elements. Noting the importance of researchers' being able to

analyze the resulting masked data, he examines the costs of data masking as a

function of type of masking, degree of masking, and type of analysis. For a range

of situations, Fuller provides appropriate statistical estimation procedures based

on measurement error methodology.
Jabine (1993b), in his paper 
Statistical Disclosure Limitation: Current 
Federal Practices and Research
, summarizes the statistical disclosure limitation
practices of 18 agencies based primarily on their responses to a 1990 request from

the panel for information about agency confidentiality and data access policies

and practices. His paper also provides an update on the statistical procedures used

by the agencies that were included in the 1978 Statistical Policy Working Paper

2.TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES152
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Lambert (1993), in her paper 
Measures of Disclosure Risk and Harm
,develops a decision-theoretic model for the actions of a data snooper in

identifying a target record. She also examines a variety of measures of disclosure

harm and relates her discussion to a larger literature.
Little (1993), in his paper 
Statistical Analysis of Masked Data
, discusses a
broad range of masking methods, including randomized response, release of

subsamples of records, suppression of cells in a cross-tabulation, deletion of

sensitive values, deletion followed by imputation of values, addition of random

noise, rounding, grouping or truncation, transformation, slicing files into subsets

of variables, slicing and recombination to form synthetic records, reduction to

aggregate sufficient statistics, and microaggregation. He develops a likelihood

theory for masked data files that combines elements of Rubin's (1976) theories

for treatment assignment and missing data and Heitjan and Rubin's (1991) theory

for coarsened data.Keller-McNulty and Unger (1993), in their paper 
Database Systems: 
Inferential Security, synthesize research that has been conducted by computer
scientists and statisticians on problems of data security and confidentiality.

Computer scientists have focused on data release through sequential queries to a

data base; statisticians have focused on the aggregate release of data.
In his discussion of the commissioned papers at the panel's March 1991
Conference on Disclosure Limitation Approaches and Data Access, Rubin

broached the idea of applying multiple imputation methodology (see Rubin,

1987; Little and Rubin, 1987) to create artificial (synthetic) microdata files.
11  Inthis mode, federal statistical agencies would not release any actual data from

subjects. The clear appeal of this notion is that there is no possibility of identity

disclosure in disseminating synthetic data. However, the notion gives rise to

important questions: To what extent can synthetic data sets created by using

techniques such as multiple imputation and data swapping satisfy user needs?

What would be the legal and research standing of inferences drawn from them?

Shielding Organizational Data
For the most part, statistical disclosure limitation techniques have been
developed for data on persons and households. The task of protecting the

confidentiality of organizational data
Šfor example, economic data on
establishmentsŠis more difficult because
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES153
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.organizational data are decidedly skew on key dimensions. Federal statistical

agencies are thus reluctant to release public-use microdata files on organizations.

Some research in this area has begun. Wolf (1988), for example, examines a

technique of microaggregation that creates pseudo-records by combining

information from similar records. He applies it to the Census Bureau's

Longitudinal Research Development file (an earlier version of the Longitudinal

Research Database), which consists of a longitudinal file of manufacturing

establishment microdata records collected through the Annual Survey of

Manufactures and the Census of Manufactures for the years 1972
Œ1981. Heexamines the utility of the masked data by comparing characteristics of the

distribution of the masked data with the corresponding characteristics of the

original data.
12  Other work in this area includes Govoni and Waite (1985),
McGuckin and Nguyen (1990), and Spruill (1983).
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Many of the statistical agencies included in the panel's review have
standards, guidelines, or formal review mechanisms that are designed to ensure

that (1) adequate analyses of disclosure risk are performed and (2) appropriate

statistical disclosure limitation techniques are applied prior to release of tables

and public-use microdata files. The standards and guidelines, however, exhibit a

wide range of specificity: Some contain only one or two simple rules; others are

much more detailed. Examples of more detailed formal documentation or

procedures include those of the Census Bureau (for microdata), the Energy

Information Administration (for tabulations only), the National Center for Health

Statistics, and the 1977 Social Security Administration guidelines, which are still

in effect. Other statistical agencies have far less formal procedures. This variation

over agencies in the comprehensiveness of disclosure review has little

justification in terms of agency mission. Further, unfulfilled opportunities exist

for agencies to work together and learn from one another, perhaps pooling

resources to investigate the strengths and weaknesses of various statistical

disclosure limitation techniques.
Based on its findings, the panel endorses the following recommendations
from Statistical Policy Working Paper 2 (Federal Committee on Statistical

Methodology, 1978) and then makes Recommendation 6.1:
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES154
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendations from Statistical Policy Working Paper 2

All federal agencies releasing statistical information, whether in tabular or
microdata form, should formulate and apply policies and procedures designed to

avoid unacceptable disclosures (pp. 41
Œ42:part of Recommendation B1).
To insure compliance with its disclosure-avoidance policies and procedures,
each agency that releases statistical information should establish appropriate

internal clearance procedures. There should be a clear assignment of individual

responsibilities for compliance (p. 43:Recommendation B6).
The 
– [Statistical Policy Office, OMB] should encourage agencies that
release tabulations and microdata to develop appropriate policies and guidelines

for avoiding disclosure, and to review these policies periodically. To the extent

feasible, 
– [this office] should help agencies to obtain technical assistance in
the development of disclosure-avoidance techniques (p. 43:Recommendation

B8).The 
– [Statistical Policy Office, OMB] should conduct periodic training
seminars for Federal agency personnel who are responsible for developing and

applying statistical disclosure-avoidance procedures (p. 43:Recommendation

C2).Since the panel convened, the federal statistical agencies have initiated some
activities consonant with the above recommendations. In particular, in 1991

OMB's Statistical Policy Office took the lead in organizing an interagency

committee to coordinate research on statistical disclosure analysis. This

Subcommittee on Disclosure Limitation Methodology was begun as an initiative

of the directors of the major statistical agencies.
Recommendation 6.1
 The Office of Management and Budget's Statistical
Policy Office should continue to coordinate research work on statistical

disclosure analysis and should disseminate the results of this work broadly

among statistical agencies. Major statistical agencies should actively encourage

and participate in scholarly statistical research in this area. Other agencies should

keep abreast of current developments in the application of statistical disclosure

limitation techniques.
As discussed above, statistical disclosure limitation methods can hide or
distort relations among study variables and result in
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES155
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.analyses that are incomplete or misleading. Because of this possibility, policy

researchers have expressed serious reservations about the use of statistical

disclosure limitation techniques (e.g., Smith, 1991). Further, data masked by
some disclosure limitation methods can only be analyzed accurately by

researchers who are highly sophisticated methodologically. Based on these

findings, the panel makes the following recommendation:
Recommendation 6.2
 Statistical agencies should determine the impact on
statistical analyses of the techniques they use to mask data. They should be sure

that the masked data can be accurately analyzed by a range of typical

researchers. If the data cannot be accurately analyzed using standard statistical

software, the agency should make appropriate consulting and software

available.The panel believes that no one procedure can be developed for all statistical
agencies. Further, confidentiality laws governing particular agencies differ, as do

the types of data collected and the needs of data users. In light of these findings,

the panel endorses the following recommendations contained in Statistical Policy

Working Paper 2:
Because there are wide variations in the content and format of information
released, the Subcommittee does not feel that it is feasible to develop a uniform

set of rules, applicable to all agencies, for distinguishing acceptable from

unacceptable disclosures. In formulating disclosure-avoidance policies, agencies

should give particular attention to the sensitivity of different data items.

Financial data, such as salaries and wages, benefits, and assets, and data on

illegal activities and on activities generally considered to be socially sensitive or

undesirable require disclosure-avoidance policies that make the risk of statistical

disclosure negligible
–.Agencies should avoid framing regulations and policies which define
unacceptable statistical disclosure in unnecessarily broad or absolute terms.

Agencies should apply a test of reasonableness, i.e., releases should be made in

such a way that it is reasonably certain that no information about a specific

individual will be disclosed in a manner that can harm that individual (p. 42:part

of Recommendation B1).
Special care should be taken to protect individual data when releases are based
on complete (as opposed to sample) files and when data are presented for small

areas (p. 42:Recommendation B2).
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES156
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Given the potential difficulties that certain statistical disclosure limitation
techniques can cause for analysts, it is important that federal statistical agencies

involve data users in selecting such procedures. As Greenberg (1991:375) notes,

''survey sponsors and data users must contribute to the decision making process in

identifying areas in which some completeness and/or accuracy can be sacrificed

while attempting to maintain as much data quality as possible." In the past,

agency staffs have been essentially the sole determiners of which statistical

disclosure limitation techniques are to be employed prior to releasing tables and

microdata files.
Recommendation 6.3
 Each statistical agency should actively involve data
users from outside the agency as statistical disclosure limitation techniques are

developed and applied to data.
Finally, over the past 30 years various agencies have released public-use
microdata files successfully. Marsh et al. (1991a) make a compelling case for the

release of public-use microdata files. (Note also Collins, 1992, for a cautionary

viewpoint and Marsh et al., 1992, for a rejoinder.) Based on experience, such data

dissemination has met a two-pronged test: (1) the microdata files have been

useful to researchers and policy analysts and (2) confidentiality has been

protected. Based on this finding, the panel makes the following recommendation:
Recommendation 6.4
 Statistical agencies should continue widespread
release, with minimal restrictions on use, of microdata sets with no less detail

than currently provided.
We note that expansion of the number and richness of public-use microdata
files to be disseminated would be better justified if all users were subject to and

made aware of sanctions for disclosure of information about individually

identifiable data providers (see Recommendation 5.3).
RESTRICTED ACCESS: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
TO PROTECT CONFIDENTIALITY
Procedures for providing restricted access to data typically establish
eligibility requirements for access and impose a variety of
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES157
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.conditions covering the purposes for which the data can be used, which

organizations and individuals can have access, the location of access, physical

security measures, and the retention and disposition of initial and secondary data

files. Written agreements are usually required, and criminal or contractual

penalties are often attached to noncompliance with the conditions of access.
Arrangements for providing restricted access to federal data for statistical
purposes are not uncommon. In a paper prepared for the panel, Jabine (1993a)

provides 19 examples, most of them current, and his list was intended only to

illustrate various types of access that are allowed, not to provide an exhaustive

summary. He also gives six examples of instances in which access could not be

obtained to data that would have had important statistical uses.
The characteristics of interagency data sharing agreements tend to be
different from those associated with arrangements for restricted access by

external users. The former are more likely to involve sharing of individual

records with explicit identifiers, for purposes such as developing sampling frames

and enhancing data bases. The latter typically are designed to permit access to

potentially identifiable records for statistical analysis. These two types of access

are discussed in the next two subsections.
INTERAGENCY DATA SHARING
We begin this subsection by presenting examples of agreements that have
been developed to permit interagency sharing of identifiable, or potentially

identifiable, personal records for statistical purposes. Some of the examples

involve transfers of administrative records; others involve transfers of data

collected in statistical surveys. Most of the examples are taken from Jabine

(1993a). Following the examples, we discuss some of the general issues they

illustrate.This subsection does not include any examples of 
unsuccessful attempts todevelop interagency data sharing arrangements for statistical purposes. The

absence of such examples does not mean that all or even most proposals for

interagency sharing are successful. For some kinds of data, statutory restrictions

make sharing impossible; in other instances, agencies' policies and their

interpretations of confidentiality statutes have thwarted requests by other

agencies for access to their data. The very limited ability of federal agencies to

share business lists for statistical purposes (see 
Chapter 8) illustrates the kinds of
barriers that exist.
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES158
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Examples of Interagency Data Sharing
Bureau of Labor Statistics Access to Nonpublic Microdata from the 
 CurrentPopulation Survey
 The main sponsor and funding agency for the monthly
Current Population Survey (CPS) is the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The

survey data are collected by the Census Bureau. Because the sample of

households is based in part on address listings from the decennial censuses, all

CPS data are subject to the confidentiality provisions of Title 13 of the U.S.

Code, which means that only Census Bureau employees (including special sworn

employees) can have access to individually identifiable information.
Such limitations on access have long been a source of discontent on the part
of agencies sponsoring household surveys conducted under the provisions of Title

13. Sponsors believe they are unduly restricted in their ability to perform detailed

analyses of the survey data and to use the survey materials for intermediate

purposes that might involve data linkages or follow-up contacts with survey

respondents to collect additional data. Nonetheless, BLS has opted to continue to

take advantage of the sampling efficiency that results from the use of decennial

census address lists for its CPS sample. In February 1990, the Census Bureau and

BLS executed a formal five-year "Memorandum of Understanding on the Use of

Nonpublic Current Population Survey Microdata by the Bureau of Labor

Statistics."13  Under the agreement, BLS users of nonpublic CPS microdata
(which consist of microdata with geographic area identifiers and no topcoding of

income items, but without explicit identifiers) must be special sworn employees

of the Census Bureau. The data may be used for "longitudinal matching of

Current Population Survey records, general statistical research [methodological

research related to the survey design and operations], and improvement and

expansion of general tabulations." No provisions are made, however, for linking

CPS records with records from other sources or for follow-up contacts of any

kind with CPS respondents. The agreement and attached statement of policies

provide for strict security measures by BLS staff, periodic on-site inspections by

the Census Bureau, and regular reviews of the benefits of the sharing

arrangement.Linkage of Records from the Departments of Defense and Health and 
Human Services
 This example also covers restricted access to data for statistical
purposes. However, it is somewhat unusual
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES159
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in that the purpose of the record linkage was to provide statistical tabulations

needed to determine the feasibility of a subsequent linkage for nonstatistical,

compliance purposes. The agencies that participated were the Office of the

Inspector General (OIG) in the Department of Health and Human Services and

the Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC) in the Department of Defense.
The purpose of the match was to determine how many military and civilian
employees of the Defense Department might be in arrears on court-ordered child

support payments. Based on the findings, OIG would determine whether to

proceed with a full-scale records match for compliance purposes. The files to be

linked were 1987 and 1988 Tax Intercept Files in the custody of the Family

Support Administration of the Department of Health and Human Services and

DMDC's personnel files for military and civilian employees of the Defense

Department. To accomplish the linkage, OIG sent a tape to DMDC containing the

Social Security numbers and names of persons potentially delinquent on child

support payments. The latter agency matched this tape against its personnel files

and provided OIG with a tabulation of the number of matches by category of

Defense Department employment.
The arrangements were formalized by an exchange of letters between
officials of the two agencies.
14  The main conditions agreed to were that DMDC
would not use the OIG records for any purpose other than the specified match and

that it would return the OIG data file when the match was completed. One of the

letters noted that the match would not be subject to federal matching standards

established by the Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988 (P.L.

100Œ503) because that act does not cover matches performed solely for statistical
purposes.The number of matches found in the OIG-DMDC matching study was
sufficient for the agencies to reach a decision to proceed with an ongoing

matching operation for compliance purposes. No Defense Department employees

whose child support payments were in arrears were immediately affected because

their records had been matched in the statistical study. However, many of them

may have been subject to disciplinary action as a result of the subsequent

matching operations for compliance purposes.
The 1973 Exact Match Study What may have been the most ambitious and
complex statistical record linkage study, involving both survey and administrative

records, that has yet been undertaken occurred in the 1970s. The 1973 Exact

Match Study was a
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES160
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.joint undertaking of the Social Security Administration (SSA) and the Census

Bureau. As part of the study, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) furnished

selected tax information from 1972 individual income tax returns to the Census

Bureau for matching to CPS records (see Kilss and Scheuren, 1978). The primary

goal of the study was to provide a broad data base for addressing such policy

issues as the redistributive effects of changes in income and payroll taxes and

alternative Social Security benefit structures. Specific uses included evaluating

the quality of CPS income reporting, conducting labor force participation and

earnings analyses using CPS income and demographic data and SSA earnings

histories, and developing lifetime earnings models.
The study linked survey records for persons in the March 1973 Current
Population Survey, including the income supplement, with their earnings and

benefit information for several years from SSA data files and IRS information

from their 1972 tax returns. There had been earlier administrative data linkages to

the CPS data, starting with the March 1964 round, but the scope of the 1973 study

exceeded that of any previous one. The study was designed to take advantage of

the possibilities that had been opened up by advances in computer matching

techniques and by the achievement of close-to-universal coverage by the IRS and

SSA record systems (Kilss and Scheuren, 1984).
The data products from the 1973 Exact Match Study included several
public-use (unrestricted access) microdata files containing linked survey and

administrative record data. The files were widely used by researchers and

provided the basis for numerous published analytic and methodologic reports and

papers (Kilss and Scheuren, 1978, list 41 reports and papers).
Although the end products of the study were available to all users, the
intermediate stages in their development required restricted access arrangements

among the three agencies involved. Kilss and Scheuren (1984) summarize the

manner in which the confidentiality requirements of the three agencies were met.

None of the linkages was performed at the IRS. For linkages performed at SSA

(to extract earnings and benefit data for sample persons), limited extracts of CPS

records were used and those records were processed only by SSA employees who

had been given appointments as special sworn employees of the Census Bureau.
The primary personal identifier used to link records from the different
sources was the Social Security number, which respondents to the CPS had been

asked to provide
Šwith assurance that their numbers would be used only for
statistical purposes. The
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES161
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SSA did not provide administrative data to the Census Bureau for the small

number of CPS respondents who declined to provide their Social Security

number.One concern of those responsible for the study was the possibility that an
SSA or IRS employee could, in theory, use the linked data to identify one or more

individuals in the public-use file and then use the survey information in those

individuals' records for administrative purposes. To minimize this possibility

(often called the 
reidentification  problem), income items were topcoded (that is,
values above specified levels were replaced by codes indicating that they

exceeded those levels) and the release of the most detailed public-use file, which

included the tax return data, was delayed until the end of the period for which the

IRS retained the same tax return information for all persons in its electronically

accessible administrative files.
Could the same agencies collaborate on a study of this scope and utility for
research on income distribution today? Probably not. Although the period for

which the IRS maintains computerized files of individual income tax data is still

about the same, the returns are kept indefinitely on microfilm or microfiche, so

that the reidentification problem would not disappear completely. Moreover, the

Census Bureau, as a matter of policy, no longer releases public-use microdata

files that link census or survey and administrative data for individuals. Even if

these difficulties could be overcome, it would probably be difficult to marshal the

resources necessary to carry out an interagency linkage study of this magnitude.
Census Bureau Use of IRS and SSA Personal Records
 To carry out their
respective responsibilities for the collection of federal taxes and the

administration of Social Security benefit programs, the IRS and SSA have

developed extensive personal record systems that now cover large segments of

the U.S. population. Over the years, the Census Bureau has used those records in

several ways to enhance its demographic censuses and surveys and to evaluate

the quality of census and survey data.
Census Bureau uses of IRS and SSA administrative data can perhaps be best
illustrated by explaining how the data serve as basic inputs to the Census

Bureau's program of intercensal population estimates for small areas. The Census

Bureau tracks trends in internal migration between censuses by matching

individual taxpayer record extracts for successive years from the IRS Individual

Master File. The migration data from the matched extracts
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES162
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.serve as inputs to the estimates of the total population of states, counties, and

other government units. The tax files do not include information on the age, sex,

or race-ethnic classification of individual taxpayers, but this information can be

obtained from the SSA's NUMIDENT file, which contains the basic demographic

data obtained in connection with the issuance of Social Security numbers. The

Census Bureau has used these and other subsidiary inputs to produce estimates of

population for states and metropolitan areas by race and age.
As explained in 
Chapter 5, the Internal Revenue Code allows certain
statistical uses of tax return information by the Census Bureau. Specific uses are

spelled out in some detail in a series of Treasury Department regulations that

identify the content of the records to be transferred, the uses to which they can be

put, and the security measures that must be adopted to protect the confidentiality

of information turned over to the Census Bureau. The information from the SSA's

NUMIDENT file is transferred to the Census Bureau under a general agreement

between the two agencies that provides for limited sharing of information in both

directions for joint statistical projects (see Jabine, 1993a:example 6).
The future of the Census Bureau's program to develop population estimates
for states and counties by age, race-ethnicity, and sex has been clouded by a

recent development. Under arrangements negotiated between SSA and state

registrars of vital statistics, birth certificates and Social Security numbers are now

being issued jointly at the time of birth in most states. For the births covered by

these arrangements, SSA no longer obtains data on race/ethnic classification.

Unless SSA finds another way to get such information, which it has used only for

statistical analyses of its programs, the gradual increase in the proportion of

persons for whom it lacks race-ethnic information will degrade the Census

Bureau's ability to include race-ethnic status in its small-area population

estimates program.
DiscussionAn obvious requirement for interagency data sharing is that the statutory
confidentiality requirements of all of the agencies involved must be observed. A

second requirement is that the transfer of data among agencies must be consistent

with statements made to data providers when the data were obtained from them.

When these requirements are not the same for all of the agencies involved, those

that are most stringent govern the arrangements.
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES163
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In the case of the Census Bureau, the law says that only sworn Census
Bureau employees, who are subject to criminal penalties for improper disclosure,

may have access to the data. Thus, in any sharing arrangement involving Census

Bureau data, employees of other agencies can have access to the data only after

taking an oath as special sworn employees of the Census Bureau. The use of the

special sworn employee provision is further circumscribed by the requirement

that it only be used in connection with activities that are part of the bureau's

statutorily defined mission.Statistical uses of IRS administrative records for purposes not related to tax
administration are limited to the agencies and purposes specified in the Internal

Revenue Code. The Tax Reform Act of 1976 (P.L. 94
Œ455) restricted such uses
to other units of the Treasury Department, the Census Bureau, and the Bureau of

Economic Analysis, in each case for particular purposes. A subsequent

amendment (P.L. 95Œ210) added the National Institute of Occupational Safety
and Health to the list of eligible recipients (P.L. 95
Œ210, 
§ 6103(j) and 6103(m)
(3)). The IRS has engaged in some sharing of records with agencies other than

those mentioned specifically in the code, but only for studies it considers to be

related to tax administration.
In general, data sharing among federal agencies other than the Census
Bureau and IRS for statistical purposes is less constrained by legislation.

However, statistical agencies that receive some of their data from the states under

federal-state cooperative programs (e.g., BLS and NCHS) must comply with

confidentiality provisions of state law, which vary among states. In some

instances, potential users of identifiable data obtained by a federal agency under

such cooperative arrangements have had to apply separately to each state for

permission to have access to its data. A federal-state cooperative program is also

central to the data collection activities of the National Agricultural Statistics

Service (NASS). However, NASS uses of the data are controlled by federal

rather than state law because the data collection, while jointly financed, is

federally controlled (specified statistical products are provided to the states).
Developing arrangements for interagency data sharing can be a complex and
time-consuming process, especially if more than two agencies are involved or if

novel applications of the data are planned. New initiatives are likely to pose new

legal, ethical, administrative, and policy questions. The expected benefits in

terms of cost savings or better quality data must be substantial to
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES164
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.justify the level of effort and perseverance needed to find acceptable answers. It

helps if the proposed data sharing arrangements offer benefits to all of the parties

concerned.EXTERNAL DATA USERSThe availability of high-speed computers and sophisticated analytic
techniques and software have generated vastly increased appetites for federal

statistical data. The statistical agencies have tried to satisfy the demand by issuing

more detailed tabulations and public-use microdata sets, but not surprisingly, they

have succeeded only in whetting user appetites further. Continued efforts to meet

increasing demands from users are important; many users have the capacity to

conduct sophisticated research on important matters of public interest.
For many of the data sets that users want, the risk of disclosure is great
enough that some form of restricted access is the only option for release. Several

modes of restricted access for external users have been developed by statistical

agencies. Some of the important features of these access modes are eligibility

criteria, location of access, cost and convenience for agencies and users, and

methods of protecting confidentiality. As in the previous subsection, we present

examples of different modes of restricted access by external users. We also

present two examples of failures to gain access to data sets. We follow the

examples with a discussion of their key features and the comparative advantages

of different modes of access.

Examples of Restricted Access by External Data Users
ASA/NSF Fellows Since 1978, the National Science Foundation (NSF) has
funded and the American Statistical Association (ASA) has administered a

program designed to promote the exchange of ideas and techniques between

federal government statisticians and academic users of federal statistical data.

Five agencies, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Census Bureau, the National

Center for Education Statistics, the National Institute of Standards and

Technology, and most recently, the National Science Foundation (as a host

agency), have participated in the program, which enables senior research fellows

and associates from universities to undertake research studies at one of the host

agencies for a period of up to one year. The National Agricultural Statistics

ServiceTECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES165
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.has a similar fellows program, administered by ASA, but paid for entirely with

agency funds rather than jointly by the National Science Foundation and the

agency.The fellows work on research topics of joint interest to themselves and their
host agencies. They have essentially the same access to agency data bases and

computer facilities as regular employees doing similar work, and they are subject

to the same confidentiality requirements and penalties for improper disclosure of

individually identifiable information. At the Census Bureau, for example, the

ASA/NSF/Census fellows receive appointments, take oaths as special sworn

employees, and are subject to the same Title 13 confidentiality provisions,

including penalties for violations, as regular employees.
The ASA/NSF fellows program has provided user access to data not
available in unrestricted public-use files for a substantial number of academic

researchers. From the start of the program through the end of 1991, 72 fellows

and 54 associates had worked at the first four agencies listed above, about three-

fourths of them at the Census Bureau. The primary restrictions are that access is

available only at the agency's central facility, for a limited term (although fellows

sometimes revisit agencies on a less formal basis), and only for projects that the

host agency deems to be of interest. A more serious problem is that NSF funding

for large numbers of fellows is expected to end soon, and it is unlikely that the

other agencies will be able to support similar numbers out of their own operating

funds.Remote On-line Access: The Luxembourg Income Study
 The Luxembourg
Income Study is an international cooperative research project providing remote

access to microdata sets from household surveys conducted by member

countries. The project is designed "to promote research on the distribution of

income 
– and the general economic situation of households and families in an
international context" (Cigrang and Rainwater, 1990:1). The project is supported

by the Government of Luxembourg and the Center for Population, Poverty, and

Policy Studies, also in Luxembourg.
At present, microdata sets from 14 countries, with explicit identifiers
removed, reside in the Luxembourg Income Study data base system maintained

at the Government of Luxembourg's computer center. Microdata sets from the

United States, Canada, and Australia had previously been issued by those

countries as public-use files, but the data sets for the remaining countries had

either been available with restrictions or not at all.
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES166
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The data base system is designed mainly to provide remote access to
registered users through an EARN/BITNET computer mail network. Use of the

data is restricted to academic and policy analysis research. Remote users submit

job requests in the SPSSX statistical language, specifying variable names used in

the system. Dedicated batch-processing computers execute the requests and the

outputs are forwarded to users over the computer mail network. To prevent

disclosure of individual records, incoming job requests and statistical outputs are

subjected to automated reviews and those that fail the review are given to the

Luxembourg Income Study staff for further review. For all of the microdata sets,

exact income amounts, some of which may have been taken from administrative

sources, are rounded.
Once users receive the statistical outputs, they are not subject to further
restrictions on use or publication, other than the general requirement that use for

commercial purposes is prohibited. As of mid-1990, the data base contained 22

data sets from the 14 member countries, had about 150 registered users, and was

averaging about 50 job requests a day.
Release in Encrypted CD-ROM Format
 The passage in 1988 of Public Law
100Œ297 (the Hawkins-Stafford amendments to the General Education Provisions
Act) led the NCES to undertake a comprehensive review of its policies for

protecting the confidentiality of individual information included in releases of

tabulations and microdata sets. It became clear that for some of the microdata sets

that had been released previously without restrictions the risk of disclosing

individually identifiable data was too high. Criteria and procedures were

established for deciding which files could continue to be released with no

restrictions on access and which could not. For the latter group, other modes of

release were sought. One of these modes, the encrypted CD-ROM format, is the

subject of this example (Wright and Ahmed, 1990). Another, licensing

agreements for use at user sites, is the subject of the next example.
Under the encrypted CD-ROM format, users purchase a diskette containing
an encrypted microdata set and software that can produce descriptive statistics

from the encrypted data. Prior to release, agency staff evaluate the disclosure

risks associated with the outputs that can be produced with the software provided

on the diskette. Restrictions are built into the software to prevent the user from

printing out unencrypted individual records or statistics that would tend to

disclose individual information. It is
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES167
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.unlikely that any users would attempt to de-encrypt the records because of the

high cost that would be associated with such an effort.
In general terms, this mode of release can be considered either public-use or
restricted access, depending on what conditions are imposed on recipients.

Significant advantages for users are the relatively low cost of access and the

ability to use the data at their own work sites. However, the only analyses they

can perform are those for which the necessary programs are included on the

diskette. At present, only elementary analytic techniques are supported, but work

is proceeding to incorporate more complex types of analyses into the system.
This system has the potential for solving, at least in part, the reidentification
problem described earlier in this chapter. Microdata sets containing linked survey

and administrative data could then be released with very little risk that the

custodians of the administrative records could reidentify individual records.
Release of Microdata under Licensing Agreements
 To meet the requirements
of users whose needs cannot be satisfied with public-use or encrypted CD-ROM

microdata sets, the NCES has developed a licensing procedure that allows

eligible organizations or agencies to use its confidential data for research and

statistical purposes at their own sites (see Wright and Ahmed, 1990). Some of the

key features of the standard agreement, which was approved for use on a trial

basis in November 1990, follow:
   All employees of the licensee who will have access to the data become
special sworn employees of NCES. They are required to sign affidavits

of nondisclosure and are subject to severe penalties for violation of their

oath.   The physical security of the identifiable data must be ensured by use of
specified procedures. Representatives of NCES have the right to make

unannounced and unscheduled inspections of the licensee's facility to

evaluate compliance.   All publications and other data products must be submitted to NCES for
review. If there are evident reasons to be concerned about the possibility

of disclosure, the products must also be submitted for review prior to any

release.   The research conducted under the license must be consistent with the
statistical purposes for which the data were initially supplied to NCES

and the data must be returned to the center or destroyed when the

research is completed.
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES168
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   If the licensee is a state agency or contractor thereof, the attorney
general of the state must certify that the licensee cannot be required to

make individually identifiable data available to a state agency or

employee not covered by the agreement.
These licensing procedures permit somewhat wider restricted access than
that currently provided by the Census Bureau under its special sworn employee

provision. The NCES statutory provisions for the appointment of special sworn

employees are identical, but the statutory definition of the latter's mission (in the

Hawkins-Stafford amendments) places greater emphasis on the dissemination of

data. Much of the research on educational policy issues takes place outside the

federal government, and NCES has taken the position that a licensing system that

allows researchers to work with restricted access files at their own site is an

important element of its compliance with its mission statement.
By early 1992, NCES had issued about 30 licenses to users. The Statistical
Policy Office, OMB, has announced that the licensing procedures and agreement

will be submitted to a formal regulatory review, including publication in the

Federal Register and comment by all interested groups.
Examples of Failure to Gain Access
SSA's Continuous Work History Sample
 The Social Security Administration
established its Continuous Work History Sample (CWHS) system about 50 years

ago to serve as a multipurpose longitudinal data base for program analysis and

research on earnings, Social Security benefits, labor force behavior, internal

migration, and other characteristics of the U.S. population. For a 1 percent sample

of all persons who have been issued a Social Security number, the system

contains their date of birth, sex, and race-ethnic classification (as stated earlier in

this chapter, race-ethnic information is no longer being captured for most new

births) from the Social Security number application form and longitudinal

information on earnings and type and location of employment. The earnings

information comes from employer annual wage reports (quarterly prior to 1978)

submitted to the IRS, and the information on type and location of employment

comes primarily from applications to the IRS for an Employer Identification

number.Prior to 1976, CWHS files were widely available and were used for research
by other agencies and organizations on the subjects mentioned above. The CWHS

system was a prime source of
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES169
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information for labor market and related research. The proceedings of a 1978

workshop on the uses of Social Security research files, for example, included

more than 10 research papers based on CWHS data sets, mostly from non-federal

researchers (Social Security Administration, 1978). The Bureau of Economic

Analysis also used CWHS data for its regional national income accounts and

analyses of regional labor force characteristics.
To enable users to update their longitudinal CWHS files on a quarterly or
annual basis, a numerical identifier was included with each record. Initially, the

identifier was the actual Social Security number, but after a short time, the actual

number was replaced by an encrypted number, based on a simple substitution

cipher. Later, a more sophisticated transformation was introduced. It is also worth

noting that the specific combinations of Social Security number ending digits

used to select the 1 percent sample were published in a journal article many years

ago, at a time when the effects of such an action on disclosure risks were not

generally understood.Prior to 1974, CWHS files were released without restrictions. However,
concerns arose that in files containing county and detailed industry codes it would

be possible to identify some employers, especially large ones. Further, employers

with access to the file, making use of knowledge of the ending digits that had

been used to select the sample, would be able to identify records for some of their

own employees and to obtain information, for example, about their previous and

other current employment. Starting in 1974, because of these concerns, all

recipients were required to agree in writing not to redisclose their files without

permission or to attempt to identify individual employers or employees from the

file.As explained in 
Chapter 5, the Tax Reform Act of 1976 severely curtailed
the use of identifiable tax return information for statistical purposes by users

outside the IRS. Both the employer information from Employer Identification

number applications and the earnings data were considered to be tax return

information, and thus, the release of CWHS files containing such data came

under the new provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. In 1977, the IRS

concluded that CWHS files could not be released in the same detail as previously

to non-federal users or to most of the federal agencies that had been using them,

including the Bureau of Economic Analysis, which had, until that point, played a

major role as a user and disseminator of CWHS files in convenient formats to

other users (Carroll, 1985; Smith, 1989).
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES170
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Since the 1977 termination of releases under the arrangements that had been
used prior to the 1976 Tax Reform Act, there have been a few releases of CWHS

files, under restricted conditions, to other federal agencies. Files with identifiers

removed have recently been released to the Treasury Department's Office of

Economic Policy and the Congressional Budget Office. Provisions of the 1976

Tax Reform Act permit both of these agencies to use tax return information under

certain conditions, so one cannot anticipate similar releases to the many potential

users who do not have this authority. One possibility for wider release would be

to develop one or more versions of the CWHS containing less detailed

information for characteristics like industry classification and geographic location

of employment. However, SSA and the IRS have not been able to agree on a

formula for doing this. Thus, agencies like the Bureau of Economic Analysis no

longer have access to the microdata files. It seems fair to say that while the

CWHS continues to be used for policy analysis by components of the SSA and a

handful of other agencies, its availability to the broader community of users is

only a small fraction of what it was prior to passage of the 1976 Tax Reform Act.
Access to Address Information in Federal Files for Medical Follow-up 
 andEpidemiologic Studies Access to data for use in epidemiologic studies and user
access to the results of such studies raise many complex issues. This example

focuses on a single question: access to federal address information for use in

locating and tracking respondents in long-term follow-up studies. Although a few

federal agencies do have access to such information, access is so limited that it

seems reasonable to put this example in the failure category.
The importance of epidemiologic follow-up studies is hard to exaggerate.
Most people are exposed, in their work and other aspects of their lives, to a host

of substances and environmental factors that may lead to adverse health effects.

Some of these effects, such as cancer, may not show up until long after initial

exposure. Thus, to determine relationships between exposures and effects and to

identify the most serious environmental risks, it is necessary to follow groups of

exposed persons for long periods, say 20 years or more, and to determine

periodically the state of their health, and if they have died, the cause of their

death. For many such studies the group of persons to be followed is not identified

until well after the period of exposure, so that finding them is not a simple

matter.TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES171
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Within the federal system, the best potential source of current addresses for
most of the population is the IRS, which has recent addresses and Social Security

numbers for all tax filers and their dependents. The Social Security

Administration and the Health Care Financing Administration have the current

address and Social Security number for beneficiaries, who include virtually all

persons aged 65 and over, but their coverage of persons under 65 is limited.
For death information, the National Death Index provides access to
information on all registered deaths in the United States for 1979 and subsequent

years. Because of restrictions imposed by the states on uses of their vital statistics

data, NCHS, which is the custodian of the National Death Index, can tell

researchers only which members of their study populations have died and the

states where those deaths occurred. Researchers who want cause of death and

other information appearing on the death certificate must contact the state where

the death occurred to purchase a copy of the certificate. Another limitation of the

National Death Index is that deaths prior to 1979 are not included. There was

some discussion of extending the coverage of the National Death Index back to

about 1965, but that was found to be infeasible.
The Social Security Administration releases information about date and
place of death to the public from its own files, and epidemiologists can obtain this

information about members of study populations they are tracking. However,

section 205(r) of the Social Security Act, added in 1983 (P.L. 98
Œ21), requiredthe agency to establish a program of voluntary contracts with the states to obtain

death certificate information. The purpose was to correct SSA records and

remove decedents' names from its benefit rolls. With some exceptions (see Aziz

and Buckler, 1992), SSA cannot provide epidemiologists and other researchers

with the death information it obtains from the states through this program. It

regularly releases death information it obtains through its own sources.
Prior to 1976, it was possible, at least in some instances, to obtain current
name and address information from the IRS for use in follow-up studies. Such

access was completely cut off by the 1976 Tax Reform Act; subsequent

amendments made the information available again to the National Institute for

Occupational Safety and Health on a limited basis and also for follow-up studies

of veterans of military service. However, numerous other government and private

organizations conducting follow-up studies do
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES172
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.not have access to this relatively low-cost and effective means of tracking their

study populations.On a slightly different, but related subject, SSA cannot disclose, for use in
epidemiologic follow-up studies, rosters of persons who have worked in a

particular industry during a specified period. Such lists would be based on

information from earnings reports and Employer Identification number

applications, both of which are classified as tax return information and are

therefore prohibited from disclosure by the 1976 amendments to the Internal

Revenue Code. For periods of employment prior to 1978 there would also be

difficulties because the manner in which the SSA's files are organized would

make the development of such lists a costly process unless a list based on the 1

percent Continuous Work History Sample could serve the purpose of the study.

Finally, SSA has little if any information on current addresses for

nonbeneficiaries except on tax records that are subject to the Internal Revenue

Code's restrictions on disclosure.

DiscussionThese examples illustrate the wide spectrum of modes of external user
access to federal statistical data, ranging from no access at all to completely

unrestricted access. Legal requirements for confidentiality are not the only factors

that influence statistical agencies' decisions on what modes of access are

acceptable for particular classes of data and users. When the probability that

individual records can be identified and the perceived sensitivity of the data items

are high, the agencies are likely to impose greater restrictions on access by

external users. An underlying consideration in all decisions is the possibility that a

well-publicized violation of confidentiality might lead to widespread public

resistance to participation in voluntary or even mandatory statistical data

collection programs.Users look for modes of access that are low cost and enable them to work at
their own sites with a minimum of restriction and formality. When their needs

cannot be met with public-use data sets, they will generally prefer to work under

licensing agreements (Smith, 1991) or with encrypted CD-ROM diskettes,

provided those modes will give them timely access to the kinds of data they

want, in sufficient detail for their research. Modes of access that require working

at agency sites or controlled remote access are not likely to be considered unless

there are no alternatives and there are strong incentives to undertake the research.
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES173
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ARCHIVING FEDERAL STATISTICAL DATA SETS
Our concern in this subsection is with arrangements whereby public-use and
other versions of significant statistical data sets, largely in electronic form, are

either maintained by statistical agencies or transferred by them to the National

Archives and Records Administration (NARA) for preservation and future access

for statistical and research uses. The potential interest in and value of secondary

analyses of data files long after their original creation is much greater today than

it was even 10 years ago given the expanded availability of computer power and

new methods of analysis. Some data sets may have the potential for illuminating

issues that were not even thought of when they were created. (An analogy would

be the practice of freezing genetic material for future breeding and research uses.)
Unfortunately, researchers who have explored the possibility of secondary
analyses of old data sets have often encountered serious obstacles. In many

instances, the desired files have not been preserved in any form (David, 1980;

David and Robbin, 1981). If the files do exist and are accessible, serious

difficulties may still result from the lack of supporting documentation, outmoded

storage media, and failure to retain the entire data content of files that were used

for the original analyses. The question, then, is what can be done to make things

easier for future secondary analysts and historical researchers who will want to

work with data sets that are now in existence or about to be created?
Current Federal Archiving Procedures
 All federal agencies, including
statistical agencies, operate under statutorily prescribed information management

procedures that oblige them to notify the NARA of proposed schedules for

disposition of their records. In turn, NARA reviews the proposed schedules and,

when it considers the records to ''have sufficient administrative, legal, research,

or other value to warrant their further preservation by the United States

Government" (Title 44 U.S.C. 
§ 3303a (a)) may disallow the proposed destruction
of the records. For records that have been in existence for more than 30 years, the

archivist (director of the agency) may direct the transfer of such records to the

National Archives.In general, statutory restrictions on access to and use of records transferred
to the National Archives expire after a period of 30 years. However, under certain

conditions, by agreement between the archivist and the agency that transferred

the records, such
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES174
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.restrictions can remain in force for a longer period (Title 44 U.S.C. 
§ 2108(a)). Inaddition, it is the usual policy of the National Archives to maintain access

restrictions for 75 years when the data are about individuals and their earlier

release by the agency that transferred the records could have been denied under

Freedom of Information Act exemption 6, which covers "personnel and medical

and similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted

invasion of personal privacy" (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552(b)(6)).The National Archives only accepts electronic files that are physically intact
and have adequate documentation to enable researchers to read and make valid

use of the data. The agency takes necessary precautions, such as reading files

periodically and recopying them to new media, to ensure that the data remain

accessible on current computers.Archiving Census Bureau Records
 Arrangements for the archiving of
Census Bureau records are fairly well developed. Economic census records,

which identify the responding firms, can be used at the National Archives

without any restrictions after the statutory period of 30 years has elapsed. Under a

special 1952 agreement between the archivist and the Census Bureau, microfilm

copies of the original population census records (which are of great interest to

genealogists) that are transferred to the National Archives are kept confidential

for 72 years, after which time they are made available to users.
About two years ago, another agreement between the archivist and the
Census Bureau extended provisions of the 1952 agreement to records from the

Current Population Survey and other demographic surveys conducted by the

Census Bureau. The 72-year period of confidentiality does not apply to any

public-use microdata files that are transferred to the National Archives, but it

would apply to internal Census Bureau survey data files whose content had not

been restricted to make them suitable for unrestricted public access. To date, no

such internal survey files have been transferred to the National Archives, but the

archivist has requested files of this type and it is likely that they will be

transferred once appropriate security arrangements have been agreed on. To

illustrate the kinds of issues that arise, archived electronic files must be copied

periodically to ensure their preservation in usable form, and the Census Bureau

believes that such copying should be done by special sworn employees who are

subjectTECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES175
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to criminal penalties for improper disclosure of Census Bureau information.
The rapid replacement of paper records by electronic files as the primary
storage medium and the prospect of further changes in data base technology pose

many challenges and opportunities for NARA in its efforts to meet future

research needs. Statutes and procedures developed for archiving paper records

will require significant alterations. A panel established by the National Academy

of Public Administration to review these questions issued a report in 1991, 
TheArchives of  the Future: Archival Strategies for the Treatment of Electronic
Databases. The tenor of that panel's recommendations is clearly expressed by the
following excerpt from the report:
NARA itself must take an active stance in seeking candidate databases 
 toevaluate for inclusion as part of the National Archives
 [emphasis in original].
Persuasive and aggressive oversight should be the ringing quality of NARA's

role in guiding the preservation policies of all federal agencies. And time is of

the essence. An outstanding characteristic of electronic records 
– is that there is a
much briefer span of time in which to bring them under active preservation.

NARA's authority prevents it from taking forceful action to guarantee

preservation of records until 30 years have passed. Electronic records not

brought under the control of a comprehensive and active preservation program

are unlikely to survive more than a few years. NARA must seek additional

authorities to sustain a viable program for bringing electronic databases into the

National Archives (pp. 1
Œ2).The report recommended that the National Archives preserve data from 430
federal data bases in addition to more than 600 that the agency had already

designated as archival. The National Archives is actively pursuing transfers from

these data bases.RESTRICTED ACCESS: FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONSRecommendation 6.5
 Federal statistical agencies should strive for a greater
return on public investment in statistical programs through carefully controlled

increases in interagency data sharing for statistical purposes and expanded

availability of federal data sets to external users.
Full realization of this goal will require legislative changes, as discussed in
Chapter 5, but much can be accomplished within the framework of existing
legislation.TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES176
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The panel believes that some of the newer and more user-friendly restricted
access techniques, such as the release of encrypted CD-ROM diskettes with

built-in software and licensing agreements that allow users to use data sets at

their own work sites, have considerable promise, and it commends the agencies

and organizations that have pioneered the use of such procedures.
Recommendation 6.6
 Statistical agencies, in their efforts to expand access
for external data users, should follow a policy of responsible innovation.

Whenever feasible, they should experiment with some of the newer restricted

access techniques, with appropriate confidentiality safeguards and periodic

reviews of the costs and benefits of each procedure.
Recommendation 6.7
 In those instances in which controlled access at agency
sites remains the only feasible alternative, statistical agencies should do all they

can to make access conditions more affordable and acceptable to users, for

example, by providing access at dispersed agency locations and providing

adequate user support and access to computing facilities at reasonable cost.
The panel agrees with the views expressed in the excerpt (above) from the
National Academy of Public Administration's report on the archiving of

electronic data bases.
Recommendation 6.8
 Significant statistical data files, in their unrestricted
form, should be deposited at the National Archives and eventually made

available for historical research uses.
This recommendation is intended to cover statistical data bases from
censuses and surveys and those, like the Statistics of Income and Continuous

Work History Sample data bases, that are derived from administrative records.

We have purposely not been specific as to the content of such archived data bases

and the length of time for which confidentiality restrictions should continue to

apply. Some data bases, like the economic and population censuses, might

include explicit identification of data providers. Others, especially those based on

samples, might not include names and addresses, but would not be subject to

statistical disclosure limitation
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES177
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.procedures of the kind that are applied to produce public-use microdata sets for

contemporary use.NOTES1. Statistical disclosure limitation techniques are often referred to as 
disclosure control of disclosure
avoidance. We prefer 
disclosure limitation because it expresses more clearly the fact that zero
disclosure risk is usually unattainable.

2. These and other conceptualizations of 
disclosure are explored in Duncan and Lambert (1989),
Duncan and Pearson (1991), and Lambert (1993).
3. Called samples of anonymized records.
 See Collins (1992) and Marsh et al. (1991a, 1992).
4. For example, as recognized by the National Center for Health Statistics,

Of course, all direct identifiers of study subjects, such as name, address, and social security number,

are deleted from the public use files. Still, there are so many different items of information about any

subject individual or establishment in our typical surveys that the set of information could serve as a

unique identifier for each subject, if there were some other public source for many of the survey

items. Fortunately there is not. But to minimize the chance of disclosure we take additional

precautions; we make sure there are no rare characteristics shown on any case in the files, such as the

exact bed-size of a large nursing home, or the exact date of birth of a subject, or the presence of a rare

disease, or the exact number of children in a very large family. We either delete or encrypt the code

identifying smaller geographical areas
Šplaces smaller than 100,000 in population
Šbecause anyone
trying to identify a respondent will have his task greatly simplified if he knows the respondent's local

area (Mugge, 1984:291).

5. Collins (1992) and Marsh et al. (1992) provide further discussion of the relationship between

disclosure risk and uniqueness.
6. There are situations in which adding noise has no effect on certain important kinds of analyses.

With, for example, the Health Care Finance Agency's Medicare data, releasing values like exact date

of death can pose substantial disclosure risk. The common practice of coarsening the data to, say,

year of death may limit the usefulness of survival analyses based on the data and make it impossible

to draw good inferences about the efficacy of certain medical treatments. However, shifting all dates

by a fixed amount, unknown to the data user, will substantially lessen disclosure risk while leaving

most survival analyses unharmed, because survival analysis generally depends only on the elapsed

time between various events.

TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES178
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7. Some researchers have begun to address these issues. Kamlet et al. (1985), for example, analyze the

1980 National Health Interview Survey, in which several averages are reported rather than

individual-level data because of confidentiality restrictions. Typically, analysts of such data simply

use the associated group-lavel information instead of the (unavailable) individual-lavel data. As

Kamlet et al. note, however, this practice can produce inconsistent estimates and regression

coefficients of the wrong sign. Kamlet and Klepper (1985) demonstrate how consistent estimators can

be computed in special cases. Hwang (1986) deals with the errors-in-variables nature of data masked

by adding noise. For such a case, Fuller (1993) illustrates how the data can be analyzed.

8. The material in this section is based largely on Jabine (1993b), a paper commissioned by the panel.

Brackstone (1990) notes that the development and application of statistical disclosure limitation

techniques to protect the confidentiality of data is a relatively new area of statistics that arose out of

the practical problems statistical agencies faced. Early discussions include Bachi and Baron (1969)

and Steinberg and Pritzker (1967). Bailar (1990) identifies the development of statistical disclosure

limitation techniques to be one of the five major contributions of the Census Bureau. Also see

Barabba and Kaplan (1975), Cox et al. (1985), and Greenberg (1990, 1991).

9. The seven agencies are the Bureau of the Census, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Internal Revenue

Service, National Center for Education Statistics, National Center for Health Statistics, Social

Security Administration, and the Statistical Reporting Service (now the National Agricultural

Statistics Service).

10. Based on conversation between Thomas Jabine, a consultant to the panel, and Patricia Doyle of

Mathematica at a meeting of the American Statistical Association/Survey Research Methods Working

Group on the Technical Aspects of SIPP on May 21, 1992.

11. Published along with other discussion and commissioned papers in a special issue of the 
Journalof Official Statistics
 1993(2). See 
Appendix A for a list of the papers.
12. For univariate dimensions, he checks percentiles, the mean, standard deviation, and skewness. For

multivariate dimensions, he checks correlation coefficients and covariance matrices.

13. The memorandum was signed on February 2, 1990, by Barbara E. Bryant (Census Bureau) and

Janet L. Norwood (BLS).

14. The letters were signed on October 20, 1988, by John A. Ferris (DMDC) and by Kenneth C.

Scheflen (OIG) on November 22, 1988.

TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES179
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES180
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7Statistical Data on Organizations
The idea of individual rights is well established in all societies 
 and cultures of the world.
Rights associated with collectives are, 
 however, another matter.
Paul Reynolds, 1993
INTRODUCTIONThe uses of statistics on businesses and other organizations are not as widely
understood as are the uses of statistics on persons and households based on the

population censuses, the Current Population Survey (source of monthly estimates

of unemployment), the vital statistics compiled by the National Center for Health

Statistics, and other household surveys and administrative record sources. Yet,

economic statistics are critical to understanding the health of the economy and the

direction in which the economy is moving. The U.S. national economic accounts,

the retail and wholesale price indexes, the data on foreign trade and financial

flowsŠall are based primarily on data collected from organizations. The

generally favorable reception to the 1991 Boskin initiative to improve the quality

of economic statistics (see Council of Economic Advisers, 1991) is evidence of

the importance that policymakers and other users attribute to these kinds of

economic data.TYPES OF ORGANIZATIONS
Statistics on organizations (considered 
legal persons) cover all data subjects
(units of analysis) other than natural persons or groups of natural persons, such as

families or households. Occasionally, data for persons and organizations may be

part of the same data set. For example, some surveys link information about the

businessSTATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS181
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.activities of sole proprietorships with demographic information about the

personal characteristics of the proprietors. Other surveys link information about

such organizations as hospitals or schools with data on persons served by or

working in those organizations.
There are many kinds of organizations, and the differences among them
often determine the level of confidentiality accorded to their data. In the

commercial sector there are three legal forms of ownership: sole proprietorship,

partnership, and corporation. Nonprofit corporations, which are exempt from

income taxation, are a special group. Among the for-profit corporations, those

whose shares are publicly traded are subject to special reporting requirements,

and the contents of their reports (e.g., to the Securities and Exchange

Commission) are generally available to the public. A subset of for-profit

corporations, especially utility companies, are granted exclusive rights to

particular markets; in return, their financial and other data may be subject to even

greater public scrutiny.
Many companies consist of several individual establishments, at different
physical locations. Although data for the company as a whole may be readily

available to anyone, the same is not necessarily true for employment, payroll,

production, and other data for each establishment controlled by the company.
In the public sector, the general expectation is that most information about
the activities of federal, state, and local agencies and units of government will be

available to all. Public access to such data is facilitated by freedom of information

and sunshine laws at the federal level and in many states.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DATA ON PERSONS AND
DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS
LegislationAs noted in earlier chapters, information about organizations is not protected
by the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93
Œ579). If a statistical agency that has
identifiable information about organizations is not governed by agency-specific

confidentiality legislation, it must rely primarily on exemption 4 of the Freedom

of Information Act (P.L. 89
Œ487), which covers "trade secrets and commercial or
financial information obtained from a person [interpreted to include legal

personsŠsuch as business organizations] and privileged or confidential," to deny
public requests for accessSTATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS182
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to identifiable records for organizations. The Freedom of Information Act,

however, does not provide authority to deny requests from other parts of the

government.Most of the major federal statistical agencies have some form of legislation
that allows them to protect the confidentiality of data on organizations that they

collect and process. One exception is the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which, as

explained in Chapter 5, has relied on a combination of regulations and lower
court decisions to protect data that it obtains from businesses, either directly or

through state employment security agencies.
For most of the economic censuses and surveys conducted by the Census
Bureau, the confidentiality provisions in Section 9 of Title 13 of the U.S. Code

apply. Those provisions protect the confidentiality of respondents' file copies of

census and survey report forms, as well as the originals submitted to the Census

Bureau. They do not apply to reports collected from state and local governments,

because those reports, by their nature, contain only data available, at least in

theory, to anyone. They also do not apply to the data compiled from official

import and export documents in the Census Bureau's foreign trade statistics

program. Section 301(a) of Title 13 makes the export data confidential unless the

secretary of commerce determines that it is in the national interest to disclose

them. The import data are not covered by Title 13 because they are collected by

the Customs Service and only compiled by the Census Bureau. As a matter of

policy, the import and export data are published in extensive detail by commodity

and other variables, but without explicit identification of importers and exporters.

The majority of data cells in the most detailed tabulations are based on fewer than

five transactions.
Some additional aspects of confidentiality legislation and its effects on the
ability of federal statistical agencies to protect data on organizations and to share

or release their data for statistical and research purposes are discussed in

connection with four case studies presented below.

Other DifferencesIn addition to the differences in confidentiality protection based on the type
of organization involved and the statutory framework of the federal agency that

collects the data, federal statistics on organizations differ from those on persons in

several significant ways:
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS183
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Response to statistical surveys of organizations is more likely to be
required by law. Mandatory response requirements do not guarantee

complete response to such surveys because prosecution of survey

nonrespondents is not a high priority for federal law enforcement units.

They do have the effect, however, that many surveys of organizations do

not require a true informed consent process, as detailed in 
Chapter 3.   There are likely to be greater incentives for other federal agencies and
individuals to desire access, for nonstatistical purposes, to individually

identifiable statistical information about commercial organizations. As

discussed below, agencies with regulatory and compliance roles might

consider a survey of businesses a good source of leads to companies that

are or may have been in violation of laws and regulations. Industrial

spies might derive substantial material benefits by obtaining access to

trade secrets and other information critical to a company's competitive

position.   For aggregate variables like production, payroll, and expenditures, the
population distributions for organizations tend to be much more skewed

than they are for most variables associated with persons. Especially at

the subnational level, data for one or two large establishments can

dominate a data cell. As a consequence, there have been virtually no

releases of public-use microdata sets containing business data, and a

considerable amount of masking is required even in the public release of

aggregate statistics. The size of a firm also affects the dynamics of the

data collection process. Small businesses are less likely to be users of the

data collected from them, have less influence over the content of

economic data collection programs, and are likely to be

disproportionately burdened by paperwork requirements.
CONTENT OF CHAPTERMost of the panel members have had limited experience with data on
organizations and our time and resources did not permit a systematic review of

all the confidentiality issues associated with such data. We therefore chose case

studies as the vehicle for identifying and exploring selected issues that have come

to our attention. The remainder of the chapter consists of four case studies. For

each case study, we provide the relevant background information, discuss the

main issues, and present our findings and recommendations.
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS184
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ENERGY INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION VS. THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE: A FURTHER EROSION OF
FUNCTIONAL SEPARATION
BACKGROUNDEarly in 1990, the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice began an
investigation into the sharp increases in the prices of home heating oil and other

fuels that had occurred as a result of unusually cold weather in December 1989.

Later in the year, the division also started an investigation of the increases in

gasoline prices that followed the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in August.
To aid its investigations, the Antitrust Division requested the Energy
Information Administration (EIA), Department of Energy, to provide specified

data on prices, production, and other variables, some in aggregate form and some

for individually named companies or establishments. The Energy Information

Administration was willing to provide the aggregate data, but it resisted the

request for individual company records on the grounds that release would be

contrary to its 
Policy  on Disclosure of Individually Identifiable Energy
Information in 
 the Possession of the Energy Information Administration,
 whichhad been published in the 
Federal Register (45(177):59812
Œ59816). The
Antitrust Division's request did not meet any of the conditions, set forth in

Section E of that policy, under which EIA would disclose individually

identifiable information to other federal agencies. Further, EIA pointed out that it

had notified survey respondents about its confidentiality policies and that its

failure to abide by them could hurt its ability to collect complete, accurate, and

timely data in the future.
Although other federal agencies requesting data from EIA had accepted its
1980 policy on disclosure, the Antitrust Division did not. After prolonged

negotiations, the matter was referred to the Office of Legal Counsel in the

Department of Justice, which ruled on March 20, 1991, that the Federal Energy

Administration Act of 1974 (P.L. 93
Œ275), one of the statutes on which the EIA
policy on disclosure was based, required that EIA produce the information

requested by the Antitrust Division. Subsequent to this ruling, the Energy

Department brought the issue to the attention of Counsel to the President, C.

Boyden Gray. Gray, although sympathetic to a prospective solution to EIA's

problem, did not feel he could recommend to the President that he direct the

Justice Department to withdraw its request in this instance. In the ensuing
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS185
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.months, there were protracted negotiations on the precise nature of the data to be

released. Eventually, the Justice Department closed the two oil-pricing

investigations after receiving some aggregate data
Šbut not company-specific
proprietary data from EIA. The Justice Department, however, has indicated that

it believes it is legally entitled to such data and will seek to obtain it if appropriate

in future investigations (General Accounting Office, 1993).
With a few exceptions, the provisions of EIA's 1980 policy on disclosure had
permitted disclosures of individually identifiable data to federal agencies outside

the Energy Department only for statistical purposes. The March 1991 Justice

Department ruling meant that that portion of the EIA policy on disclosure could

no longer be sustained; identifiable records would have to be released to any

agency that insisted on having them.
In August 1991, EIA sent a letter to all of the roughly 25,000 respondents to
the surveys affected to notify them of the forced change in its policy. As of

January 1992, EIA had received approximately 50 letters and 200 telephone calls

with complaints or inquiries. By the end of 1992 there had been no observable

effects on the completeness and timeliness of responses to the surveys. However,

the real test will come if individually identifiable data are turned over to the

Justice Department and the disclosures are publicized in trade journals or other

media.DISCUSSIONIs EIA a Statistical Agency?
The Committee on National Statistics (National Research Council, 1992b:2)
has proposed the following definition of a federal statistical agency: ''a unit of the

federal government whose principal function is the compilation and analysis of

data and the dissemination of information for statistical purposes." The committee

also states that a federal statistical agency, 
to be effective,
 must protect the
confidentiality of individual responses and must not disclose identifiable

information for administrative, regulatory, or enforcement purposes.
The 
principal mission of EIA is statistical, and thus the agency may be said
to meet the basic definition proposed by the Committee on National Statistics,

but there are significant exceptions. The Department of Energy Organization Act

(P.L. 95Œ91) requires EIA to gather data in support of regulatory and program
needs of the Department of Energy. For those surveys that collect data
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS186
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.already available to the public and for those that collect data for regulatory

purposes, completed report forms are available for inspection by the public, and

respondents are informed of this fact.
Clearly, EIA lacks the kind of confidentiality policy that the Committee on
National Statistics considers essential for an 
effective federal statistical agency.
Individually identifiable information can be disclosed and is sometimes required

to be disclosed for nonstatistical purposes. The agency's 1980 policy on

disclosure allows disclosures for nonstatistical purposes to other units of the

Department of Energy, the Congress, the General Accounting Office, and when

the information does not come under the exemptions in the Freedom of

Information Act, to the public. Thus, the 1991 ruling by the Justice Department's

Office of Legal Counsel was not a first breach in an otherwise airtight policy of

functional separation of data. Rather, it might be looked at as another hole in an

already leaky dike.
Officials in EIA are quite concerned about their inability to guarantee full
confidentiality of information that they collect or acquire by other means for

statistical purposes. They have tried more than once to obtain legislation to

remedy the situation, but they have yet to succeed. In the meantime, because it

cannot guarantee confidentiality, EIA has been unable to get access to other

statistical agencies' lists of companies and establishments for use in its own

surveys, and it must develop and maintain completely independent lists, at

considerable cost.

Did EIA Mislead Respondents?
Most of EIA's survey respondents are companies or establishments and their
response to most of its surveys is mandatory. Following final adoption of the

1980 policy on disclosure, the agency developed a standard notification

statement for its mandatory company and establishment surveys, which included

information about the conditions under which identifiable information might be

released to the public in response to Freedom of Information Act requests, to

courts and congressional bodies, and to other federal agencies. The provisions of

the policy governing release to other federal agencies were not described in detail

in the notification statement; respondents wanting full information had to obtain

and study the complex 1980 policy statement in the 
Federal Register.One can assume that many respondents did not bother to obtain the policy
statement and therefore were not familiar with the
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS187
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.conditions under which their individual data might or might not be released to

other federal agencies. It cannot be said that respondents in this category were

seriously misled, they were merely not fully informed. However, those who were

familiar with the policy were confronted, when they received the August 1991

letter from EIA, with a suddenŠand retroactiveŠchange. They had clearly beenmisled by a statement representing a policy that EIA had believed it could follow

but which turned out not to be fully supported by the relevant statutes.

Is the EIA's Problem Unique?
In a sense, every federal statistical agency operates under a different
statutory and regulatory framework. However, as discussed in 
Chapter 5, theagencies may be classified roughly as haves and have-nots with respect to

legislation that both allows and requires them to apply the principle of functional

separation to all data in their possession. The Energy Information Administration

is clearly one of the have-nots and is in an especially awkward position because

its statutorily defined mission includes some collection of data for nonstatistical

purposes. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) is also a have-not agency in

terms of legal protection of confidentiality, but its mission is more clearly

statistical and, as explained in 
Chapter 5
, it has so far been able to maintain 
defacto functional separation.

The Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (P.L. 102
Œ240),passed late in 1991, included provisions to establish a separate Bureau of

Transportation Statistics in the Department of Transportation. This legislation has

weak confidentiality provisions, clearly putting the new agency in the have-not

category with respect to adequate statutory protection of the confidentiality of

data obtained for statistical purposes. Legislation, proposed but not passed in

1991, to establish a separate statistical agency in a Department of Environmental

Protection had similarly weak confidentiality provisions.
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Businesses are subject to many kinds of regulations and are also eligible for
various benefits. Monitoring compliance with regulations and determining

eligibility for benefits require substantial amounts of data for individually

identifiable units. Such data are used to make decisions that directly affect

individualSTATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS188
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.businesses. They can also be used for statistical analyses, which are sometimes

focused directly on the program for which the data were collected and sometimes

may be entirely unrelated to it.
Some kinds of business data, however, are of interest only for statistical
research and analysis. Such data can best be collected by statistical agencies that

have the authority and mandate to ensure that the data are fully protected from

disclosure and from any use whatsoever for nonstatistical purposes. The

collection of data that have nonstatistical and statistical uses should be left to

programmatic and regulatory agencies. Such data, with identifiers if needed, can

be acquired by statistical agencies and used for statistical purposes, but once in

the possession of a statistical agency, the data should be given the same

confidentiality protection as data collected directly by the agency.
Recommendation 7.1
 The principle of functional separation, which the panel
endorsed in Recommendation 5.1(a), should apply equally to data for persons

and data for organizations.A similar position was adopted by the Conference of European Statisticians
(1991). Its Resolution on the Fundamental Principles of Official 
 Statistics in theRegion of the Economic Commission for Europe
 states that "individual datacollected by statistical agencies for statistical compilation, whether they refer to

natural or legal persons [such as business organizations], are to be strictly

confidential and used exclusively for statistical purposes" (p. 8).
As illustrated by the EIA example, a statistical agency's intention to operate
under this principle is not sufficient.
Recommendation 7.2
 Legislation that authorizes and requires protection of
the confidentiality of data for persons and organizations should be sought for all

federal statistical agencies that do not now have it and for any new federal

statistical agencies that may be created (see also Recommendation 5.1).
An opposing argument is that, for the sake of efficiency, federal agencies
needing data for nonstatistical purposes, especially if related to compliance of

businesses with laws and regulations, should be permitted to acquire the data from

any agency that has them. Such a policy would seriously threaten the quality of

the nation's economic statistics. Businesses, knowing that their census
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS189
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and survey forms could be used for any purpose, would be less inclined to submit

complete, accurate, and timely data. One has only to review the history of

economic data in the socialist economies over the past 50 years to understand

this. Why risk such consequences for the relatively small efficiencies that might

be realized by compliance agencies in deciding which businesses should be the

targets of their detailed investigations?
The EIA example also illustrates the need to exercise care in the
development of statements that notify respondents to mandatory surveys about

how their data will be used and who will have access to them.
Recommendation 7.3
 Data providers, whether persons or organizations,
should have ready access to as much information as they want about the uses of

the information they are requested or required to provide to federal statistical

agencies. They should be told who will have access to their data in individually

identifiable form. Statements of the collecting agency's intentions should be

clearly distinguished from statements describing what is authorized and required

by statute.INABILITY TO SHARE BUSINESS LISTS: AN
EMBARRASSMENT TO THE FEDERAL STATISTICAL
SYSTEMBACKGROUNDThe question of access to business lists for statistical purposes by federal
agencies has a history covering more than half a century. It is a question that has

important implications for the cost, quality, and internal consistency of the

economic statistics produced by the federal statistical system. In essence, the

problem is that there are significant barriers to interagency sharing of business

lists among agencies in the decentralized federal statistical system.
Broadly speaking, business lists are lists of companies, establishments,
employers, and other kinds of economic units. The lists contain identifiers, such

as name, address, and Employer Identification number, and classifiers, such as a

Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code and size codes based on

employment, wages, production, or other measures. A primary statistical use of

business lists is the development and maintenance of sampling
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS190
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.frames for censuses and surveys. In addition, the lists may be used as a means of

achieving uniformity in the classifications, especially SIC codes, that are assigned

to the same units by different agencies.
Major producers of economic statistics include federal statistical agencies
and operating agencies with statistical units. In the first category, the Census

Bureau, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the National Agricultural Statistics

Service (NASS) have major programs. We also allude in this case study to the use

of business lists by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and the Energy

Information Administration.In the second category, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), with its
Statistics of Income program, and the Social Security Administration (SSA), with

its Continuous Work History Sample, are of major importance. These two

agencies maintain extensive business lists in connection with their tax and benefit

programs, lists that have great potential value (only partially realized at this time)

for statistical applications. We also refer here to the use of business lists by the

Small Business Administration's (SBA's) Office of Advocacy, which has

developed its own lists for use in surveys and studies of small businesses.
To what extent are business lists currently being shared? The Census Bureau
in the early 1970s developed its Standard Statistical Establishment List (SSEL) to

serve as a master list for use in all of its economic censuses and surveys. Direct

use of the SSEL for intercensal surveys has been limited, however, because of the

difficulty of keeping the list current between censuses. The Census Bureau also

originally intended that the SSEL would be available for use by other statistical

agencies. There have been several attempts, so far unsuccessful with one small

exception, to obtain legislation that would make this possible. A report by the

Economic Policy Council's (1987) Working Group on the Quality of Economic

Statistics recommended that BLS and NASS be administratively designated, by

the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), as the "central collection

agencies" for nonfarm and farm business lists, respectively. However, this

recommendation was never implemented.
The Census Bureau obtains inputs to the SSEL from several sources,
especially the administrative lists of the IRS and SSA. Use of tax return

information for this purpose is specifically permitted by the "statistical

information" exception to the disclosure constraints of the Internal Revenue Code

(see Chapter 5). The terms of this exception were negotiated between IRS and the
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS191
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Commerce Department in the 1976 amendments that established the current

disclosure policy of the Internal Revenue Code (Title 26 U.S.C.). However, those

same provisions prohibit redisclosure, by recipients, of tax return information

received for statistical purposes. For a particular establishment or employer

whose identity was originally supplied by the IRS, the Internal Revenue Code

allows the Census Bureau to contact the taxpayer, and any response returned to

the Census Bureau is considered to be data collected under the authority of the

Census Bureau (Title 13 U.S.C.) rather than tax return information.
There is little flow of business list information 
from the Census Bureau to
other agencies. Exceptions are the occasional correction or updating of SIC codes

on lists provided by other agencies, under the authority of a 1953 opinion issued

by Attorney General McGranery (41 Op. A.G. 120), and the release of certain

SSEL information to BEA, which has become possible as a result of legislation

passed by the 101st Congress (Foreign Direct Investment and International

Financial Data Improvements Act of 1990, P.L. 101
Œ533). As part of the same
legislation, BEA is required to share with BLS and the Census Bureau selected

data on foreign direct investment that it collects from business enterprises.
There are a few other examples of business list sharing, but what is more to
the point is the sharing that is not occurring. The National Agricultural Statistics

Service shares its farm list information with the Census Bureau in preparation for

each quinquennial census of agriculture, but Title 13 prohibits any reverse flow

of information to NASS for use in its extensive program of current agricultural

surveys. The Census Bureau uses farm tax return lists from the IRS as a major

source of its sampling frame for the agricultural censuses, but the provisions of

the Tax Reform Act of 1976 (P.L. 94
Œ455) do not permit IRS or the Census
Bureau to share the same lists with NASS. The result has been to increase

substantially the cost to NASS of developing and maintaining the lists of farms

that it needs for its data collection programs.
For a long time there had been no sharing of data for individual
establishments or other units in either direction between the Census Bureau and

BLS, the two agencies with the most extensive program of economic surveys for

the nonagricultural sectors. However, changes are occurring. Late in 1990, in

preparation for the 1992 economic censuses, the Census Bureau submitted a

request to OMB for approval of several classification surveys to improve industry

classification for new businesses. The OMB,
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS192
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.within its authority under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (P.L. 96
Œ511),denied the request by the Census Bureau to collect industry classification

information because, in its view, such collection would duplicate surveys already

conducted by the BLS. The OMB proceeded to work with BLS, the Census

Bureau, and the IRS to resolve some legal questions about the sharing of business

list information. Terms negotiated with the three agencies were incorporated in an

order (authorized under 44 U.S.C. 3510) directing limited sharing of the data (see

MacRae, 1990). A formal interagency agreement between BLS and the Census

Bureau (signed by Barbara E. Bryant, Census Bureau, and Janet L. Norwood,

BLS, April 19, 1991) implementing the OMB order was negotiated with the

assistance and support of OMB. The matching of BLS and Census Bureau

records, based primarily on Employer Identification numbers, is being carried out

at BLS by BLS employees who are also special sworn employees of the Census

Bureau. The emphasis in the list sharing is on the transfer of BLS's SIC codes to

the Census Bureau. Under the McGranery opinion cited above, the Census

Bureau's SIC codes could be transferred to BLS 
for units already on BLS lists
,but BLS has not asked for the Census Bureau codes. It is not likely that

information for unmatched units on either agency's list can be transferred to and

used by the other agency. However, the agreement includes research to evaluate

such discrepancies in coverage with a view to developing a coordinated data

collection strategy, such as using a jointly sponsored data collection program, to

resolve them.The EIA and the SBA's Office of Advocacy require general and specialized
business lists for most of their economic surveys, but neither has access to the

Census Bureau's SSEL, BLS lists developed in connection with the federal-state

Unemployment Insurance program, or the business lists that could be developed

from the IRS/SSA administrative systems. Previous efforts to make the SSEL

available to other agencies for statistical use have excluded EIA and SBA's Office

of Advocacy because, as explained above for EIA, neither agency had the kind of

statutory provisions that would guarantee that it could protect the shared list

information from all access for nonstatistical purposes.
The proposal for improving the quality of economic statistics issued by
Chairman Michael Boskin of the Council of Economic Advisers (1991:6)

included as one of seven major elements the development of legislation to permit

"limited sharing of confidential statistical information solely for statistical

purposes between statistical agencies under stringent safeguards." Such

legislation,STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS193
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as now envisioned, would provide a statutory basis for sharing business lists and

other kinds of data among four major federal statistical agencies: the Bureau of

Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Census Bureau, and the National

Agricultural Statistics Service. As of early 1993, the legislation had not yet been

introduced.PRACTICES IN OTHER COUNTRIES
The panel reviewed the policies and practices of several other developed
countries with respect to statistical and other uses of business lists established and

maintained by government statistical agencies. The review was based mainly on

eight papers presented at two meetings of the International Roundtable on

Business Survey Frames, an informal international group of government

statisticians, which has met annually since 1986 to discuss statistical and other

uses of business lists. Relevant papers from the 1989 meeting covered the

business list confidentiality and access policies of Australia, France, Japan, the

Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Papers from the 1990 meeting

covered Finland and New Zealand. We obtained information about Canadian

policies directly from Statistics Canada.
The nine countries whose policies the panel reviewed vary widely as to who
may have access to business lists and the purposes for which they may be used.

Insofar as we could determine, Finland, France, and Sweden place no restrictions

on access to and uses of basic list information other than payment of fees and, in

some instances, prohibition of release to third parties. The most restrictive

country was Japan, which allows access to its complete list only by other units of

national and local government, solely for statistical purposes. Australia and the

United Kingdom joined Japan in allowing access only to other units of

government, but they permitted some kinds of nonstatistical uses. The

Netherlands allows disclosure to other units of government and specified types of

nongovernment entities, solely for statistical purposes. New Zealand makes list

information available to any type of organization, but it prohibits release to third

parties and some types of nonstatistical uses.
In Canada, the Statistics Act allows the disclosure of lists of businesses, by
order of the chief statistician, as an exception to the general prohibition against

disclosure contained in the law. A committee reviews requests for such

information, using criteria set out in an internal Statistics Canada policy, and

makes recommendationSTATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS194
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to the chief statistician, who has the discretion to grant or deny each request. For

each request, the review committee considers the proposed uses of the lists and

their potential impact. Lists may be released for the collection of statistical data if

the proposed survey uses acceptable methodology, does not duplicate information

already collected, and does not appear to jeopardize respondents' continued

cooperation with Statistics Canada. Lists may also be released to assist data users

in the analysis or interpretation of data, and for that purpose, they are sometimes

included in industry publications, particularly for the manufacturing sector. Lists

may include any or all of the following information: names and addresses;

telephone numbers for statistical inquiries; official language preferred for

statistical inquiries; services provided and products produced, manufactured,

processed, transported, stored, purchased or sold; and size, expressed in terms of

an employment size range (letter from Ivan P. Fellegi, chief statistician of

Canada, to panel, January 26, 1993).
Three of the nine countries give units included in their lists the option to
have their names excluded from some kinds of releases. The United Kingdom, in

connection with one of its economic surveys, requests permission from

manufacturers for their inclusion in a directory that is published at five-year

intervals. Less than half of the units, in terms of employment, agree to have their

information included. In Finland and the Netherlands, units may request to have

their information excluded from any releases of directory information to other

organizations. Neither country provided information on the number of such

requests.The most striking finding of this review was that none of the nine countries
has business list policies as restrictive as those currently followed in the United

States. All of the countries reviewed allow, 
at a minimum, access to the
government's business lists by 
all units of national government (and generally
local government units as well) for statistical purposes. Some allow unrestricted

access to the lists for any purpose.
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
In 1939, the U.S. Central Statistical Board proclaimed the need for "a United
States Business Directory or Official Mailing List which will show the name,

address, and industrial classification of each important business

enterprise" (Bureau of the Budget, 1961:1). Over the intervening years, other

organizations and advisory groups too numerous to mention have recommended

more sharing of
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS195
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.business lists (see, e.g., American Statistical Association, 1980; Economic Policy

Council, 1987), but until quite recently the trend has been in the opposite

direction.There is little doubt that significant savings and improvements in the quality
and comparability of the economic data produced by BLS, the Census Bureau,

and NASS could be realized if all three agencies had full access to the IRS/SSA

administrative lists and to each others' lists. Further gains would accrue if other

agencies that conduct economic surveys could be brought into the system.
The panel commends OMB's Statistical Policy Office for the steps it has
been taking to promote limited sharing of business list information between BLS

and the Census Bureau and to develop legislation that will permit further sharing

of business lists, as recommended in the Boskin initiative.
Recommendation 7.4
 There should be increased sharing of business lists for
statistical purposes by federal and state agencies.
Detailed business lists, especially at the establishment level, that are
developed by federal agencies for statistical uses should be protected against

nonstatistical uses. Hence, federal agencies should have access only if they can

guarantee such protection. Two potential statistical users, EIA and the SBA's

Office of Advocacy, are currently unable to meet this requirement.
Recommendation 7.5
 New legislation on sharing of business lists for
statistical purposes should provide that government agencies that are now unable

to guarantee protection against nonstatistical uses can have access to business

lists if they acquire statutory authority for such protection in the future.
WAIVERS: WHOSE INFORMATION IS IT?
BACKGROUNDStatistical agencies sometimes request permission from survey respondents
to use the latter's information in ways that depart from standard agency policies

for the protection of confidentiality. For example, an agency might wish to
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS196
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   transfer individually identifiable information for an organization to
another agency for a statistical purpose,
   release tabulations without application of some of the masking
techniques that would usually be used, or
   include identification information for respondents in a published
directory of organizations.
Agencies may seek waivers from respondents for such purposes, either
because the proposed uses of the latter's data would not usually be permitted by

applicable statutes or regulations or because the uses would be contrary to

announced agency policies. In terms of fair information principles, the process of

requesting waivers, if  carried out according to accepted procedures for informed
consent, allows respondents greater control over how information about them is
used.Organizations may benefit in some ways from granting waivers requested by
statistical agencies. For example, if a waiver permits two agencies to share an

organization's data for statistical uses, the organization will not have to provide it

to each one separately. If the waiver allows an agency to publish a tabulation with a

production or sales data cell that is dominated by the organization, the latter may

be in a better position to determine its market share. Below we present several

examples of situations in which federal statistical agencies have asked

organizations to waive confidentiality protections for their data.
EXAMPLESIn detailed tabulations of economic survey data, it is common for one or two
data providers to dominate a single data cell. For example, one establishment in a

county or state may account for a large proportion of total employment, payroll,

production, or some other variable. As described in 
Chapter 6, most agencieshave policies that suppress or mask such data cells when one or two units

account for more than a specified proportion of the total. At least three federal

statistical agencies sometimes seek waivers that will allow them to include such

data cells, without the usual suppression or masking, in their publications. The

National Agricultural Statistics Service has a formal standard for its state offices

to use for obtaining permission from respondents in instances in which there are

only one or two respondents in a cell or one respondent accounts for more than 60

percent of the value to be published. Written permission is required and must be
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS197
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.updated every five years (National Agricultural Statistics Service, 1989).

Consideration is being given to updating the permission every two or three years.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics has a cooperative program with state
employment security agencies for the collection of periodic occupational

employment statistics data. Frequently, a single company will account for a high

proportion of the persons in particular occupations in its area. In such instances

the state agency conducting the survey seeks waivers to allow publication of the

affected data cells.
The Census Bureau has a Current Industrial Reports program for periodic
collection, from manufacturers, of intercensal data on the production of a large

number of specifically defined commodities. For some commodities, one or two

manufacturers may dominate total production, even at the national level. The

Census Bureau uses a waiver procedure to obtain permission from survey

respondents to publish data for the affected commodities.
Until recently, the Census Bureau also used waivers for a different purpose:
to share individually identifiable data about cotton ginning operations with

NASS. As described in a July 18, 1990, memorandum to the panel from Frederic

A. Vogel, an official of NASS,
in the past, NASS has had access to individual gin reports to compile data for
the monthly cotton production forecast. This data sharing activity was done with

the concurrence of the cotton gins so they could eliminate duplicate reporting.
However, OMB's legal counsel ruled in 1990 that Census Bureau employees
may not release individually identifiable information collected under Title 13,

even when waivers have been obtained. It was OMB's position, based on the

legislative history, that the provision of Title 13 (
§ 8(a)) that permits transfer of
copies of reports to authorized agents was intended to apply only to special

situations involving a few individual respondents, not to large-scale transfer of

records from a particular survey. Further, OMB counsel argued, the right to

confidentiality under Title 13 constitutes a public right (as opposed to a private

right) that cannot be waived by the respondent. In this particular instance, the

difficulty was resolved by transferring responsibility for the cotton ginning survey

program from the Census Bureau to NASS, which is not governed by Title 13.
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS198
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The panel finds it somewhat incongruous that OMB's interpretation of Title
13 prevents the Census Bureau from using a waiver procedure to share data with

NASS for statistical purposes, but that the Census Bureau is able to use a waiver

procedure in its Current Industrial Reports program to permit the release of data

cells whose publication would usually be contrary to the confidentiality

provisions of Title 13. We believe that the use of waiver procedures for the kinds

of statistical purposes illustrated in this section should be permitted, provided the

consequences of granting waivers are clearly explained to respondents and they

are not put under any kind of pressure to grant the permission requested.
Recommendation 7.6
 The Office of Management and Budget's Statistical
Policy Office should develop uniform guidelines for federal statistical agencies

covering the purposes for which waivers of confidentiality protections by

organizations are considered acceptable and the methods of obtaining waivers

from respondents. Efforts should be made to amend the confidentiality statutes

of federal statistical agencies that would otherwise be prevented from using

waivers for generally accepted statistical purposes.
With respect to waivers for the publication of data cells dominated by one or
two large organizations, there may be some circumstances in which smaller

organizations contributing to the same cell, especially if they are few in number,

should also be asked for permission to publish the data for that cell. If there are

only one or two smaller organizations, they may not want their large competitors

to have more precise information about them than would usually be available.

The written policies we reviewed did not include any provision for preventing

that.USER ACCESS: GETTING A BETTER RETURN ON
INVESTMENTS IN ECONOMIC STATISTICS
BACKGROUNDAs we pointed out in the introduction to this chapter, organizations vary
widely on many important characteristics, and thus individual organizations are

often easily recognizable on the basis
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS199
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of a few data items and classifiers, especially if their geographic location is

given. Consequently, federal statistical agencies have been unable, with few

exceptions, to issue public-use microdata sets containing individual records,

minus explicit identifiers, for companies, establishments, employers, and other

organizational entities. Even for aggregate data on organizations, the same

considerations restrict the amount of detail by location, type of economic

activity, and other classifiers that can be published.
Substantial benefits have been realized by data users, statistical agencies,
and society as a whole as a result of the wide dissemination of public-use

microdata sets on persons. Comparable returns on investment in data collection

have not been realized from the resources devoted to statistics on businesses and

other organizations. Those data are an underutilized resource.
The same constraints carry over to hierarchical files containing data on
persons and organizations. As explained in 
Chapter 6, an important reason why
microdata from the Continuous Work History Sample, a 1 percent longitudinal

sample of persons issued Social Security numbers, are no longer widely available

to researchers is the concern that some large employers could be identified fairly

easily on the basis of their industry classifications and geographic locations.

Thus, employers having access to the file might be able to identify their own

employees who were in the sample and learn about their work histories and

current second jobs. Similar considerations apply to data from surveys conducted

by the National Center for Education Statistics in which data are collected

simultaneously for students, staff, and educational institutions.
In 
Chapter 6, we described several forms of restricted access to federal
statistical data that are provided for external users: American Statistical

Association/National Science Foundation (ASA/NSF) fellowships that allow

researchers to work with data at federal agencies; remote on-line access with

query restrictions, as in the Luxembourg Income Study; release of encrypted

microdata in CD-ROM format; and various types of licensing agreements that

provide access for users at their work sites, but place restrictions on the uses that

can be made of the data and often include penalties for failure to abide by the

terms of the agreement.
To some extent, these kinds of arrangements have been providing greater
access to data for organizations over the past few years. Some of the ASA/NSF

fellows, including those who have worked at the Census Bureau's Center for

Economic Studies, have had access to microdata for establishments and

enterprises. ThroughSTATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS200
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.contracts for joint research studies the Center for Economic Studies has also

provided access to such data, at the Census Bureau, to several researchers from

nonprofit organizations. McGuckin (1992), in a discussion paper issued by the

Center for Economic Studies, proposes that some economic microdata sets be

made available to researchers, working as special sworn Census Bureau

employees, at the Census Bureau's regional offices. He also recommends a broad

interpretation of the requirement that research studies relying on this mode of

data access be of joint interest to the Census Bureau and the researchers.
The National Agricultural Statistics Service and the Economic Research
Service of the Department of Agriculture have established a research enclave that

makes it possible for researchers to have limited access, in Washington, D.C., to

microdata on farms from the two agencies' annual Farm Costs and Returns

Survey. The National Agricultural Statistics Service has also developed

administrative procedures that allow some researchers to have restricted access to

statistical data at its state offices. The National Center for Education Statistics has

become an active proponent of dissemination of data by means of encrypted

CD-ROM diskettes and licensing agreements, and some of the data released in

those ways are for schools.
Despite these developments, external users still have difficulty obtaining
access to federal statistical data on organizations. This is particularly true for data

on nonagricultural establishments and other economic units, for which many of

the data sets that would be of most interest to researchers are maintained by the

Census Bureau.FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The panel's general findings and recommendations about procedures for
giving external users restricted access to federal statistical data were presented in

Chapter 6. In brief, we expressed our belief that a greater return on public
investment in statistical programs would be possible through carefully controlled

expansion of the availability of federal data sets to external users. We encouraged

statistical agencies to develop and use some of the newer data dissemination

techniques, such as the use of encrypted CD-ROM diskettes and licensing

agreements, with appropriate confidentiality safeguards and periodic reviews of

costs and benefits.We believe there is a need for substantially expanded user
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS201
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.access to federal statistical data about organizations, especially business

establishments and other economic units.
Recommendation 7.7
 Federal statistical agencies that collect data on
organizations should make a special effort to improve access for statistical

research and analysis by external users and, if necessary, should seek legislation

that will permit them to develop licensing arrangements that allow such users to

have access at their work sites, subject to penalties for violating the conditions

under which they are allowed access to the data.
STATISTICAL DATA ON ORGANIZATIONS202
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8Managing Confidentiality and Data Access
FunctionsTechnology always moves ahead of sound management principles.
Stuart Sutton, 1991
The effective functioning of the federal statistical system requires
responsible policies toward data providers and data users. Managers of federal

statistical programs must give constant, careful attention to confidentiality and

data access issues. However, new data collection and processing technologies,

novel types of surveys, and innovative statistical uses of administrative records

bring with them questions for which statutes, regulations, and policy statements

do not always provide definitive answers.
The general principles and recommendations in this report are broadly
focused. In the course of this study, the panel has identified many more questions

than it could expect to provide detailed answers for. We have tried to provide

useful guidelines, but we have not tried to give specific answers to questions such

as the following:
Ł   How much detail should be included in aggregate statistics and
microdata sets that are released to the public with no restrictions on their

use? should a proxy respondent be allowed to provide
data for another person or household without the latter's informed

consent?are passive waivers acceptable?

  To what extent should lists of businesses compiled by federal statistical
agencies be made publicly available?
  What conditions should be included in interagency agreements for
sharing identifiable data for statistical purposes?
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS203
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   What kinds of informed consent procedures are appropriate for telephone
surveys?Agencies in the federal statistical system have established policies and
procedures for reaching administrative decisions about these and other

confidentiality and data access questions. Are those decision mechanisms

adequate? If not, how might they be improved? In this chapter we look at internal

agency staffing and organization of information management activities and at

government-wide mechanisms for standardizing and coordinating policies and

practices. We also examine the extent to which the decision processes of federal

statistical agencies incorporate the views of data providers and data users. We

discuss the relevant decision mechanisms, such as data protection boards, that

have been established in other countries, and we explore their possible relevance

for the U.S. statistical system.
MANAGEMENT OF CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS
QUESTIONS IN THE FEDERAL STATISTICAL SYSTEM
WITHIN STATISTICAL AGENCIES
The documentation provided to the panel by federal statistical agencies
included several examples of policy manuals, policy memorandums and

standards related to statistical disclosure limitation procedures, informed consent

procedures, and other aspects of confidentiality and data access. The most

comprehensive formal codification of these issues by any of the agencies that

responded to our request for information was in two publications of the National

Center for Health Statistics (NCHS): the 
Policy Statement on Release of Data for
Individual Elementary 
 Units and Special Tabulations
 (1978; first published in
1969) and the 
NCHS Staff Manual on Confidentiality
 (1984; first published in
1978). The 
Policy Statement is addressed primarily to data users and focuses on
various ways of gaining access to NCHS microdata. The basic policy statement is

as follows:
Within prevailing ethical, legal, technical, technological and economic
restrictions, it is the policy of the National Center for Health Statistics to

augment its programs of collection, analysis, and publication of statistical

information with procedures for making available, at cost, transcripts of data for

individual elementary units
Špersons or establishments
Šin a form that will not
in anyMANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS204
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.way compromise the confidentiality guaranteed the respondent (National Center

for Health Statistics, 1978:4).
The NCHS 
Staff Manual presents the agency's policies for the protection of
confidentiality. It includes information and rules covering legal requirements and

penalties, employees' responsibilities, promise of confidentiality to respondents,

treatment of requests for information, physical protection of records, disclosures

that may be permitted, avoidance of unintentional disclosures through published

data, maintenance of confidentiality in the release of microdata files, and

requirements placed on contractors.
Several agencies have prepared written guidelines for the application of
statistical disclosure limitation procedures in the release of tabulations and

microdata. Some of the guidelines contain only one or two simple rules; others

are much more detailed. Agencies with more detailed formal documentation of

procedures include the Census Bureau (for microdata), the Energy Information

Administration (EIA; for tabulations only), NCHS, and the Social Security

Administration (SSA). The panel found that agency guidelines gave much less

attention to other aspects of confidentiality and data access, such as the

development of interagency data sharing agreements and the content of informed

consent and notification statements for surveys.
Two agencies, the Census Bureau and the National Center for Education
Statistics (NCES), have internal committees that review all proposals for releases

of new microdata sets. The Census Bureau's Microdata Review Panel has a

formal charter and guidelines, as well as a standard prospectus that must be

completed by all divisions sponsoring new microdata releases. Key elements of

the Microdata Review Panel's evaluation criteria were published in the 
FederalRegister (46(72):22017) at the time the panel was formally established in 1981.
The Microdata Review Panel has no outside members; however, the Census

Bureau is considering an arrangement for periodic review of the panel's policies

and decisions by outside advisors selected to represent data providers and data

users.The NCES's Disclosure Review Board was created more recently, in 1989.
The board's primary function, like that of the Census Bureau panel, is to

determine whether microdata sets proposed for release pose an acceptably low

risk of disclosure of individually identifiable data. The board consists of NCES

staff members and a Census Bureau representative.
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS205
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Several federal statistical agencies have external advisory groups, and they
sometimes ask them for their views on confidentiality and data access questions.

The Census Bureau has asked several of its advisory groups to review its plans

for the application of statistical disclosure limitation procedures to decennial

census data. About 1980, when EIA was developing its confidentiality policies, it

asked the American Statistical Association's (ASA's) Committee on Energy

Statistics to review drafts of policy statements on more than one occasion. More

recently, EIA has sought advice from the same committee on how to deal with the

consequences of the Justice Department's request for identifiable records

(discussed in Chapter 7
).Statistical agencies have also drawn on the Committee on National Statistics
to help them address specific problems. In the late 1970s, a panel established by

the committee in response to a request from the Census Bureau undertook

research to obtain information on ''how people in the United States currently feel

and behave in their roles as respondents, or intended respondents, in household

censuses and surveys" (p. viii). The main findings from that panel's report,

Privacy  and Confidentiality as Factors in Survey Response
 (National Research
Council, 1979), were discussed in 
Chapter 3 of this report.
Prior to the start of this panel's study, the Committee on National Statistics
and the Social Science Research Council organized two workshops at the request

of federal agencies. The first workshop, sponsored by the National Institute on

Aging, explored the legal and ethical aspects of a proposed follow-up survey of

surviving members of the sample panel for the SSA's Longitudinal Retirement

History Survey. The second workshop, sponsored by the National Science

Foundation (NSF), explored various options for improving researchers' access to

microdata from two of NSF's scientific and technical personnel data systems, the

Doctorate Records File and the Survey of Doctorate Recipients.
During the term of this study, the panel conducted a workshop on
confidentiality and data access issues for the National Center for Education

Statistics, which had been seeking advice from several groups on how best to

collect data and serve the needs of data users under the terms of new agency

confidentiality legislation that had been passed in 1988. All three of these

workshops brought together agency staff, data users, and experts on information

law, statistical disclosure limitation procedures, and other relevant topics. Several

members of the panel participated in one or more of the workshops.
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS206
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The panel did not conduct a review of detailed management and
organizational issues, such as where confidentiality and data access functions are

placed within statistical agencies or the titles, grade levels, and qualifications of

the individuals who play major roles. Based on our general knowledge of these

matters, however, we can make a few broad statements. First, only a handful of

statistical agencies have a staff person whose primary role is to deal with such

issues as informed consent, release of microdata, interagency data sharing

agreements, and other aspects of confidentiality and data access. The

development and application of statistical disclosure limitation techniques is

frequently assigned to mathematical statisticians in a unit responsible for

methodological research and consulting assistance to operating units. In some of

the smaller statistical agencies, there are no specialists on confidentiality issues,

and the relevant questions are dealt with on an ad hoc basis by operating staff,

some of whom have little or no pertinent background or experience.
ACROSS STATISTICAL AGENCIES
The Office of Management and Budget's (OMB's) original Statistical Policy
Division, the interim successor
Šthe Office of Federal Statistical Policy and
Standards in the Department of Commerce
Šand OMB's current Statistical Policy
Office have played a role in developing and monitoring government-wide

standards and policies regarding protection of confidentiality and access to

federal statistical data. Two of the early Statistical Policy Working Papers issued

by the Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology covered relevant topics:

No. 2, Report on Statistical 
 Disclosure and Disclosure-Avoidance Techniques
(1978), and No. 5, 
Report on Exact and Statistical Matching Techniques
 (1980).Working Paper 2 and the interagency seminars based on it were instrumental in

raising the level of awareness of federal statisticians to the need for more careful

application of statistical disclosure limitation techniques when releasing

aggregate data or microdata.
Subsequent to the start of this panel's study, the head of the Statistical Policy
Office has taken steps to review, with agency representatives, such issues as

informed consent, statistical disclosure limitation procedures, interagency data

sharing, and licensing procedures for data access for external users. Early in

1992, the office formed an interagency committee to exchange information on

current statistical disclosure limitation practices and on recent technical

developments. (Early in 1993, this committee
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS207
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.became the Subcommittee on Disclosure Limitation Methodology of the Federal

Committee on Statistical Methodology.) The office is planning a formal review,

with public comment, of the data user licensing procedures that are now being

used on a trial basis by NCES.
As explained in 
Chapter 7, the Statistical Policy Office has been
instrumental in persuading the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics

to begin sharing business lists that until now have been developed and maintained

independently. In addition, it is coordinating the development of proposed

legislation that would permit list sharing for statistical purposes among four of

the major federal statistical agencies: the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the

Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Census Bureau, and the National Agricultural

Statistics Service.The Statistical Policy Office has also been working for some time on a
revision of the OMB Circular, 
Guidelines for Federal Statistical 
 Activities. Onecan expect, on the basis of an early draft published for public comment, that the

final version of these guidelines will cover some of the issues studied by the

panel, such as the content of informed consent and notification statements and the

conditions under which record matching for statistical purposes is appropriate.
The Statistical Policy Office reviews all data collection requests developed
by the Census Bureau and the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Data collection

requests submitted to OMB by other federal agencies, including those for

statistical purposes, are reviewed by OMB clearance officers who are not part of

the Statistical Policy Office. The Statistical Policy Office provides advice on

statistical data collections to the clearance officers on request, and on its own

initiative it frequently makes recommendations concerning proposals sponsored

by statistical agencies. Forms-clearance reviews provide an opportunity to

examine informed consent and notification statements, but currently the OMB

reviewers do not work from any written guidelines, aside from the Privacy Act

regulations, about what should be included in such statements. This may change

when the OMB circular mentioned above is issued.
In addition to the interagency committees and other formal coordination
mechanisms established by OMB's Statistical Policy Office, there are many other

ways in which employees of federal statistical agencies exchange information

about the policies and procedures they use to deal with confidentiality and data

access questions. Many surveys and other statistical programs involve
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS208
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.two or more agencies and require joint efforts to develop appropriate

methodologies. Official statisticians from different agencies often participate in

discussions of confidentiality and data access matters at meetings of

organizations like the Committee on National Statistics and the Council of

Professional Associations on Federal Statistics. Managers and technicians from

various statistical agencies have frequent contacts through their active

participation in national and local professional associations, as described in the

next subsection.
THE INFLUENCE OF PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES
The American Society for Access Professionals is an organization whose
membership consists primarily of federal government employees whose functions

include activities related to agency compliance with the requirements of privacy

and freedom of information statutes. The society organizes an annual symposium

in the fall and sponsors tutorial sessions each spring to update its members on

changes in privacy and freedom of information legislation and case law. A few of

the society's members are from federal statistical agencies, and some of the

presentations at their annual symposiums have covered the application of

information legislation to research and statistical activities.
As outlined below, the American Statistical Association has been actively
involved in addressing confidentiality and data access issues:
   Two ASA committees, the Ad Hoc Committee on Privacy and
Confidentiality and the Ad Hoc Committee on Professional Ethics, have

developed guidelines relevant to census and survey activities, especially

in the area of informed consent (see discussions in Chapters 
3 and 
4).The association now has a permanent Committee on Privacy and

Confidentiality. Over the years, several members of this committee have

been employees of federal statistical agencies. The current chair was

Gerald Gates of the Census Bureau. As described in 
Chapter 3, the
committee has developed an informational brochure, 
Surveys andPrivacy.   The journals and proceedings of ASA have included numerous articles
on statistical disclosure limitation theory and methods and other aspects

of confidentiality and data access. Several panel discussions have been

held on these topics at annual and other meetings.
   From time to time other ASA committees, such as the
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS209
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Census Advisory Committee and the Committee on Energy Statistics,

have advised federal statistical agencies on confidentiality questions.
Other U.S. professional associations, including the American Association
for Public Opinion Research, the American Psychological Association, and the

American Sociological Association, have developed codes or guidelines for their

members, some portions of which are relevant to the conduct of surveys and

experimental research. And as mentioned in 
Chapter 3
, the International
Statistical Institute's (1986) 
Declaration  on Professional Ethics includedextensive guidelines for the content of informed consent procedures.
On the data access side, meetings of organizations like the Association of
Public Data Users provide another forum in which agency statisticians and data

users can exchange views. Also, data users tend to be well represented on the

various advisory committees to federal statistical agencies, especially the ones

that deal with substantive rather than methodological issues.
ALTERNATIVE MODELS FOR MANAGING
CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS QUESTIONS: A
LOOK AT OTHER COUNTRIES
The issues that the panel has studied are not peculiar to the United States. As a
natural consequence of the coming of the information age, they have arisen in all

of the countries that have led the way in the development of modern data

collection, processing, storage, and dissemination methods. The panel would be

remiss if it failed to ask what can be learned from other countries that have also

been grappling with how to manage confidentiality and data access questions.
The mechanisms described in this section go well beyond purely statistical
and research uses of data about persons. The Privacy Act in the United States and

the data protection boards established in other countries have jurisdiction over

administrative and statistical uses of individual records. A key question, for

official statisticians, is how well these mechanisms take into account the

differences between statistical and other uses of personal data.
Flaherty (1989:viii) has undertaken "a comparative examination of the
passage, revision, and, especially, implementation of data protection laws at the

national and state levels" in Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, France,

Sweden, and the United
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS210
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.States. His review, plus materials the panel obtained directly from Statistics

Canada, provide the main basis for our discussion of what has happened in

countries other than the United States. Also helpful were papers by Dalenius

(1979) and Durbin (1979) in the 
Journal of 
 the Royal Statistical Society
 anddiscussants' comments on those papers.
In the United States, the responsibility for oversight of compliance with the
requirements of the Privacy Act of 1974 was assigned to OMB. In contrast, in

each of the four other countries that Flaherty studied, data protection legislation

provided for the establishment of a commissioner or board, with a considerable

degree of independence from the executive branch of the government, to monitor

compliance with the fair information practices mandated by the legislation. The

structure, scope of authority, and functions of those independent units vary.

Canada has separate privacy and information commissioners. Both have

jurisdiction only over records and information in the public sector and both

function mostly in an ombudsman/advisory mode, although they may take certain

cases to the Federal Court of Canada when agencies do not follow their advice.
The Swedish Data Inspection Board has jurisdiction over record systems in
the public and private sectors, but only those maintained in electronic form.

Initially, all new electronic record systems had to be licensed by the board. This

proved to be unwieldy, and the procedure was changed to require registration,

rather than licensing, of new systems, with some exceptions. The board has broad

regulatory powers over all electronic record systems; for example, almost all

record linkages are subject to its regulation.
The Federal Republic of Germany has an independent federal data protection
commissioner, as well as data protection offices in the states. The federal and

state commissioners have jurisdiction over record systems in the public sector

only and operate mainly in an advisory capacity. They maintain registers of

record systems, respond to complaints, and have the authority to conduct

investigations or audits of compliance with the fair information practices

mandated by law.France has a National Commission on Informatics, Data Banks and
Freedoms (CNIL), whose functions extend well beyond protection of the privacy

and confidentiality interests of individuals. The CNIL is an independent agency

and operates under the direction of a group of part-time commissioners. It has

broad authority to regulate processing of automated personal data in the public
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS211
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and private sectors, carry out inspections, rule on complaints, maintain a register

of data processing activities, and assist persons to gain access to their own data.
What impact have these independent boards and commissions had on the
collection and use of data about individuals for statistical and research purposes?

In Sweden, which pioneered formal data protection activities at the national

level, the Data Inspection Board initially focused considerable attention on the

central statistical agency, Statistics Sweden. An early ruling of the board

prevented Statistics Sweden from using imputation for persons not responding to

the Swedish labor force survey. Another ruling prohibited the use of proxy

respondents in the same survey; in other words, persons asked to participate in

the survey could respond to the questions only for themselves, not for other

members of their families or households. This ruling was appealed and it was

decided that proxies could be used for objective data items only, provided the

proxy respondent was closely related to the data subject (Dalenius, 1979).
Other rulings requiring the removal of identifiers placed severe constraints
on the conduct of longitudinal surveys and record linkages for statistical

purposes. In the early 1980s, a widely publicized debate between the heads of the

Data Inspection Board and Statistics Sweden about proposed uses of

administrative records in the national census of population eventually led to a

government decision to conduct a more traditional census. According to Flaherty

(1989), the two agencies are by now able to reach understandings on most issues,

but some minor ones remain outstanding.
Like the U.S. Privacy Act, the Swedish Data Act allows individuals to
inspect their own records in government record systems. Unlike the U.S. act,

however, the Swedish act does not allow any exceptions for statistical record

systems. As a consequence, Statistics Sweden has "faced a major financial and

administrative burden of replying to requests for access from individuals. There

were 67,000 such requests during the first four years" (Flaherty, 1989:152).
In the mid-1980s important privacy issues were raised by Project
Metropolitan, a longitudinal research data base maintained at the University of

Stockholm that linked information from many sources, much of it highly

sensitive, for 15,000 persons born in the Stockholm area in 1953. About 1980,

after the researchers had adopted recommended data protections, the Swedish

Data Inspection Board licensed the data base, showing "a high degree of tolerance

for theMANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS212
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.linkage of a large amount of sensitive personal information" (Flaherty,

1989:154). However, in 1986 the project came to the attention of the data

subjects and the general public, and a major debate ensued. The debate finally led

to the board's requiring the removal of all identifiers from the system, so that no

further data from other sources could be linked to the existing records.
It is more difficult to define the role of the German data protection
commissioners in connection with the controversies that led to a four-year delay

in carrying out the scheduled 1983 census of population for the Federal Republic

of Germany. The federal commissioner's office had warned the federal Statistical

Office that potential problems with data protection were associated with the

census procedures, but the Statistical Office did little to respond. Nevertheless, in

March 1983 the commissioner's office issued a press release stating that "people's

fears about the census were unfounded, and that adequate safeguards were in

place" (Flaherty 1989:81). Continued public concern and legal challenges to the

census, however, forced postponement, and it was not until after the passage of

new census legislation in 1986 that the census was finally undertaken in 1987,

still in a very controversial atmosphere. According to Flaherty, these difficulties

occurred, at least in part "because the strong data protection laws and statistical

laws currently in place are not well enough known to the general public, and

because public anxieties about surveillance practices using administrative data are

so great" (p. 83).
Flaherty does not detail any specific instances of actions by the privacy
commissioner of Canada having direct effects on the programs of Statistics

Canada. However, he does describe measures that have been introduced to reduce

substantially the administrative uses of Canada's Social Insurance number

(comparable to the Social Security number in the United States). As a

consequence, there may be a reduction in the number and scope of administrative

record systems that can readily be used for research studies and statistical

analyses that require linking of records from different sources. Nevertheless,

Statistics Canada has an active and successful program to produce current

demographic data from administrative sources, and it is possible that this system

may at some time take the place of the more traditional kind of population

census.From other sources, it is clear that the former privacy commissioner of
Canada, John Grace (in an interesting change of hats, he became the information

commissioner in 1990), had serious doubts about record linkages and

longitudinal studies for research
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS213
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.purposes, although he did not entirely rule them out (Grace, 1988, 1989). He

believed that they should be limited in scope and only undertaken with strong

justification and full knowledge by the data subjects. Statistics Canada, perhaps

due in part to Grace's views, has taken a cautious approach to record linkage

activities. A formal policy statement (Statistics Canada, 1986) describes the

potential benefits of such activities, but it also lists a fairly rigorous set of

conditions that must be satisfied before they can be undertaken. A series of

agency guidelines issued over the past few years has set out requirements for

notifying survey respondents of plans to link administrative record data with their

survey information or to release nonpublic-use microdata to other agencies. The

guidelines provide specific examples of language that can be used in the

notifications, taking into account the mode of data collection.
U.S. PROPOSALS FOR AN INDEPENDENT PRIVACY
PROTECTION BOARDAlthough most drafts of the Privacy Act of 1974 provided for the
establishment of a permanent privacy protection commission, the provision was

eliminated just prior to final passage of the act. Consequently, responsibility for

oversight of the act's fair information provisions devolved on OMB.
Recently, however, there has been growing interest among U.S. privacy
advocates in the possible application of at least some features of the Canadian and

European models in the United States (see Rotenberg, 1991). Bills to establish an

independent data protection board in the executive branch of the government

were introduced by Representative Robert Wise in 1989 and 1991. The 1991 bill,

which would have taken the form of an amendment to the Privacy Act, provided

for a board whose functions would have been largely advisory. The board would

have been required to prepare guidelines under the Privacy Act and other

information statutes and to issue periodic compilations of agency record system

notices. It would have had authority to investigate compliance with the Privacy

Act and report on violations, to review existing and proposed data protection

legislation, investigate complaints about violations of data protection rights, and

request agencies to take action on matters affecting data protection. Although no

legislation had been passed by early 1993, there is sufficient interest in these

issues that future enactment is possible.
There does not seem to be any corresponding interest or activity,
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS214
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.at least in any organized sense, aimed at furthering the ability of data users to gain

access to federal data for research and statistical purposes. Paul Reynolds (1993),

in a paper prepared for the panel's Conference on Disclosure Limitation

Approaches and Data Access, presented a detailed proposal for the issuance of

"federal data base research certificates," which would be issued to organizations

presenting worthy research proposals to a "federal data base review board." The

certificates would provide access to data maintained by any federal agency (with

their approval), immunity from any legal subpoena, and substantial penalties for

researcher disclosure of individual information.
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
AGENCY STAFFING AND MANAGEMENT OF
CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS
The panel has noted several instances, some of them recent or current, of
federal agency practices that reflect inadequate knowledge of and attention to

confidentiality and data access issues. As discussed in 
Chapter 3, some informed
consent and notification statements have been inadequate in terms of accuracy,

completeness, and comprehensibility. And as noted in 
Chapter 6
, some agency
standards for statistical disclosure limitation are rudimentary and do not take full

advantage of current knowledge and experience in this area.
Recommendation 8.1
 Each federal statistical agency should review its
staffing and management of confidentiality and data access functions, with

particular attention to the assignment within the agency of responsibilities for

these functions and the background and experience needed for persons who

exercise these responsibilities.
Currently, there is a dearth of opportunities (such as the seminars that were
conducted following the 1978 publication of Statistical Policy Working Paper 2)

for federal statisticians to obtain training in fair information practices and related

subjects.Recommendation 8.2
 Statistical agencies should take steps to provide staff
training in fair information practices, informed consent procedures,

confidentiality laws and policies,
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS215
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.statistical disclosure limitation procedures, and related topics.
Possible sites for such training include the new Joint University of
Maryland-University of Michigan Program in Survey Methodology (National

Research Council, 1992a; University of Maryland et al., 1993) and the U.S.

Department of Agriculture Graduate School.
The panel believes that it is highly desirable for data providers and data
users to participate in or have greater input into agency decisions on data

protection and data access policies and procedures. The existing institutions and

mechanisms that we have described are useful, but not entirely adequate.

Especially for data users, there are inadequate means to appeal adverse decisions

by federal statistical agencies.
Recommendation 8.3
 Statistical agencies should establish mechanisms for
allowing and encouraging greater external inputs into their decisions on

confidentiality protection and data access.
One possibility would be to establish data review boards, with external
members representing data subjects and data users, in all federal statistical

agencies that release substantial amounts of data to the public. Trade-offs

between confidentiality protection and data access exist whether data releases are

in aggregate or microdata form, and thus both kinds of releases should be subject

to review by such boards.
Alternatively, existing agency advisory committees could be asked
periodically to review agency policies and practices for confidentiality protection

and data access. For the latter approach to be effective, committee membership

should be balanced to provide representation of data subjects and data users.
INTERAGENCY COORDINATION
The Office of Management and Budget and, in particular, its Statistical
Policy Office, have an important role in coordinating federal data protection and

access activities. The Statistical Policy Office, although handicapped by having a

very small staff, has recently undertaken some important initiatives, such as its

efforts to promote and facilitate business list sharing for statistical purposes and

to bring agency officials together to review and evaluate new data access

procedures.MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS216
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The OMB Circular, 
Guidelines for Federal Statistical Activities
, which isbeing revised, has the potential to provide an impetus for improved agency

practices in such areas as informed consent and notification statements,

application of statistical disclosure limitation techniques, and record linkages for

statistical purposes.Recommendation 8.4
 The Statistical Policy Office should give high priority
to proceeding with the development and issuance of the OMB 
Guidelines for
Statistical Activities
, with the full participation of the federal statistical agencies
and the public.
The policy directives and memorandums issued by Statistics Canada might
provide useful models for the treatment of such topics as informed consent and

record linkage.DATA PROTECTION BOARD
Unlike other advanced industrial societies, the United States does not have
an independent advisory board or commission charged with promoting effective

implementation of the Privacy Act and other information legislation. There have

been recent proposals by privacy advocates and legislators to create such a body.
Recommendation 8.5
 The panel supports the general concept of an
independent federal advisory body charged with fostering a climate of enhanced

protection for all federal data about persons 
and responsible data disseminationfor research and statistical purposes. Any such advisory body should promote

the principle of functional separation and have professional staff with expertise

in privacy protection, computer data bases, official statistics, and research uses

of federal data.The experience of other countries has shown that data protection agencies
can be a source of additional oversight for statisticians and researchers, subjecting

their activities to greater scrutiny, promoting balance in data protection and data

dissemination, and generating public debate. In some instances, new restrictions

have been imposed on practices that do not appear to pose a threat to the

confidentiality of individual data. Nevertheless, the panel believes that creating a

positive climate for enhanced data protection and data dissemination requires

assurances from many different
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS217
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.quarters that legitimate protective policies and procedures are in place and are

being followed.An independent advisory board, with appropriate professional staffing, could
constitute a regular source of expertise on a wide spectrum of privacy issues,

including those related to research and statistics. It could give advice, serve as a

sounding board for data protectors and data users, and offer legitimacy to

responsible initiatives by both groups. The advisory board could provide support

for responsible access to personal data as needed to realize the fundamental goals

of democratic accountability and constitutional empowerment, which we

introduced in 
Chapter 1
. A professionally competent, respected advisory body
could also act as a mediator when there are differences of opinion among data

providers, privacy advocates, data users, and statistical agencies. Orderly

evaluation and resolution of such differences by an impartial ombudsman could

reduce the likelihood of their escalating to the point at which they seriously

disrupt key data collection and dissemination activities.
Data protectors can and should be important allies of official statisticians and
the general public in the achievement of an appropriate balance between the

privacy interests of individuals and societal needs for research and statistical data

about a complex society. In particular, data protectors can help statistical

agencies resolve difficult issues in the areas of informed consent, confidentiality,

data access, and record linkage.
An advisory body could also promote harmonization of disparate
interpretations of federal regulations under the Privacy Act of 1974 or other

legislation covering all or part of the federal statistical system. It could

disseminate information about innovative techniques to permit the exchange of

data for statistical uses without diminishing the protection offered to individuals,

and it could provide oversight of agency practices in maintaining and

disseminating sensitive information.
MANAGING CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESS FUNCTIONS218
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RecommendationsFor the reader's convenience, we present all the panel's recommendations,
keyed to the chapters in which they appear.
CHAPTER 3
Recommendation 3.1 Federal statistical agencies should follow a flexible,
multilayered approach to informing data providers of the conditions under which

they are being asked to provide information.
Recommendation 3.2 Basic information given to all data providers
requested to participate in statistical surveys and censuses should include
(a) for data on persons, information needed to meet all Privacy Act
requirements. Similar information is recommended for data on

organizations, except that the requirement to inform providers about

routine uses (as defined by the Privacy Act) is not applicable.
(b) a clear statement of the expected burden on the data providers,
including the expected time required to provide the data (a

requirement of the Office of Management
RECOMMENDATIONS219
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and Budget) and, if applicable, the nature of sensitive topics included

in the survey and plans for possible follow-up interviews of some or

all respondents.(c) no false or misleading statements. For example, a statement that
implies zero risk of disclosure is seldom, if ever, appropriate.
(d) information about any planned or potential 
nonstatistical uses of the
information to be provided. There should be a clear statement of the

level of confidentiality protection that can be legally ensured.
(e) information about any planned or anticipated record linkages for
statistical or research purposes. For persons, this notification will

usually occur in conjunction with a request for the data subject's

Social Security number.
(f) a statement to cover the possibility of unanticipated future uses of the
data for statistical or research purposes.
(g) information about the length of time for which the information will
be retained in identifiable form.
Recommendation 3.3 In keeping with the objective of giving individuals
control over their own information whenever societal needs do not clearly take

precedence, data subjects or data providers should be allowed to waive certain

aspects of confidentiality protection that would usually be accorded to the

information they provide. Agencies should take special care to ensure that any

such waivers are based on fully informed consent.
Recommendation 3.4. Statistical agencies should undertake and support
continuing research, using the tools of cognitive and survey research, to monitor

the views of data providers and the general public on informed consent, response

burden, sensitivity of survey questions, data sharing for statistical purposes, and

related issues.Recommendation 3.5 Federal statistical agencies should continue todevelop systematic informational activities designed to inform the public of their

ability to maintain the confidentiality of individually identifiable information,

including use of legal barriers to disclosure and physical security procedures, and

their intentions to minimize intrusions on privacy and the time and effort required

to respond to statistical inquiries.
RECOMMENDATIONS220
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendation 3.6 Agencies should be prepared to deal quickly and
candidly with instances of ''moral outrage" that may be directed at statistical

programs from time to time as a result of actual or perceived violations of

pledges of confidentiality given to data providers by data collectors. The agencies

should be prepared to explain the purpose of specific data collection activities and

the procedures used to protect confidentiality. They should accept full

responsibility if a violation occurs and should announce measures to prevent

future violations.Recommendation 3.7 As part of the communication process, statistical
agencies should work more closely with appropriate advocacy groups, such as

those concerned with civil liberties and those that represent the rights of

disadvantaged segments of the population, and with specialists on ethical issues

and human rights.CHAPTER 4
Recommendation 4.1 Greater opportunities should be available for sharing
of explicitly or potentially identifiable personal data among federal agencies for

statistical and research purposes, provided the confidentiality of the records can

be properly protected and the data cannot be used to make determinations about

individual data subjects. Greater access should be permitted to key statistical and

administrative data sets for the development of sampling frames and other

statistical uses. Additional data sharing should only be undertaken in those

instances in which the procedures for collecting the data comply with the panel's

recommendations for informed consent or notification (see Recommendations 3.2

and 3.3).Recommendation 4.2 Federal statistical agencies should seek to improve
the access of external users to statistical data, through both legislation and the

development and greater use, under carefully controlled conditions, of tested

administrative procedures.RECOMMENDATIONS221
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendation 4.3 All federal statistical agencies should establish
systematic procedures for capturing information on a continuing basis about user

requests for data that have been denied or only partially fulfilled. Such

information should be used for periodic reviews of agency confidentiality and

data access policies.
Recommendation 4.4  All users of federal data, regardless of the formal
conditions of access, should subscribe to the following principles for responsible

data use:(a) Conscientiously observe all conditions agreed to in order to obtain
access to the data. Allow access to the original data set only by those

permitted access under the agreed conditions of recipiency and

ensure that all such persons are aware of the required conditions of

use.(b) Make no attempt to identify particular individuals or other units
whose data are considered to be confidential.
(c) In the event that one or more individuals or other units are identified
in the course of research, notify the organization that provided the

data set, and do not inform anyone else of the discovered identities.
Recommendation 4.5 To promote knowledge of and adherence to the
principles of responsible data use,
(a) Federal statistical agencies should ask all recipients of federal
microdata sets to submit to the releasing agency, in writing, their

agreement to observe the above principles, plus any other conditions

deemed necessary for specific data sets.
(b) Professional societies and associations that have ethical codes,
standards, or guidelines should incorporate these principles in them.
(c) The principles and the justifications for them should be included in
academic and other training for disciplines whose members are likely

to be users of federal statistical data.
RECOMMENDATIONS222
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHAPTER 5
Recommendation 5.1 Statistical records across all federal agencies should
be governed by a consistent set of statutes and regulations meeting standards for

the maintenance of such records, including the following features of fair

statistical information practices:
(a) a definition of statistical data that incorporates the principle of
functional separation as defined by the Privacy Protection Study

Commission,(b) a guarantee of confidentiality for data,
(c) a requirement of informed consent or informed choice when
participation in a survey is voluntary,
(d) a requirement of strict control on data dissemination,
(e) a requirement to follow careful rules on disclosure limitation,
(f) a provision that permits data sharing for statistical purposes under
controlled conditions, and
(g) legal sanctions for those who violate confidentiality requirements
(see Recommendation 5.3 for further discussion of this requirement).
Recommendation 5.2 Zero-risk requirements for disclosure of statistical
records are, in practice, impossibly high standards. Regulations and policies

under existing statutes should establish standards of reasonable care. New statutes

should recognize that almost all uses of information entail some risk of disclosure

and should allow release of information for legitimate statistical purposes that

entail a reasonably low risk of disclosure of individually identifiable data.
Recommendation 5.3 There should be legal sanctions for all users, both
external users and agency employees, who violate requirements to maintain the

confidentiality of data.
RECOMMENDATIONS223
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHAPTER 6
Recommendation 6.1 The Office of Management and Budget's Statistical
Policy Office should continue to coordinate research work on statistical

disclosure analysis and should disseminate the results of this work broadly among

statistical agencies. Major statistical agencies should actively encourage and

participate in scholarly statistical research in this area. Other agencies should

keep abreast of current developments in the application of statistical disclosure

limitation techniques.Recommendation 6.2 Statistical agencies should determine the impact on
statistical analyses of the techniques they use to mask data. They should be sure

that the masked data can be accurately analyzed by a range of typical researchers.

If the data cannot be accurately analyzed using standard statistical software, the

agency should make appropriate consulting and software available.
Recommendation 6.3 Each statistical agency should actively involve data
users from outside the agency as statistical disclosure limitation techniques are

developed and applied to data.
Recommendation 6.4 Statistical agencies should continue widespread
release, with minimal restrictions on use, of microdata sets with no less detail

than currently provided.
Recommendation 6.5 Federal statistical agencies should strive for a greater
return on public investment in statistical programs through carefully controlled

increases in interagency data sharing for statistical purposes and expanded

availability of federal data sets to external users.
Recommendation 6.6 Statistical agencies, in their efforts to expand access
for external data users, should follow a policy of responsible innovation.

Whenever feasible, they should experiment with some of the newer restricted

access techniques, with appropriate confidentiality safeguards and periodic

reviews of the costs and benefits of each procedure.
RECOMMENDATIONS224
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendation 6.7 In those instances in which controlled access at
agency sites remains the only feasible alternative, statistical agencies should do

all they can to make access conditions more affordable and acceptable to users,

for example, by providing access at dispersed agency locations and providing

adequate user support and access to computing facilities at reasonable cost.
Recommendation 6.8 Significant statistical data files, in their unrestricted
form, should be deposited at the National Archives and eventually made available

for historical research uses.
CHAPTER 7
Recommendation 7.1 The principle of functional separation, which the
panel endorsed in Recommendation 5.1 (a), should apply equally to data for

persons and data for organizations.
Recommendation 7.2 Legislation that authorizes and requires protection of
the confidentiality of data for persons and organizations should be sought for all

federal statistical agencies that do not now have it and for any new federal

statistical agencies that may be created (see also Recommendation 5.1).
Recommendation 7.3 Data providers, whether persons or organizations,
should have ready access to as much information as they want about the uses of

the information they are requested or required to provide to federal statistical

agencies. They should be told who will have access to their data in individually

identifiable form. Statements of the collecting agency's intentions should be

clearly distinguished from statements describing what is authorized and required

by statute.Recommendation 7.4 There should be increased sharing of business lists
for statistical purposes by federal and state agencies.
RECOMMENDATIONS225
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendation 7.5 New legislation on sharing of business lists for
statistical purposes should provide that government agencies that are now unable

to guarantee protection against nonstatistical uses can have access to business

lists if they acquire statutory authority for such protection in the future.
Recommendation 7.6 The Office of Management and Budget's Statistical
Policy Office should develop uniform guidelines for federal statistical agencies

covering the purposes for which waivers of confidentiality protections by

organizations are considered acceptable and the methods of obtaining waivers

from respondents. Efforts should be made to amend the confidentiality statutes of

federal statistical agencies that would otherwise be prevented from using waivers

for generally accepted statistical purposes.
Recommendation 7.7 Federal statistical agencies that collect data on
organizations should make a special effort to improve access for statistical

research and analysis by external users and, if necessary, should seek legislation

that will permit them to develop licensing arrangements that allow such users to

have access at their work sites, subject to penalties for violating the conditions

under which they are allowed access to the data.
CHAPTER 8
Recommendation 8.1 Each federal statistical agency should review its
staffing and management of confidentiality and data access functions, with

particular attention to the assignment within the agency of responsibilities for

these functions and the background and experience needed for persons who

exercise these responsibilities.Recommendation 8.2 Statistical agencies should take steps to provide staff
training in fair information practices, informed consent procedures,
confidentiality laws and policies, statistical disclosure limitation procedures, and

related topics.RECOMMENDATIONS226
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Recommendation 8.3 Statistical agencies should establish mechanisms for
allowing and encouraging greater external inputs into their decisions on

confidentiality protection and data access.
Recommendation 8.4 The Statistical Policy Office should give high priority
to proceeding with the development and issuance of the OMB 
Guidelines forStatistical Activities
, with the full participation of the federal statistical agencies
and the public.Recommendation 8.5 The panel supports the general concept of an
independent federal advisory body charged with fostering a climate of enhanced

protection for all federal data about persons 
and responsible data dissemination
for research and statistical purposes. Any such advisory body should promote the

principle of functional separation and have professional staff with expertise in

privacy protection, computer data bases, official statistics, and research uses of

federal data.
RECOMMENDATIONS227
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONS228
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ReferencesAdam, N.R., and J.C. Wortman 1989 Security control methods for statistical databases: A
comparative study. ACM Computing Surveys
 21:515Œ556 .Allison, J., and W.W. Cooper 1991 Data Disclosure and Data Sharing in Scientific Research. Paper
presented at a Conference on Research Policies and Quality Assurance, Rome, Italy.
American Statistical Association 1977 Report of Ad Hoc Committee on Privacy and Confidentiality.
The  American Statistician
 31(2):59Œ78 .
1980 Business directories: Findings and recommendations of the ASA Committee on Privacy and
Confidentiality. The American Statistician 34(1):8Œ10 .
1983 Ethical guidelines for statistical practice: Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on Professional
Ethics (with comments). 
The American  Statistician 37(1):5Œ20 .1989 Ethical guidelines for statistical practice. 
AMSTAT News 1989(154):24
Œ25 .1991 Surveys and Privacy . Committee on Privacy and Confidentiality. Washington, D.C.: American
Statistical Association.
Andrussier, S.E. 1991 The Freedom of Information Act in 1990: More freedom for government; less
information for the public. 
1991 Duke Law Journal
 : 753
Œ801 .
Aziz, F., and W. Buckler 1992 The Status of Death Information in Social Security Administration
Files. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Statistical Association,

Boston.REFERENCES
229
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Babcock, L., and J. Engberg 1990 Are Local Labor Market Statistics Appropriate for Policy? Paper
presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association for Public Policy and Management, San

Francisco.Bachi, R., and R. Baron 1969 Confidentiality problems related to data banks. 
Bulletin of  theInternational Statistical Institute
 43:225Œ241 .Bailar, B.A. 1990 Contributions to statistical methodology from the U.S. federal government. 
SurveyMethodology 16(1):51Œ61 .
Barabba, V.P., and D.P. Kaplan 1975 U.S. Census Bureau Statistical Techniques to Prevent
DisclosureŠThe Right to Privacy vs. the Need to Know. Paper presented at the 40th Session
of the International Statistical Institute , Warsaw.
Beauchamp, T.L., R.R. Faden, R.J. Wallace, and L. Walters, eds. 1982 
Ethical Issues in Social
Science Research
 . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Bethlehem, J.G., W.J. Keller, and J. Pannekoek 1990 Disclosure control of microdata. 
Journal of the
American Statistical 
 Association 85:38Œ45 .Black, H.C., J.R. Nolan, and J.M. Nolan-Haley 1990 
Black's Law Dictionary . St. Paul, Minn.: West
Publishing.Boorstin, D.J. 1973 
The Americans: The Democratic Experience
 . New York: Random House.
Boruch, R.F., and J.S. Cecil 1979 
Assuring the Confidentiality of Social Research Data
 .Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Boruch, R.F., and W. Kehr 1983 On Use of the Doctorate Records File and the Survey of Doctorate
Recipients: Privacy and Research Utility. Report prepared for the National Science

Foundation. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Brackstone, G.B. 1990 Comment on "Contributions to Statistical Methodology from the U.S. Federal
Government." Survey Methodology 16(1):58Œ61 .
Bureau of the Budget 1961 Brief History of the Movement in the Federal Government for a Central
Directory and of Related Efforts Aimed at Improving Quality and Comparability of

Economic Statistics. Unpublished paper. Washington, D.C., Bureau of the Budget.
Bureau of the Census 1982 
Evaluating the Public Information Campaign for the 1980 Census: 
Results of the KAP Survey
 . Preliminary Evaluation Results Memorandum (PERM) No. 31.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce.
1985 How the Census Bureau Keeps Your Information Strictly Confidential
 . Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Commerce.
Bureau of Labor Statistics 1980 Responsibility for safeguarding sensitive information. 
BLSDirective  System . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor.
Burnham, D. 1983 
The Rise of the Computer State
 . New York: Random House.
REFERENCES
230
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Butz, W.P. 1985a Data confidentiality and public perceptions: The case of the European censuses.
American Statistical Association 1985 Proceedings 
 of the Section on Survey Research
Methods . Washington, D.C.: American Statistical Association.
1985b The future of administrative records in the Census Bureau's demographic activities. Comment
on Jabine and Scheuren, "Goals for Statistical Uses of Administrative Records: The Next 10

Years." Journal  of Business and Economic Statistics
 3(4):393Œ395 .Carroll, J.J. 1985 Uses of administrative records: A social security point of view. Comment on Jabine
and Scheuren, "Goals for Statistical Uses of Administrative Records: The Next 10 Years."

Journal of Business and Economic Statistics
 3(4):396Œ397 .Cassel, C.M. 1976 Probability based disclosures. In T. Dalenius and A. Klevmarken, eds., 
PersonalIntegrity and the Need for Data in the Social Sciences
 . Stockholm: Swedish Council for the
Social Sciences.
Cecil, J.S. 1989 Regulation of Federal Research Records: Fifteen Years Since the Privacy Act and the
Freedom of Information Act. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American

Statistical Association, Washington, D.C.
1993 Confidentiality legislation and the United States federal statistical system. 
Journal of Official
Statistics 9(2):519Œ535 .Cigrang, M., and L. Rainwater 1990 Balancing Data Access and Data Protection: The Luxembourg
Income Study Experience. Paper presented at the Joint Statistical Meetings of the American

Statistical Association, Anaheim, Calif.
Coles, T.R. 1991 Does the Privacy Act of 1974 protect your right to privacy? An examination of the
routine-use exemption. American University 
 Law Review
 40:957Œ1001 .
Collins, M. 1992 The case for samples of anonymized records from the 1991 census. Letter to the
Editor. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
 155(1):165
Œ166 .Commission on Federal Paperwork 1977a 
Confidentiality and Privacy
 . 052
Œ003Œ00458
Œ5.Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
1977b 
Statistics . 052
Œ003
Œ00454
Œ2. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Committee on National Statistics and Social Science Research Council 1989 Collaborative Research:
A Proposal for a Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access. Committee on National

Statistics and Social Science Research Council, Washington, D.C.
Conference of European Statisticians 1991 Resolution on the fundamental principles of official
statistics in the region of the Economic Commission for Europe. 
International 
 StatisticalInformation Newsletter 15(2):8 .Council of Economic Advisers (Executive Office of the President) 1991 FY 1992 Economics
Statistics Initiative: Improving the Quality of Economics
REFERENCES
231
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Statistics. Press Release. Executive Office of the President, Washington, D.C.
1992 Economic Report of the President
 . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Courtland, S. 1985 Census confidentiality: Then and now. 
Government Information 
 Quarterly 2(4):407Œ418 :
Cox, L.H. 1980 Suppression methodology and statistical disclosure control. 
Journal of the American
Statistical Association
 75:337Œ385 .1986 Confidentiality issues at the United States Bureau of the Census. 
Journal of Official Statistics
 2(2):135Œ160 .
1987 A constructive procedure for unbiased controlled rounding. 
Journal 
 of the American Statistical
Association 82(398):520
Œ524 .
1991 Comment on Duncan and Pearson. 
Social Sciences
 6(3):232Œ234 .Cox, L.H., B. Johnson, S. McDonald, D. Nelson, and V. Vazquez 1985 Confidentiality issues at the
Census Bureau. 
Proceedings of  the First Annual Research Conference
 . Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Department of Commerce.
Dahl, R.A. 1982 Dilemmas of Pluralist Democracy: Autonomy vs. Control
 . New Haven: Yale
University Press.Dalenius, T. 1977 Towards a methodology for statistical disclosure control. 
Statistisk 
 Tidskrift5:429Œ444 .1979 Data protection legislation in Sweden: A statistician's perspective (with comments). 
Journal ofthe Royal Statistical Society
 142(3):285
Œ298 .
1988 Controlling Invasion of Privacy in Surveys
 . Stockholm: Statistics Sweden.
David, M.H. 1980 Access to data: The frustration and utopia of the researcher. 
Review of Public Data
Use 8(4):327Œ337 .1991 The science of data sharing: Documentation. In J.E. Sieber, ed., 
Sharing Social Science Data:
Advantages and Challenges . Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage.
David, M.H., and A. Robbin 1981 The great rift: Gaps between administrative records and knowledge
created through secondary analysis. 
Review of Public Data Use
 9:153Œ166 .Denning, D.E. 1980 Secure statistical databases with random sample queries. 
ACM 
 Transactions onDatabase Systems
 5:291Œ315 .Denning, D.E., and T.F. Lunt 1988 A multilevel relational data model. 
Proceedings of the 1988 
 IEEESymposium on Research Security and Privacy
 . Los Alamitos, Calif.: IEEE Computer
Society.Desky, J. 1991 Government information and privacy: Who controls the data? 
PA 
 Times 14(12):1,12 .
Duncan, G.T., and D. Lambert 1986 Disclosure-limited data dissemination. 
Journal of the American 
Statistical Association
 81(393):10Œ28 .REFERENCES
232
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1989 The risk of disclosure for microdata. 
Journal of Business and 
 Economic Statistics
 7(2):207Œ217 .
Duncan, G.T., and S. Mukherjee 1991 Microdata disclosure limitation in statistical databases: Query
size and random sample query control. 
Proceedings of the 1991 IEEE 
 Symposium on
Research in Security and Privacy
 . Los Alamitos, Calif.: IEEE Compute Society.
1992 Confidentiality Protection in Statistical Databases: A Disclosure Limitation Approach. Paper
presented at the International Seminar on Statistical Confidentiality, Dublin.
Duncan, G.T., and R.W. Pearson 1991 Enhancing access to microdata while protecting
confidentiality: Prospects for the future. 
Statistical Science
 6(3):219Œ239 .Duncan, J.S., and W.C. Shelton 1978 
Revolution in United States Government Statistics 1926
Œ1976 .003
Œ005
Œ00181
Œ6. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce.
1992 U.S. Government contributions to probability sampling and statistical analysis. 
StatisticalScience 7(3):320Œ338 .Durbin, J. 1979 Statistics and the report of the Data Protection Committee (with comments). 
Journalof the Royal Statistical Society
 142(3):299
Œ306 .Economic Policy Council 1987 
Report of the Working Group on the Quality of Economic Statistics
 .Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy Council.
Ellenberg, J.H. 1983 Ethical guidelines for statistical practice: A historical perspective. 
The AmericanStatistician 37(1):1Œ5 .Equifax Inc. 1990 The Equifax Report on Consumers in the Information Age
 . A national opinion
survey conducted for Equifax Inc. by Louis Harris and Associates and Alan F. Westin.

Atlanta, Ga.: Equifax Inc.
Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology 1978 
Report on Statistical Disclosure and
Disclosure-Avoidance Techniques .  Statistical Policy Working Paper 2. Subcommittee on
Disclosure-Avoidance Techniques. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce.
1980 Report on Exact and Statistical Matching Techniques
 . Statistical Policy Working Paper 5.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce.
1993 Untitled draft statistical policy working paper dated July 1993. Subcommittee on Disclosure
Limitation Methodology. Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the

President, Washington, D.C.
Fellegi, I.P. 1972 On the question of statistical confidentiality. 
Journal of the 
 American StatisticalAssociation 67:7Œ18 .
Fienberg, S., and J.M. Tanur 1989 Combining cognitive and statistical approaches to survey design.
Science 243:1017
Œ1022 .
Flaherty, D.H. 1978 Final report of the Bellagio Conference on Privacy, Confidentiality, and the Use
of Government Microdata for Research and Statistical Purposes. 
Statistical Reporter
 78(8):274Œ279 .
REFERENCES
233
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1979 Privacy and Government Data Banks: An International Perspective
 . London: Mansell
Publishing.1989 Protecting Privacy in Surveillance Societies: The Federal Republic 
 of Germany, Sweden,
France, Canada, and the United States
 . Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina
Press.Frank, O. 1976 Individual disclosures from frequency tables. In T. Dalenius and A. Klevmarken,
eds., Personal Integrity and the Need for Data 
 in the Social Sciences
 . Stockholm: Swedish
Council for the Social Sciences.
1979 Inferring individual information from released statistics. 
Bulletin  of the International Statistical
Institute: Proceedings of the 42nd 
 Session (Book 3). NEDA-APO Production Unit.
Philippines: Philippine Organizing Committee.
Frankfurter, F. 1930 The Public and Its Government
 . New Haven: Yale University Press.
Fuller, W.A. 1993 Masking procedures for microdata disclosure limitation. 
Journal  of OfficialStatistics 9(2):383Œ406 .Gates, G.W. 1988 Census Bureau microdata: Providing useful research data while protecting the
anonymity of respondents. 
American Statistical Association 
 1988 Proceedings of the Social
Statistics Section
 . Alexandria, Va.: American Statistical Association.
General Accounting Office 1993 Energy Security and Policy: Analysis of the Pricing of Crude Oil
and Petroleum Products. Report to Congressional Requesters, GAO/RCED-93-17.

Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Govoni, J.P., and P.J. Waite 1985 Development of a public-use file for manufacturing. 
American Statistical Association 1985 Proceedings of the Business and Economic 
 Statistics Section
 .Washington, D.C.: American Statistical Association.
Grace, J.W. 1988 
Annual Report, Privacy Commissioner, 1987
Œ88 . Ottawa: Minister of Supply and
Services Canada.1989 The Use of Administrative Records for Social Research. Notes for an address to the Statistics
Canada Workshop, Ottawa.Greenberg, B. 1990 Disclosure-avoidance research at the Census Bureau. 
Proceedings,  1990 AnnualResearch Conference . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce.
1991 Disclosure-Avoidance Practices at the Census Bureau. Statistical Policy Working Paper 20.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce.
Greenberg, B., and L. Voshell 1990a 
The Geographic Component of Disclosure Risk for Microdata
 .Census/SRD/RR-90-13. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce.
1990b Relating risk of disclosure for microdata and geographic area size. 
American StatisticalAssociation 1990 Proceedings of the Section 
 on Survey Research Methods
 . Alexandria,
Va.: American Statistical Association.
Greenberg, B., and L.V. Zayatz 1992 Strategies for measuring risk in public-use microdata files.
Statistica Neerlandica 46(1):33Œ48 .
REFERENCES
234
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Hauser, R.M. 1991 What happens to youth after high school? 
Focus 13(3):1Œ13 .
Heitjan, D.F., and Rubin, D.B. 1991 Ignorability and coarse data. 
Annals of Statistics
 19(4):2244Œ2253 .Hwang, J.T. 1986 Multiplicative errors-in-variables models with applications to recent data released
by the U.S. Department of Energy. 
Journal  of the American Statistical Association
81:680Œ688 .Internal Revenue Service 1984 
Taxpayer Attitudes Study Final Report
 . Prepared for the Statistics of
Income Division, by Yankelovich, Skelly and White, Inc. Washington, D.C.: U.S.

Department of Treasury.
1987 1987 Taxpayer Opinion Survey
 . Document 7292(1
Œ88). Conducted for the Internal Revenue
Service by Louis Harris and Associates, Inc. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the

Treasury.International Statistical Institute 1986 Declaration on Professional Ethics. 
International Statistical 
Review 54(2):227Œ242 .Jabine, T.B. 1986 Selected guidelines for notification to survey participants. 
American StatisticalAssociation 1986 Proceedings of the Section 
 on Survey Research Methods
 . Washington,
D.C.: American Statistical Association.
1993a Procedures for restricted data access. 
Journal of Official 
 Statistics 9(2):537Œ589 .
1993b Statistical disclosure limitation practices of United States statistical agencies . 
Journal ofOfficial Statistics
 9(2):427Œ454 .Jabine, T.B., J.A. Michael, and R.H. Mugge 1977 Federal agency practices for avoiding statistical
disclosure: Findings and Recommendations. 
American Statistical Association 1977 
Proceedings of the Social Sciences Section
 . Washington, D.C.: American Statistical
Association.Juster, F.T. 1991 Discussion. 
American Statistical Association 1991 Proceedings 
 of the Social
Statistics Section
 . Alexandria, Va.: American Statistical Association.
Kamlet, M.S., and S. Klepper 1985 Mixing Individual and Group-Level Data. Working Paper.
Department of Social Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh.
Kamlet, M.S., S. Klepper, and R.G. Frank 1985 Mixing micro and macro data: Statistical issues and
implication for data collection and reporting. In 
Proceedings of the 1983 Public 
 HealthConference on Records and Statistics
 . Hyattsville, Md.: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.Keller-McNulty, S., and E.A. Unger 1993 Database systems: Inferential security. 
Journal of Official 
Statistics 9(2):475Œ499 .Kilss, B. and F. Scheuren (with F. Aziz and L. DelBene) 1978 1973 CPS-IRS-SSA Exact Match
Study: Past, present, and future. In Social Security Administration, Office of Policy, 
PolicyAnalysis  with Social Security Research Files: Proceedings of a Workshop Held 
 March1978 at Williamsburg, Virginia
. Research Report No. 52, Office of Research
REFERENCES
235
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and Statistics. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare.
1984 The 1973 CPS-IRS-SSA Exact Match Study. In 
Statistical Uses 
 of Administrative Records:
Recent Research and Present Prospects
 . Vol. 1 . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Treasury.Kim, J. 1990 Masking Microdata for National Opinion Research Center. Final Project Report. Bureau
of the Census, Washington, D.C.
Lambert, D. 1993 Measures of disclosure risk and harm. 
Journal of Official Statistics
 9(2):313Œ331 .Lave, L.B. 1990 Does the surgeon-general need a statistics advisor? 
Chance: 
 New Directions for
Statistics and Computing
 3(4):33Œ40 .Lewis, P.H. 1991 Why the privacy issue will never go away. 
The New York Times
 , April 7:F4 .
Little, R.J.A. 1993 Statistical analysis of masked data. 
Journal of Official Statistics
 9(2):407Œ426 .Little, R.J.A., and D.B. Rubin 1987 
Statistical Analysis with Missing Data
 . New York: John Wiley &
Sons.Locke, J. 1690/1988 
Two Treatises of Government . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lodge, F.Z. 1984 Damages under the Privacy Act of 1974: Compensation and deterrence. 
FordhamLaw Review 52(4):611Œ636 .Louis Harris and Associates 1981 
The Dimensions of Privacy
 . A survey conducted for the Sentry
Insurance Company. New York: Garland Publications.
1983 The Road After 1984: The Impact of Technology on Society
 . A survey conducted for Southern
New England Telephone. New Haven, Ct.: Southern New England Telephone.
MacRae, J.B. 1990 Provision of Standard Industrial Classification Information to the Census Bureau.
Memorandum to the Director of the Bureau of the Census and the Commissioner of Labor

Statistics. December 20. Office of Management and Budget, Washington, D.C.
Marsh, C., A. Dale, and C. Skinner 1991b Safe data versus safe settings: Access to customized results
from the British census. 
Proceedings of the 48th International Statistical 
 Institute .Voorburg, Netherlands: International Statistical Institute.
Marsh, C., C. Skinner, S. Arber, B. Penhale, S. Openshaw, J. Hobcraft, D. Lievesley, and N. Walford
1991a The case for a sample of anonymized records from the 1991 census: A request from

the Economic and Social Research Council Working Party on the 1991 census. 
Journal ofthe Royal Statistical Society
 154(2):305
Œ341 .
1992 Authors reply to letter to the editor by Martin Collins. 
Journal  of the Royal Statistical Society
155(1):166
Œ167 .
REFERENCES
236
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Martin, M.E. 1974 Statistical legislation and confidentiality issues. 
International 
 Statistical Review
42(3):265Œ281 .Marx, G.T. 1988 Undercover: Police Surveillance in America
 . Berkeley, Calif.: University of
California Press.1990 Technology and privacy. 
The World and I
. September:523
Œ541 .
Matloff, N.S. 1986 Another look at noise addition for database security. 
Proceedings  of the IEEE
Computer Society Symposium on Research in Security and 
 Privacy . Los Alamitos, Calif.:
IEEE Computer Society.
McGuckin, R.H. 1992 Analytic Use of Economic Microdata: A Model for Researcher Access with
Confidentiality Protection. Discussion paper for the Center of Economic Studies, U.S.

Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C.
McGuckin, R.H., and S.V. Nguyen 1990 Public-use microdata: Disclosure and usefulness. 
Journalof  Economic and Social Measurement
 16:19Œ39 .McGuckin, R.H., and G.A. Pascoe, Jr. 1988 The Longitudinal Research Database: Status and research
possibilities. Survey of Current Business July .
Mugge, R.H. 1984 Issues in protecting confidentiality in national health statistics. 
Review of Public
Data Use 12:289Œ294 .
1993 Informed consent in U.S. government surveys. 
Journal of Official 
 Statistics 9(2):345Œ360 .National Academy of Public Administration 1991 
The Archives of the Future: Archival Strategies for
the Treatment 
 of Electronic Database
 . A Report for the National Archives and Records
Administration. Washington, D.C.
National Agricultural Statistics Service 1989 Policy and Standards Memorandum Number 12
Œ89.U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
National Center for Education Statistics 1989 Policies and Procedures for Public Release of Data.
Draft. U.S. Department of Education, Washington, D.C.
1992 NCES Statistical Standards
 . NCES 92
Œ021. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.
National Center for Health Statistics 1978 
Policy Statement on Release of Data for Individual
Elementary  Units and Special Tabulations
 . DHEW No. (PHS)78
Œ1212. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare.
1984 NCHS Staff Manual on Confidentiality
 . DHHS No. (PHS) 84
Œ1244. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
1992a Catalog of Electronic Data Products from the National Center 
 for Health Statistics . DHHS
Pub. No. (PHS)92
Œ1213. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services.1992a New Public-Use Data Tape Distribution Policy in NCHS' Division 
 of Vital Statistics
 .Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
REFERENCES
237
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.National Research Council 1979 
Privacy and Confidentiality as Factors in Survey Response
 . Panel
on Privacy and Confidentiality as Factors in Survey Response, Committee on National

Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington,

D.C.: National Academy Press.
1985 Sharing Research Data ,  S.E. Fienberg, M.E. Martin, and M.L. Straf, eds. Committee on
National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education.

Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1991 Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age
 . System Security Study Committee,
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, Commission on Physical Sciences,

Mathematics, and Applications. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
1992a Center for Survey Methods: Summary of a Workshop
 . F.E. Wolf, ed. Committee on National
Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington,

D.C.: National Academy Press.
1992b 
Principles and Practices for a Federal Statistical Agency
 ,  M.E. Martin and M.L. Straf, eds.
Committee on National Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and

Education. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Newton, K.B., and D.C. Pullin 1990 Reconciling a Policy Favoring Dissemination of Information
with the Privacy Rights of Individuals and Institutions. Paper commissioned by the National

Center for Education Statistics, U.S. Department of Education, Washington, D.C.
1991 The Impact of Section 252 of the Excellence in Mathematics, Science and Engineering Act of
1990 on the Policies and Practices of the National Center for Education Statistics. Paper

commissioned by the Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access, Committee on National

Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, National Research

Council, Washington, D.C.
Norwood, J.L. 1990 Statistics and public policy: Reflections of a changing world. Presidential
Address. Journal of the American Statistical Association
 85(409):1Œ5 .Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards 1978 
A Framework for Planning U.S. Federal
Statistics for the 1980's
 1980's. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce.
Office of Technology Assessment (U.S. Congress) 1989 
Statistical Needs for a Changing U.S.
Economy . Background Paper. OTA-BP-E-58. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office.O'Neill, H.V., and J.P. Fanning 1976 The challenge of implementing and operating under the Privacy
Act in the largest public sector conglomerate
ŠHEW. 
Bureaucrat 5:171Œ188 .President's Commission on Federal Statistics 1971 
Federal Statistics: Report of the President's
Commission on 
 Federal Statistics . Vol. 1 . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office.President's Reorganization Project for the Federal Statistical System 1981 Improving the federal
statistical system: Issues and options. 
Statistical Reporter
 81Œ5:133
Œ221 .
Prewitt, K. 1985 Public statistics and democratic politics. In J.J. Smelser and D.R. Gerstein,

REFERENCES
238
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.eds., Behavioral and Social Science: Fifty Years of Discovery
 . Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.Privacy Protection Study Commission 1977a 
Personal Privacy in an Information Society
 . 052
Œ003Œ00395Œ3. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office
1977b 
The Privacy Act of 1974: An Assessment
 . 052
Œ003Œ00424
Œ1. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office1977c Technology and Privacy
 . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Rainwater, L., and T.M. Smeeding 1988 The Luxembourg Income Study: The use of international
telecommunications in comparative social research. 
The Annals of the American Academy 
of Political and Social Science
 495:95Œ105 .Reynolds, P.D. 1993 Privacy and advances in social and policy science: Balancing present costs and
future gains. Journal of Official Statistics
 9(2):275Œ312 .
The Roper Organization, Inc. 1980 
Roper Reports Research Service
 . Issue 80
Œ5, April 26-May 3 .
Rotenberg, M. 1991 In support of a data protection board in the United States. 
GovernmentInformation Quarterly 8(1):79Œ93 .Rubin, D.B. 1976 Inference and missing data. 
Biometrika 63:581Œ592 .
1987 Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys
 . New York: John Wiley & Sons.
1993 Comments on confidentiality: A proposal for satisfying all confidentiality constraints through
the use of multiple-imputed synthetic microdata. 
Journal of Official Statistics
 , forthcoming.
Rubin, P. 1990 Applying the Freedom of Information Act's privacy exemption to requests for lists of
names and addresses. Fordham Law Review
 58:1033
Œ1051 .
Sagarin, E. 1973 The research setting and the right not to be researched. 
Social 
 Problems 21:52Œ64 .Sande, G. 1983 Automated cell suppression to preserve confidentiality of business statistics.
Statistical Journal of the United Nations
 2:33Œ41 .
Sartori, G. 1962/1972 
Democratic Theory
 . Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.
Scheuren, F. 1989 Statistical research problems in government. In B. Kilss and B. Jamerson, eds.,
Statistics of Income and Related Administrative 
 Record Research: 1988
Œ1989 .Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Treasury.
Singer, E. 1978 Informed consent: Consequences for response rate and response quality in social
surveys. American Sociological Review 43:144Œ162 .
1979 Informed consent procedures in surveys: Some reasons for minimal effects on response. In
M.L. Wax and J. Cassel, eds., 
Federal Regulations: 
 Ethical Issues and Social Research
 .Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
REFERENCES
239
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1993 Informed consent and survey response: A summary of the empirical literature. 
Journal ofOfficial Statistics
 9(2):361Œ375 .Singer, E., H. Hippler, and N. Schwarz 1990 The Effect of Confidentiality Assurances on Survey
Responses. Paper presented at the International Conference on Measurement Errors in

Surveys, Tucson, Ariz.Smith, C.M. 1989 The Social Security Administration's Continuous Work History Sample. 
SocialSecurity Bulletin 52(10):20Œ28 .Smith, J.P. 1991 Data confidentiality: A researcher's perspective. 
American Statistical 
 Association1991 Proceedings of the Social Statistics Section
 . Alexandria, Va.: American Statistical
Association.Social Security Administration 1978 
Policy Analysis with Social Security Research Files:
Proceedings  of a Workshop Held March 1978 at Williamsburg, Virginia
 . Research Report
No. 52, Office of Research and Statistics. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health,

Education and Welfare.Spruill, N. 1983 The confidentiality and analytic usefulness of masked business microdata. 
AmericanStatistical Association 1983 Proceedings of the 
 Section on Survey Research Methods
 .Washington, D.C.: American Statistical Association.
Statistics Canada 1986 Policy on record linkage. 
Policy Manual
 . Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
Steinberg, J., and L. Pritzker 1967 Some experiences with and reflections on data linkage in the
United States. Bulletin of the International Statistical Institute
 42:786Œ808 .
Sullivan, G., and W.A. Fuller 1989 The use of measurement error to avoid disclosure. 
AmericanStatistical 
 Association 1989 Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods
 .Alexandria, Va.: American Statistical Association.
Tanur, J.M., ed. 1992 
Questions About Questions: Inquiries into the Cognitive Bases 
 of Surveys . New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Tendick, P. 1991 Optimal noise addition for the preservation of confidentiality in multivariate data.
Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference
 27:342Œ353 .
Turn, R. 1990 Information privacy issues for the 1990's. 
Proceedings of the 
 IEEE Symposium on
Research in Security and Privacy
 . Los Alamitos, Calif.: IEEE Computer Society.
U.S. Bureau of Labor 1889 
Fourth Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor, 1888: Working 
Women in Large Cities
 . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Code Congressional and Administrative News 1976 
Legislative History
 , P.L. 94
Œ455. 4:2897
Œ4284 . St. Paul, Minn.: West Publishing Co.
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare 1973 
Records, Computers, and the Rights of
Citizens . Report of the Secretary's Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data
Systems. DHEW No.
REFERENCES
240
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(OS)73Œ94. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare.
U.S. Department of Labor 1972 
Control of Data and Information Collected by the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics . Secretary's Order 39
Œ72. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor.
U.S. Department of Transportation 1992 Card establishes statistics bureau: Knisely will be deputy
director. U.S. Department of Transportation News
 . Press Release, October 20 .
University of Maryland, University of Michigan, and Westat, Inc. 1993 
The Joint University of
Maryland-University of Michigan Program 
 in Survey Methodology
 . College Park:
University of Maryland.
van Melis-Wright, M., D. Stone, and D. Herrmann 1992 
The Semantic Basis of Confidentiality
 .Bureau of Labor Statistics, Statistical Note Series: Statistical Note 34. Washington, D.C.:

Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Wallman, K.K. 1988 
Losing Count: The Federal Statistical System
 . Washington, D.C.: Population
Reference Bureau.Wilson, O.H., and W.J. Smith, Jr. 1983 Access to tax records for statistical purposes. 
AmericanStatistical 
 Association 1983 Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods
 . Washington, D.C.: American Statistical Association.
Wolf, M.K. 1988 Microaggregation and disclosure-avoidance for economic establishment data.
American Statistical Association 1988 Proceedings of the Business 
 and Economic Statistics
Section . Alexandria, Va.: American Statistical Association.
Wright, D., and S. Ahmed 1990 Implementing NCES' new confidentiality protections. 
American Statistical Association 1990 Proceedings of the Section on Survey 
 Research Methods .Alexandria, Va.: American Statistical Association.
REFERENCES
241
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES
242
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
Study ProceduresThis appendix describes the organization of the panel study and the
procedures used by the panel to gather relevant background information, explore

the issues, and develop its recommendations. This description covers two case

study workshops that were held prior to the formal convening of the panel, but

made important contributions to the panel's work.
PANEL ORGANIZATION AND ACTIVITIES
The panel was jointly convened in 1989 by the Committee on National
Statistics (CNSTAT) of the National Academy of Sciences-National Research

Council and the Social Science Research Council (SSRC). Its goal was to provide

recommendations to federal agencies to aid them in their stewardship of data for

public policy decisions and research. The panel was comprised of experts in the

fields of ethics, privacy, respondent issues, public policy, legislation, the history

of the federal statistical system, and statistics. Supporting the panel's work was a

staff consisting of a study director, two consultants, a senior project assistant, and a

staff liaison from the Social Science Research Council. (See 
Appendix B forbiographical sketches of panel members and staff.)
Funding for the study was provided by the National Science Foundation, the
Bureau of the Census of the U.S. Department of
APPENDIX A
243Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Commerce, the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the U.S. Department of Labor, the

Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income Division of the U.S. Department of

Treasury, the National Institute on Aging of the U.S. Department of Health and

Human Services, the National Center for Education Statistics of the U.S.

Department of Education, and, through their general contributions to the work of

the Committee on National Statistics, several other federal agencies.
The panel accomplished its work in several different ways. Prior to the first
meeting of the panel, and as a foundation for the panel's work, the Committee on

National Statistics and the Social Science Research Council sponsored two

workshops: the Longitudinal Retirement History Workshop, held in September

1987, and the Workshop on Confidentiality of and Access to Doctorate Records,

held in November 1988. In January 1991 the panel sponsored a workshop on

confidentiality of and access to National Center for Education Statistics data. A

conference on disclosure limitation approaches and data access was held in March

1991. The panel held nine deliberative meetings from November 1989 through

January 1992. The panel also met with representatives from the federal statistical

community, privacy advocates, and other concerned individuals and

organizations. Finally, the panel commissioned papers to inform its deliberations,

including several papers that served as background for the Workshop on

Confidentiality of and Access to National Center for Education Statistics Data

and the Conference on Disclosure Limitation Approaches and Data Access (see

below).The panel held nine meetings in Washington, D.C., between November 1989
and January 1992. Through presentations by agency representatives at these

meetings, the panel was informed about the complexities and realities of the

missions of the agencies and the role that those missions and environment play in

agencies' efforts to protect confidentiality while permitting access to data for

research. Agency representatives identified important aspects of confidentiality

and data access and provided information on the subtleties of some of the

problems they face in dealing with these issues. In addition, the panel held

lengthy discussions with researchers, privacy advocates, and others about data

sharing and record linkage, statistical disclosure limitation, administrative

policies of the agencies, legislative problems and solutions, the needs of

researchers, and the needs of the federal statistical agencies. The length, duration,

and number of meetings was intended to encourage debate and ultimately develop

consensus on the issues. Throughout
APPENDIX A
244Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.these meetings, the panel was mindful of its goal to provide helpful

recommendations to the federal statistical agencies.
At a June 1991 meeting, several privacy advocates were invited. The
meeting focused on the public's interest, ethical issues, and cognitive research on

informed consent and notification in relation to confidentiality and data access

concerns.CASE STUDIESLONGITUDINAL RETIREMENT HISTORY WORKSHOP
The Longitudinal Retirement History Workshop, chaired by Jerry A.
Hausman and held on September 18
Œ19, 1987, was conducted at the request of
the National Institute on Aging (NIA) and the Census Bureau. The National

Center for Health Statistics provided additional support for the workshop.
The National Institute on Aging requested the workshop to help answer a
question of whether its proposed reinterview of surviving panel members and

spouses of decedents from the Longitudinal Retirement History Survey was

feasible. Additional goals of the workshop were to learn some of the problems

and issues in protecting confidential data, discuss the disclosure limitation

practices of the Census Bureau, develop suggestions for methods to access

confidential data for research, and provide information to NIA on how to achieve

its goals while maintaining adequate protection of the data. Workshop

participants were particularly interested in the legal, ethical, and policy questions

surrounding the issues of recontacting the panel members, linking the data from

the reinterview with the old data, and making the linked data files available to

researchers for analysis.
After considering the questions above, the workshop participants outlined
three possible courses of action. Two were deemed useful in a broad context:

allowing access of researchers to microdata through their appointments as special

sworn employees of the Census Bureau and the establishment of data resource

centers where Census Bureau employees could process researcher requests. A

third proposed course of action, one that was thought to be the most feasible for

the follow-up of the Longitudinal Retirement History Survey, involved obtaining

consent from the survey respondents to transfer data in existing files to another

agency whose data are not subject to the conditions of Title 13 (see 
Chapter 5).The workshop participants also developed some ideas to help guide
APPENDIX A
245Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access, which at the time had not yet been

convened.WORKSHOP ON CONFIDENTIALITY OF AND ACCESS
TO DOCTORATE RECORDS
The Workshop on Confidentiality of and Access to Doctorate Records,
chaired by George T. Duncan and held November 4
Œ5, 1988, was convened by
CNSTAT and SSRC. The purposes of the workshop were to determine if and how

mechanisms for allowing greater researcher access to data from the Doctorate

Records File and the Survey of Doctorate Records could be developed without

compromising the confidentiality of the data and to identify issues that would be

important for the proposed Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access to address.
Workshop participants discussed various approaches for providing increased
access to the Doctorate Records File and the Survey of Doctorate Records.

Topics discussed included the creation of public-use data files with all

information that would allow identification of the respondent removed;

modification of statements of use; providing respondents an opportunity to

approve or disapprove of the proposed uses of the data; development of signed

agreements that clearly define users responsibilities in maintaining the

confidentiality of the data; and providing remote access to the data through a

''gatekeeper," who would monitor access requests and ensure adherence to any

confidentiality provisions associated with the remote access. The general

conclusion of participants was that the tension between confidentiality and data

access could not be resolved by any one action.
WORKSHOP ON CONFIDENTIALITY OF AND ACCESS
TO NATIONAL CENTER FOR EDUCATION STATISTICS
DATAThe panel's Workshop on Confidentiality of and Access to National Center
for Education Statistics Data, chaired by William M. Mason, was held in January

1991. The purposes of the workshop were to investigate confidentiality and

access issues as they apply to the National Center for Education Statistics

(NCES) and to obtain information for the panel's deliberations. Participants from

the educational research community, federal government, education associations,

and state departments of education were invited to attend the workshop. Panel

members also attended the meeting.
APPENDIX A
246Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.During the workshop, participants discussed the evolution of confidentiality
legislation covering the NCES particularly Section 3001(m) of the Augustus F.

Hawkins-Robert T. Stafford Elementary and Secondary School Improvement

Amendments of 1988 (the Hawkins-Stafford Act, P.L. 100
Œ297) and Section 252
of the Excellence in Mathematics, Science and Engineering Act of 1990 (P.L.

101Œ589), which amended the confidentiality provisions of the General Education
Provisions Act (P.L. 90
Œ247). In a paper commissioned by the panel, Diana C.
Pullin and Kenneth B. Newton discussed the impact of Section 252 on the

policies and practices of NCES in permitting access to their data while respecting

the confidentiality of respondents' identities. Discussion focused on the various

data systems maintained by NCES, including the sources of the data and the type

of data items in the data sets; NCES's confidentiality provisions; users'

experiences before and after the Hawkins-Stafford Act; and NCES's statistical

and administrative procedures to prevent the disclosure of individually

identifiable information. Finally, participants assessed the issues and discussed

possible changes in procedures, legislation, regulations, and interpretations that

could increase access to data and protect the confidentiality of the data.
INFORMATION GATHERING
REQUEST FOR DOCUMENTATION
In fall 1990, the panel contacted approximately 40 federal agencies,
requesting documentation of their policies and practices for ensuring the

confidentiality of data that they collect and disseminate. The agencies were

selected based on the number of their statistical activities and budgets for

statistical programs. Information was requested on agencies' statutes, regulations,

and internal guidelines; Privacy Act notices describing the nature of systems of

records that it maintains (Title 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(e)(4)); informed consent and
notification procedures (for individuals and establishments); disclosure limitation

techniques; access to nonpublic-use data, including the type of arrangements

made for the access; instances of denied access; and other organizational

arrangements and guidelines used to establish policies for protecting the

confidentiality of data and reviewing requests for access to data. The panel also

asked the agencies to provide information on their experiences as users of

identifiable data.
The panel received extensive information on agencies' practices.
APPENDIX A
247Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The documentation was invaluable to its work in assessing the agencies'
confidentiality and access practices and their future needs. The panel and staff

conducted many follow-up contacts with the agencies. In addition,

representatives from the agencies attended panel meetings. The text of the

request appears as Attachment 1.
INVITATION FOR COMMENTS
In fall 1990, the panel also published an "Invitation for Comments" in a
variety of professional journals and newsletters. The panel requested comments

from users of federal statistics on access problems, suggestions for improving

access, and information on persons or businesses harmed by disclosure of

identifiable data. The "Invitation" provided an opportunity for concerned

individuals to submit their comments, suggestions, and experiences for the

panel's consideration. Approximately 20 responses were received. The text of the

"Invitation for Comments" is included as Attachment 2.
CONFERENCE ON DISCLOSURE LIMITATION
APPROACHES AND DATA ACCESS
Identification and examination of methods to maximize access to federal
statistical data while maintaining the confidentiality of the respondents' identities

were the foci of the Conference on Disclosure Limitation Approaches and Data

Access, held in March 1991. Researchers, federal government employees, and

panel members attended the conference, chaired by George T. Duncan. To

understand the underlying issues, participants reviewed data dissemination

policies of federal agencies and the effect of increasingly powerful technologies

on the agencies' efforts to provide data and maintain confidentiality. To facilitate

the discussion of the issues, the conference was divided into four sessions: basic

issues, statistical disclosure limitation, computer issues, and assessment of

current legislation and restricted access procedures.
The panel commissioned several papers to serve as background information
for the conference. These papers were presented at the conference and are

discussed in 
Chapter 6 of the report. They are published in a special issue of the
Journal of Official Statistics
 (1993(2)).APPENDIX A
248Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSIONED PAPERS
The panel commissioned 11 papers to help its deliberations.

Paper commissioned for the Workshop on Confidentiality of and Access to
National Center for Education Statistics Data
Kenneth B. Newton and Diana C. Pullin, "The Impact of Section 252 of the
Excellence in Mathematics, Science and Engineering Act of 1990 on the Policies

and Practices of the National Center for Education Statistics"
Papers commissioned for the Conference on Disclosure Limitation
Approaches and Data Access
Session 1: Basic Issues

Diane Lambert, "Measures of Disclosure Risk and Harm"

Paul D. Reynolds, "Privacy Advances in Social and Policy Science:
Balancing Present Costs and Future Gains"
Discussants: William Butz, Thomas Plewes, Eleanor Singer

Session 2: Statistical Disclosure Limitation

Wayne A. Fuller, "Use of Masking Procedures for Disclosure Limitation"

Roderick J.A. Little, "Statistical Analysis of Masked Data"

Discussants: Brian V. Greenberg, Donald B. Rubin

Session 3: Computer Issues

Sallie Keller-McNulty and Elizabeth A. Unger, "Database Systems:
Inferential Security"Discussants: Gerald Gates, Teresa F. Lunt

Session 4: Creative Solutions to the Disclosure Problem Under the Status
QuoJoe S. Cecil, "Confidentiality Legislation and the Federal Statistical System"

Thomas B. Jabine, "Procedures for Restricted Data Access"

Discussants: John P. Fanning, F. Thomas Juster, Nancy J. Kirkendall
APPENDIX A
249Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Other papers

Thomas B. Jabine, "Statistical Disclosure Limitation: Current Federal
Practices and Research"Robert H. Mugge, "Informed Consent in U.S. Government Surveys"

Eleanor Singer, "Summary of Informed Consent Literature for National
Research Council Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access"
Most of the papers and discussants' comments appear in revised form in a
special issue of the 
Journal of Official Statistics (9(2))
.APPENDIX A
250Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Attachment 1
COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS

NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES

2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20418

Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access

CNSTAT: (202) 334
Œ2550SSRC: (212) 661
Œ0280Request for Documentation of Policies and Practices

FROM: George T. Duncan, Chair

DATE: October 31, 1990

Federal agencies differ with respect to their statutes, regulations, and
organizational arrangements that pertain to the confidentiality of and the access to

statistical data that they collect and disseminate. The review of policies and

procedures related to confidentiality and data access is one of the most important

activities of our panel study. Therefore, we are asking you to assist the Panel on

Confidentiality and Data Access in obtaining documentation on your agency's

policies and practices.
The Panel plans to collect information in two steps:
   From a broad cross-section of federal statistical agencies and units, the
Panel will request that each agency provide documentation related to its

confidentiality and data access policies and practices; and
   Following the review of these materials, the Panel and staff will request
meetings with key officials of a few agencies. The meetings will serve

the purpose of adding to or clarifying information provided in the

documents. They will also provide the Panel an opportunity to obtain

information on topics for which there was no documentation.
The purpose of this memorandum concerns the first step: a request from the
Panel to provide documentation about your agency's policies and practices. The

Panel is primarily interested in obtaining
APPENDIX A
251Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.documentation on policies and practices that pertain to the data your agency

produces. In addition, the Panel would like to learn about your agency's

experiences as a 
user of identifiable data from federal and non-federal sources.
For instance, has your agency experienced difficulties or delays in accessing data

produced by another federal agency? If so, what were the problems and how were

they resolved? Examples of the relevant types of documentation are given below.
Please note that the Panel is asking your agency to provide 
copies  ofexisting documents. We are not asking your agency to prepare additional written
statements at this time. Since the documents collected from each federal agency

will be used to develop the Panel's report and may be summarized in ways that

can lead to the identification of an agency, they cannot be considered to be

confidential.To assist you in collecting this documentation, please consider the scope of
this study: it includes publicly-supported 
statistical data  collection activities suchas censuses, surveys, administrative record data (when used for statistical

purposes), and epidemiological studies. We are interested in statistical data for

both individuals and establishments. Data from clinical trials, while very

important, will not be considered in this study. There are some special issues

associated with clinical trial data that would require a separate study focusing on

the bioethical aspects of confidentiality and data access.

I. DOCUMENTATION FOR DATA PRODUCED BY YOUR AGENCY
For data produced by your agency, we ask that you provide relevant
documentation of your agency's confidentiality and data access policies and

practices. We use the word "documentation" to refer to a broad array of 
existingmaterials, such as published technical papers, standards manuals, copies of

consent forms, memoranda, policy statements, statutes, interagency agreements,

etc., that are relevant to each of the topics below. Please remember that the Panel

is interested in data collected from both individuals (except in clinical trials) and

establishments. Note that the Panel has copies of all documents listed in the

appendices and does not require additional copies.
1. 
Statutes, regulations, agency guidelines
: Statutes, regulations,
APPENDIX A
252Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.agency guidelines (ex., National Center for Health Statistics' 
Staff Manual on Confidentiality
), etc., that pertain to the confidentiality of
and access to your agency's data. Please note that we are not

interested in government-wide statutes and guidelines pertaining to

data used for statistical purposes, such as the Privacy Act
Šthe panel
will contact the Office of Management and Budget for government-

wide documents. However, if your agency has its own regulations or

guidelines for compliance with government-wide statutes, we are

interested in those.
2. 
Privacy Act system of records notice
: We would like to obtain
system of records notices for two or three of your agency's major

systems that are used for statistical purposes. In addition, notices

from other systems that have features of special interest for the panel

study would also be appreciated.
3. 
Respondent notification and consent procedures for both
individuals  and establishments
: The Panel would like to obtain
examples, from questionnaires or other survey forms, of the

respondent notification and consent procedures (RNCPs) used by

your agency to collect data from both individuals and

establishments. Note that the term RNCP, as used in this

memorandum, refers to a wide range of notices provided by federal

agencies to individuals and businesses. It includes, but is not limited

to, informed consent statements or agreements, confidentiality

notification statements, and privacy act notifications. Some topics of

interest follow:
   How RNCPs differ for individuals and establishments, especially for
agencies that collect information from both.
   The RNCP(s) used by your agency when it plans to link survey data with
administrative record data (for example, when your agency plans to use

Social Security Number for the linkage).
In addition, the Panel also requests agency documents that contain
instructions for staff on how to write RNCPs.
4. 
Disclosure limitation techniques
: Statistical methods and
procedures are sometimes used to limit disclosure risk in the release

of tabulations and microdata to the public, for example,
APPENDIX A
253Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.not releasing separate data for geographic areas with small

populations. Some topics of interest are:
   The procedures that are used by your agency to limit disclosure risk.
   If relevant, how procedures differ for individuals and establishments.
5. 
Facilitating access to nonpublic-use data
: Some agencies haveimplemented special procedures to facilitate access to data that have

not been released for public-use. Some topics of interest to the Panel

follow:   Whether your agency has ever provided access to data that were not
released for public-use.   If so, the type of arrangements used by your agency and its experience
with such "special arrangements." Some examples include:
  - allowing controlled access to specially sworn employees who are
required to relocate to the principal office of your agency;
  - allowing controlled access to specially sworn employees who work in
regional offices of the agency; and
  - employing special licensing agreements.
6. 
Inability to facilitate access
: Documents from your agency of cases
where access has been denied and the reason for denial.

Documentation might be contained in correspondence or in published

papers, e.g., G. Gates, "Census Bureau microdata: Providing useful

research data while protecting the anonymity of respondents" in the

Proceedings 
 of the Survey Research Section
 (American Statistical
Association, 1988).
7. 
Organizational arrangements
: Existing documentation that
describes organizational arrangements in your agency that are used

(1) to establish confidentiality guidelines and (2) to review requests

for access (for example, the Census Bureau's Microdata Review

Panel). Essentially, the Panel is interested
APPENDIX A
254Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in tracing the "standard flow" of a request for access to unpublished

data through your agency.
II. DOCUMENTATION FOR ACCESSING IDENTIFIABLE DATA

FROM FEDERAL AND NON-FEDERAL SOURCES
The second area of interest to the Panel concerns your agency's experiences
in accessing identifiable data from other federal agencies and non-federal

sourcesŠdata to be used for statistical purposes. Specifically, we are interested in

those experiences that concern access to microdata which would not meet

public-use criteria.Federal agencies may require identifiable data from other agencies to (1) use
as a frame for their surveys; (2) link with their own survey data; (3) do analyses.

The Panel is interested in the extent to which your agency had difficulty in

obtaining such data (documentation might be letters or published papers). The

Panel is also interested in knowing if special treatment was required for these

data, above and beyond the standards applied to microdata produced by your own

agency.1. 
Data from other federal agencies: We are requesting information
about your agency's experiences in accessing data from other federal

agencies, especially the barriers encountered. Topics of interest

include:  The extent to which your agency uses data for statistical purposes that
are produced by other agencies.  Cases in which your agency experienced "difficulties" in accessing the
federal data that it needed. For instance, barriers that a federal agency

might experience are:
an agency sponsors surveys but is unable to get fully detailed files from the
collecting agency; or
a federal agency or program experiences delays in getting administrative
data or business lists from other agenciesŠdata that are needed for use

in its own statistical programs.
2. 
Confidentiality and access issues for non-federal data
: A federal
agency sometimes serves an important role as a repository
APPENDIX A
255Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of non-federal survey and/or administrative data. These non-federal

data provide valuable sources of statistical information that

supplement federal data. Some issues of interest to the Panel include

the following:   The extent to which your agency uses identifiable, non-federal records
for statistical purposes (e.g., administrative data produced on the state-

level).   The provisions that exist concerning confidentiality to and access of
these data, especially where agency policies for data that it produces

differ from its policies covering non-federal data.
Finally, agency papers and/or publications that describe the preceding items,
but which might also include the history of access to unpublished data or the

history of changes to relevant confidentiality laws and regulations, would be

most helpful.If there is someone else the Panel should contact in your agency or program
to obtain the documentation that we are requesting, please provide Virginia de

Wolf, Study Director, (202
Œ334Œ2550) with the name and telephone number. If
you have any questions, please direct them to Virginia. We would appreciate

receiving your agency's documentation by December 3, 1990. Thank you very

much for your efforts in helping the Panel.
APPENDIX A
256Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Attachment 2 PANEL ON CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA
ACCESSMany users of Federal statistics are aware of the balance that must be struck
between protecting the confidentiality of information provided by persons and

businesses for statistical purposes and the need to make publicly-collected data

widely available for legitimate research and statistical uses.
In search of new ways to deal with this issue, the Committee on National
Statistics and the Social Science Research Council, with support from several

Federal agencies, have convened a Panel on Confidentiality and Data Access. As

part of its two-year study, the Panel, which had its first meeting in December of

last year, will be compiling relevant information from both producers and users

of Federal statistics.
The scope of this panel study includes publicly-supported statistical data
collection activities on individuals and establishments, such as censuses, surveys,

administrative record data (when used for statistical purposes), and

epidemiological studies. Data from clinical trials, while very important, will not

be considered in this study. There are some special issues associated with clinical

trial data that would require a separate study focusing on the bioethical aspects of

confidentiality and data access.
Readers of this notice are invited to submit short statements on any or all of
the following subjects:Access problems. Specific examples of instances where Federal agency
confidentiality laws or policies have made it impossible for you or your

colleagues to obtain data needed in your work or caused excessive delays in

arranging for access to the data. Please indicate the sources and specific kinds of

data desired and the purposes for which the data were needed.
Suggestions for improving access.
 Have you had any experience in
obtaining access to data not disclosed for general public-use? How was this

arranged? Do you have suggestions for improving data access with appropriate

safeguards to maintain confidentiality
APPENDIX A
257Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and without undue risk of adverse effects on public cooperation with censuses

and surveys?Persons or businesses harmed by disclosure.
 Do you know of any
instances in which persons or businesses were harmed by unlawful or unintended

disclosure of information they provided to the government under the condition

that the information was to be used only for statistical purposes? How did this

happen? What were the consequences? (This category differs from the first two in

that statements need not be based on your own personal experience.)
Please submit your statements to me c/o Committee on National Statistics,
National Research Council, 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington DC

20418. If you have any questions, please call Virginia de Wolf, Study Director,

on 202/334
Œ2550. We look forward to hearing from you.
George T. Duncan, 
ChairPanel on Confidentiality and Data Access
APPENDIX A
258Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix BBiographical SketchesGEORGE T. DUNCAN is professor of statistics in the H. John Heinz III
School of Public Policy and Management and in the Department of Statistics at

Carnegie Mellon University. He previously held an academic appointment at the

University of California, Davis, and was a Peace Corps volunteer in the

Philippines in 1965
Œ1967, teaching at Mindanao State University. His current
research work centers on the decision processes of conflict resolution as they

apply to privacy and information issues. He is a fellow of the American

Statistical Association. He has been editor of the Theory and Methods Section of

the Journal of the American Statistical Association
. He received B.S. and M.S.
degrees from the University of Chicago and a Ph.D. degree from the University

of Minnesota, all in statistics.
JAMES T. BONNEN is professor of agricultural economics at Michigan
State University. His current research interests include information systems

theory, the design and management of statistically based policy decision systems,

and agricultural research policy. Bonnen has served as chair of the National

Research Council Panel on Statistics for Rural Development Policy (1979
Œ1980),director of the President's Reorganization Project for the Federal Statistical

System (1978
Œ1980), president of the American Agricultural Economics
Association (1975), member of the President's National
APPENDIX B
259Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Advisory Commission on Poverty, and as senior staff economist with the

President's Council of Economic Advisers (1963
Œ1965). In 1981 he received the
American Statistical Association's Washington Statistical Society's Julius Shiskin

Award for Outstanding Achievement in Economic Statistics. He is a fellow of the

American Agricultural Economics Association, the American Statistical

Association, and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. He

received a B.A. degree from Texas A&M University, an M.A. degree from Duke

University, and a Ph.D. degree from Harvard University, all in economics.
JOE S. CECIL is a project director at the Federal Judicial Center. He is the
author of numerous publications concerning legal standards affecting exchange

of information for research purposes. Other areas of research interest include the

use of scientific and technical evidence in litigation, variations in procedures

employed by federal courts of appeals, and management of mass tort litigation.

He received a J.D. degree from Northwestern University School of Law and a

Ph.D. degree in psychology and evaluation research from Northwestern

University.MICHELE L. CONRAD is a senior project assistant with the Committee on
National Statistics. Previously she was the senior project assistant for the Panel to

Review Evaluation Studies of Bilingual Education, and she is currently working

with the Panel on Census Requirements in the Year 2000 and Beyond. She

received a B.A. degree from the University of Pittsburgh.
MARTIN HEIDENHAIN DAVID is professor of economics at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison. His research has explored a variety of

problems relating to taxation and transfer programs, involving extensive work in

collecting, analyzing, and managing complex data and the design of information

systems to support such data. His books include two that report on major data

collection efforts, 
Income and Welfare 
 in the United States (McGraw-Hill, 1962)
and Linkage and Retrieval 
 of Microeconomic Data (Lexington Books, 1974). He
has served on the National Research Council (NRC) Panel on Statistics for

Family Assistance and on the Panel on Research Strategies in the Behavioral and

Social Sciences on Environmental Problems and Policies. He is a fellow of the

American Statistical Association. He serves as adviser to the Statistics of Income

Division of the Internal Revenue Service; a member of the Committee on

National Statistics of the NRC; and
APPENDIX B
260Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.a member of the Advisory Board of the German Socio-economic Panel Study,

which is conducted by the Deutsches Institut fur Wirtschafts-forschung. He

received an A.B. degree from Swarthmore College and M.A. and Ph.D. degrees

from the University of Michigan.
VIRGINIA A. DE WOLF, who served as the panel study director, is
currently a mathematical statistician at the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Previously

she worked at the national Highway Traffic Safety Administration, the U.S.

General Accounting Office, and the University of Washington (Seattle). She

received a B.A. degree in mathematics from the College of New Rochelle, and a

Ph.D. degree from the University of Washington (Seattle) in educational

psychology with emphases in statistics, measurement, and research design.
RUTH R. FADEN is professor of health policy and management and
director of the Program in Law, Ethics, and Health in the School of Hygiene and

Public Health of the Johns Hopkins University, and she is also a senior research

scholar at the Kennedy Institute of Ethics, Georgetown University. She serves as a

consultant to numerous government and private agencies and is the author of

books and journal articles on health policy, biomedical ethics, and health

behavior. She also works on procedure-based rationing in medical care. She holds

an M.A. degree in humanities from the University of Chicago, a M.P.H. degree

from the University of California-Berkeley, and a Ph.D. degree in attitudes and

behavior from the University of California, Berkeley.
DAVID H. FLAHERTY is a professor of history and law at the University
of Western Ontario, London, Canada. He has had a long involvement with issues

of personal privacy and information policy and has written several books on the

issues of privacy and confidentiality, including 
Privacy and Government Data
Banks: An International Perspective
 (Mansell, 1979) and 
Protecting Privacy in
Surveillance Societies: The Federal 
 Republic of Germany, Sweden, France,
Canada, and the United States (University of North Carolina Press, 1989). He
has testified before many U.S. and Canadian legislative committees on computer

matching, the privacy implications of computer crime, and bills on freedom of

information and protection of individual privacy. He also participated in the first

oversight hearings on the Privacy Act of 1974, held by the House Subcommittee

on Government Information of
APPENDIX B
261Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the U.S. Congress. In 1992
Œ1993 Flaherty held appointments as a fellow at the
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, a Canada-U.S. Fulbright

fellow, a visiting scholar at Georgetown National Law Center, and a fellow of the

Kennedy Institute for Ethics at Georgetown University. He received a B.A.

degree from McGill University and M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from Columbia

University.THOMAS B. JABINE is an independent statistical consultant who
specializes in sampling, survey research methods, and statistical policy. He was

formerly a statistical policy expert for the Energy Information Administration of

the U.S. Department of Energy, chief mathematical statistician for the Social

Security Administration, and chief of the Statistical Research Division of the

Bureau of the Census. He is a member of the International Statistical Institute and a

fellow of the American Statistical Association, and he served as president of the

Washington Statistical Society. He is the author of several articles on the

confidentiality and data access policies and practices of federal statistical

agencies and served as chair of the American Statistical Association Committee

on Privacy and Confidentiality. With Richard P. Claude, he edited 
Statistics andHuman Rights: Getting 
 the Record Straight (University of Pennsylvania Press,
1992). He has a B.S. degree in mathematics and an M.S. degree in economics and

science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
F. THOMAS JUSTER is a research scientist at the Survey Research Center
and professor of economics at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. His

research includes the design of economic and social accounting systems, the

analysis of saving and wealth accumulation patterns among U.S. households, the

analysis of time allocation among households, and the development of measures

of economic well-being. He has served on a number of National Research

Council (NRC) committees, including the Committee on National Statistics, and

he has chaired the NRC Committee on the Supply and Demand for Mathematics

and Science Teachers and the American Economic Association Committee on the

Quality of Economic Data. He is a fellow of the American Statistical Association

and of the National Association of Business Economists. He received a B.S.

degree in education from Rutgers University and a Ph.D. degree in economics

from Columbia University.
APPENDIX B
262Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GARY T. MARX is professor and chair of the Sociology Department at the
University of Colorado at Boulder and director of the Center for the Social Study

of Information Technology. Previously he taught at the University of California,

Berkeley, Harvard University, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He

is the author most recently of 
Undercover: Police Surveillance in America
(University of California Press, 1988) and of academic and popular articles on the

social implications of information technology. His work has been translated into

many languages, including Japanese and Chinese. He has worked on privacy and

technology issues for the U.S. Office of Technology Assessment, the U.S.

General Accounting Office, Senate and House Subcommittees, state and local

governments, the Canadian House of Commons, and the Council of Europe. His

current work focuses on technologies for extracting personal information and

research on cross-border forms of social control. He received a Ph.D. degree from

the University of California, Berkeley.
WILLIAM M. MASON is professor of sociology at the University of
California, Los Angeles. He has held academic appointments at the University of

Michigan, Duke University, and the University of Chicago. His research has been

in the areas of research design, multilevel models, social demography, and

political sociology; he is currently studying infant mortality in China. He has been

a John Simon Guggenheim Foundation fellow and a fellow at the Center for

Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. He received a B.A. degree from

Reed College and a Ph.D. degree from the University of Chicago.
WLODZIMIERZ OKRASA is a staff associate at the Social Science
Research Council. He is currently developing a social science research laboratory

for collaborative, comparative research in and about Eastern and Central Europe.

He specializes in the methodology of social investigation, social statistics, and

microeconomics. He has held appointments as an American Statistical

Association research fellow and as a fellow of the British Academy and the

Friedrich Ebert Stiftung. Previously he served as head of a research unit at the

Institute of Economic Science at the Polish Academy of Sciences and as adviser

to the president of the Polish Central Statistical Office. He has written and edited

several books, including 
Social Welfare in Britain and Poland
, with Julian Le
Grand (London School of Economics, 1988). He received a Ph.D. degree in 1977

from the University of Warsaw.
APPENDIX B
263Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROBERT W. PEARSON is Director of Corporate and Foundation Relations
at Barnard College. He previously served as Assistant Survey Director at the

National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago and as staff

associate at the Social Science Research Council (SSRC). While at SSRC, he

worked with the panel and with committees on cognition and survey research, the

comparative evaluation of longitudinal surveys, and research on the urban

underclass. He received a B.A. degree from the University of Missouri,

Columbia, and a Ph.D. degree in political science from the University of

Chicago.DONALD B. RUBIN is professor of statistics and chair of the Department
of Statistics at Harvard University. Previously he was professor of statistics and

of education at the University of Chicago and chair of the Statistics Research

Group at the Educational Testing Service. His research has dealt with causal

inference in experimental and observational studies, missing data and

nonresponse in surveys, and applied Bayesian statistics, including computational

methods. He has been coordinating and applications editor of the 
Journal of the 
American Statistical Association and is a past member of the National Research
Council Committee on National Statistics. He is a fellow of a number of

professional associations, including the American Academy of Arts and

Sciences, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the Institute

of Mathematical Statistics, the American Statistical Association, and the

International Statistics Institute. He received an A.B. degree from Princeton

University and an M.S. degree in computer science and a Ph.D. degree in

statistics, both from Harvard University.
ELEANOR SINGER is a senior research scholar at the Center for the Social
Sciences at Columbia University. Her primary areas of work include public

opinion and survey methods research, and she has conducted several studies of

the impact of informed consent procedures and confidentiality assurances on

survey participation rates and response quality. She is a past president of the

American Association for Public Opinion Research and a former editor of 
PublicOpinion Quarterly. With Stanley Presser, she edited 
Survey Research Methods: A
Reader (University of Chicago Press, 1989). She received a B.A. degree from
Queens College and a Ph.D. degree from Columbia University.
APPENDIX B
264Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DAVID L. SZANTON is Executive Director of International and Area
Studies at the University of California, Berkeley. He is an anthropologist with

research interests in contemporary Southeast Asia. From 1975 to 1991 he
organized and staffed numerous area and research planning committees at the

Social Science Research Council in New York. He received a B.A. degree from

Harvard College and a Ph.D. degree from the University of Chicago.
W.H. WILLIAMS is professor of mathematics and statistics at Hunter
College in New York City. His current research interests are in the statistics of

employment discrimination and the influence of language factors in mathematics

learning. Previously he was in the Mathematics and Statistics Research Center at

Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey, and he later headed a division of

A.T.&T. responsible for econometric analysis of corporate financial structures.

He has also been Executive Vice-President of Louis Harris and Associates, the

public polling firm, and president of Strategic Comaps, a firm that develops

software for the credit and collections industry. He has had visiting appointments

at the University of California, Berkeley, the University of Michigan, and the

Census Bureau. He has published more than 50 papers and three books on

statistical methods applicable to economic and business problems. He was

educated at McMaster and Iowa State Universities.
APPENDIX B
265Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IndexA
Accountability, see Democratic account-
abilityAd Hoc Committee on Privacy and Con-
fidentiality, 50, 65-66, 104, 105, 209. See also Committee on Privacy and
ConfidentialityAd Hoc Committee on Professional
Ethics, 
66, 209Administrative agencies, 
2, 18, 30, 40Administrative procedures, 
2, 18-19, 141archiving, 174-176, 177, 225data protection, 
3, 4, 12, 203-205
for disclosure limitation, 
10-11, 86-87,152, 154, 155informed consent, 
9, 69-71, 75, 219nongovernment data access, 
7, 97,99-100, 221public information activities, 
10, 88, 220 see also
 Restricted access
Administrative records, 
1, 4-5, 17, 24,27-28, 34, 40-41, 47, 48, 67, 68, 74,172, 173, 178historical use, 47, 48and notification, 
63, 65, 70, 71-75,77-80, 220public views on statistical uses, 
61, 83-85risk of privacy violations, 
9, 88statutes on, 50, 110, 114-115
, 135 see also
 Continuous Work History
Sample;Interagency data sharing;

Linkages of records;

Lists of respondents;
Tax records;

Vital statisticsAdvisory agency, 13, 50-51, 79, 214-215
,217, 227. See also Review boards and mechanisms
Advocacy groups, 
17, 36, 92and privacy violations, 
10, 86-87, 89, 221Agencies, 
see Administrative agencies;
Administrative procedures;
Interagency data sharing;

 names of specific agencies
Aid to Families with Dependent Children,
78American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU),
86-87American Society for Access Profession-
als, 
209American Statistical Association (ASA),
46, 50, 65-66, 87, 97, 104 
, 105, 206,209-210
fellowships, 
94, 101, 165-166
, 200INDEX
266
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Analysis, see Policy and program analy-
sis; Statistical disclosure limitation
Anonymization, 
142, 145Archiving procedures, 
174-176
, 177, 225Association for Public Data Users, 
17, 97,210Attribute disclosure, 
23-24, 143-144
Australia, 
194Authorization, see Informed consent and
notificationAutonomy, 
see Individual autonomyB
Baldridge v. Shapiro
 , 119-120
Behavioral Sciences Research Group,
BLS, 
82Bellagio principles, 
104, 105Bias, 30, 147Birth certificates, 
96, 163Blurring, 146. See also Statistical disclosure limitation
Boskin initiative, 
49, 181, 196Burden on data providers, 
32, 36, 75, 219and barriers to interagency data sharing,
6, 98-99, 221and data linkage, 
41, 53Bureau of Economic Analysis, 
21, 128,164, 170, 171, 191, 192, 194Bureau of Environmental Statistics, 
132,188Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
15, 20, 39, 40,137Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 
2, 15,20, 21, 29, 40, 165cognitive research, 
55, 82and Current Population Survey, 
94, 159data policies and statutes, 183, 188organizational data, 
129-131
, 191,192-193
, 194, 198Bureau of the Census, 
1-2, 4, 20, 21, 41,109, 113, 118-121, 136, 183address lists, 
37, 95-96, 119-120
, 134,191administrative data use, 
96, 140 n,162-163
archived material, 
175-176
cognitive research, 
55, 82confidentiality statutes, 
37, 41Current Population Survey, 
94, 159,160-162
, 175, 181disclosure limitation procedures, 
86-87,98, 146, 148, 205, 206Exact Match Study, 
160-162external user access, 
38, 39, 165history of, 
46-47, 48and IRS, 
127, 128, 162-163microdata releases, 
120-121organizational data, 
183, 191-194
, 198and public opinion, 
35, 83, 86-87
reimbursable surveys, 
120-121
special sworn employees, 
38, 101, 119,159, 164, 166waiver use, 68-69, 73, 198, 199Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 
20,131-132
, 140 n, 188Businesses, 
see OrganizationsC
Canada, 
46, 194-195, 211, 213-214CD-ROM data releases, 
87, 92, 102encrypted formats, 
7, 94, 123, 167-168
,200Cell suppression, 
98, 144, 148. See also Statistical disclosure limitation
Census Bureau, 
see Bureau of the Census
Censuses, 1, 17nonstatistical uses, 
5-6
, 8-9, 33-34, 71 see also
 Decennial censuses
Center for Economic Studies, 
200-201
Central state planning board, 
31Certificates of research, 
215Child support data, 
159-160Cognitive research, 
9, 30, 52, 55, 82,85-86, 220Committee on Privacy and Confidential-
ity, 87, 209Communications technology advances,
52, 150Computer-assisted surveys, 
70Computer Matching and Privacy Protec-
tion Act, 
111, 160INDEX
267
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computer Professionals for Social
Responsibility, 17Computer technology, 
15, 17, 52, 93,149-151
data base access, 
56, 144-145
, 150-151
Concentration rule, 
147, 148. See also Statistical disclosure limitation
Conferences, for data users, 
35, 36, 54Confidentialitydefinition of, 
22-23historical overview, 
47, 48-49violations of, 
7, 38, 100, 101, 119, 138,223Congress, 16, 21, 30Congressional Budget Office, 
21Constitutional Convention of 1787, 
45Constitutional empowerment, 
2, 3, 18,26-27, 29, 33, 78Consultation, 11, 157, 224Consumer Expenditure Survey, 
21Consumer Price Index, 
30Continuous Work History Sample, 
95,128, 169-171, 173, 191, 200Cooperation, 
see Voluntary survey partici-
pationCosts of data collection, 
29-30, 32and data linkage, 
41Cotton gin reports, 
198Council of Economic Advisers, 
21, 48, 49Council of Professional Associations on
Federal Statistics, 
97-98Criminal records, 
74Current Industrial Reports, 198, 199Current Population Survey (CPS), 
94,159, 160-162, 175, 181D
Data protection, definition of, 
23staff training for 
12, 215-216, 226Death information, 
68, 172, 178 nDecennial censuses, 
29, 30, 36, 72, 87-88,98address lists, 
119-120
history of, 
45-47, 48use of administrative data, 
40, 83, 84,96, 162-163
Declaration on Professional Ethics
 , 66,210Definitions, 
22-24of records, 
24, 113, 139 nDemocratic accountability, 
2, 3, 18,25-26, 29, 31-33, 36, 78Denials of user requests, 
95, 98, 158,169-173
monitoring of patterns, 
7-8
, 96, 100, 222Department of Agriculture, 
48Department of Defense, 
159-160
Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, 112, 114, 159-160Department of Justice, dispute with
Energy Information Administration ,

34, 129, 185-188
Department of the Treasury, 
128, 164Disclosure risk, 
88, 136-137, 223. See also Attribute disclosure;
Identity disclosure;

Inferential disclosure;

Restricted access;

Restricted data;

Statistical disclosure limitation

definition, 
23-24notification of, 
8, 66, 76, 136, 156, 220Dissemination, 
see Disclosure risk;
Microdata files;

Restricted access;

Restricted data;

Statistical disclosure limitation;

Tabulations;

Users of federal data
E
Economic data, 
181, 189-190Economic Policy Working Group, 
49Economic Research Service, 
21, 201Economics of data and data collection,
26-27, 29-30, 43 n, 184Education data, 
31, 121-123
Education statistics, 
see National Center
for Education Statistics
Electronic data formats, 
92archiving of, 
175-176
, 177, 225 see also
 CD-ROM data releases ;
Microdata files;

On-line data accessEmployer Identification number, 
170, 190Employment data, 
129-131
, 169-171, 173,182, 184, 200INDEX
268
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Encryption, 143CD-ROMs, 
7, 94, 123, 167-168, 200End uses of data, 
92Energy Information Administration (EIA),
20, 38data policies and statutes, 205, 206dispute with Justice Department, 
34,129, 185-188proprietary data collection, 
34, 129, 185,191, 193Environmental Protection Agency, 
43 nEpidemiology, 
40, 95, 128, 171-173
Equifax, Inc., 
83, 87Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Prac-
tice , 66Ethical principlesfor agencies, 
2-3, 18-19, 25-29for data users, 
105-107, 222Evaluation studies, 
70-71, 92Exact Match Study, 
160-162
Experimental research, 
1, 17-18, 63, 107Export data, 
183F
Face-to-face interviews, 
62, 80-81False statements, to data providers, 8, 76,220. See also Informed consent and notifica-
tionFarm Costs and Returns Survey, 
201Federal Aviation Administration, 
2, 18Federal Committee on Statistical Method-
ology, 
11, 143Federal-state cooperative arrangements, 
18Federal Trade Commission, 
33-34Fellowship programs, 
94, 96, 101,165-166
, 200Financial data, 76, 116-117
, 182, 184Finland, 194, 195Fish and Wildlife Service, 
20-21Follow-up interviews, 
8, 76, 220Food and Drug Administration, 
116Food Security Act, 
135Food Stamp program, 
4-5, 78, 149Foreign trade data, 
183Framework for Planning U.S. Federal
Statistics for the 1980's
 , 51, 72-73France, 195, 211-212
Freedom of Information Act, 
4, 27, 37,98, 109, 111, 112-113, 115-117and organizations, 
116-117, 130, 182-183
Functional separation, 
4-6, 34-35, 50,53-54, 73, 134, 135, 223advisory body promotion of, 
13,217-218
, 227and organizational data, 
189, 225Future use of data, notification on, 
9, 76,220. See also Informed consent and notifica-
tionG
General Accounting Office, 
113General Education Provisions Act, 
121,122General-purpose data sets, 
1-2, 17Geocoding, 
87-88
, 149Germany, 
211, 213Grantees, statistical activities, 
18Great Depression, 
48Great Society programs, 
48Guidelines for Federal Statistical Activi-
ties , 208, 217, 227H
Hawkins-Stafford amendments, 
121, 122,137Health and Retirement Study, 
69Health Care Financing Administration
(HCFA), 
18Medicare lists, 
172, 178 nHow the Census Bureau Keeps Your
Information Strictly Confidential 
 , 86I
Identity disclosure, 
23, 143-144, 145, 153. See also Statistical disclosure limitation
Illegal behavior, 
76Income tax, 
47Income Tax Act, 
47Independent advisory agency, 
13, 50-51,79, 214-215
, 217, 227. See also Review boards and mechanisms
INDEX
269
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Individual autonomy, 
2, 3, 18, 27-29, 33,46-47, 58, 78Individually identifiable data, 
see Admin-istrative records;
Disclosure risk;

Interagency data sharing;

Statistical disclosure limitation;

Tax records
Individual Master File, 
162Infant formula data, 115Inference channel, 150-151
Inferential disclosure, 
24, 144, 145, 151Informational privacy, 
22Informed consent and notification, 
8-9,113, 115, 134, 135, 204, 223administrative data, 
36, 62, 63, 65, 70,71-75, 74, 77-80, 220definitions of, 
23, 63guidelines, 
63-69, 75-77, 219-220
and interagency data sharing, 
6, 99, 112,221methods of data collection, 
62for nonstatistical uses, 
5-6
, 8-9, 76-77,133, 220proxy procedures, 
74, 203research on, 
9, 52, 55, 80-82routine-use exemption, 
113-115
, 133survey participants, 
8-9
, 52, 56-57, 65 see also
 WaiversInstitutional Brokers Estimate System
(IBES), 44 nInstitutional review boards, 
107Interagency data sharing, 
6, 21, 40-41, 58,74, 92, 93, 94, 98-99
, 101, 111-112
,113, 158-165, 176, 203, 221, 224administrative records, 
6, 48, 58, 73, 74,83-84, 94, 98-99, 159-163, 221barriers, 6, 37, 98-99, 100, 111-112,134, 158, 221business lists, 191, 195-196
, 225-226
statutes, 6, 98, 99Interagency technical cooperation, 
10, 11,216-217
Intercensal surveys, 
96, 162-163
, 191, 198Intermediate uses of data, 
92, 93, 101Intermodal Surface Transportation Effi-
ciency Act, 
131, 188Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 
2, 18, 21data policies and statutes, 41, 94, 117,127-128
organizational data, 
191-193
and public opinion, 
35, 55, 82, 83-85taxpayer lists, 161-163
, 164, 172International Statistical Institute (ISI), 
65,66-67, 210Inter-University Consortium for Political
and Social Research, 
39J
Japan, 
194Jefferson, Thomas, 
45Joint Economic Committee, 
48L
Lawyers, 16-17Legislation, 4-6, 36-38, 50, 51, 98,109-111
, 135. See also Freedom of Information Act;
Computer Matching and Privacy Protec-
tion Act ;
Income Tax Act;

Paperwork Reduction Act;

Privacy Act;

Public Health Service Act;

Tax Reform Act

agency-specific, 
117-136
on data sharing, 
6, 98, 99, 192on external use, 7, 114-115on organizational data, 
182-183
, 189,196, 225, 226Licensing agreements, 
7, 38-39, 94, 96,100, 101, 102-104, 123, 200microdata, 
168-169Linkages of records, 
8, 40-41, 52, 53-55,74, 111, 159-163
and informed consent, 
9, 65, 67, 70-71,76, 220in microdata files, 
94Lists of respondents, 37, 95-96, 119-120,171-173
business, 
6, 95, 128, 190-196, 203,225-226
Local government, 
21, 182, 183Longitudinal Research Database, 
38, 154Longitudinal Retirement History Survey
(LRHS), 
68-69, 73, 96, 206Lotus Marketplace: Households, 
87Louis Harris and Associates, surveys, 
55,82-83Luxembourg Income Study, 
150, 166-167
INDEX
270
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.M
Mail surveys, 
37, 62Management, see Administrative proce-
duresMandatory disclosure, 
4-5
, 33-34
, 36Mandatory participation, 
23, 28-29,56-57, 61, 62and notification, 
63, 67, 71-75by organizations, 
184Manufacturing Energy Consumption Sur-
vey, 38Maryland Motor Vehicles Administration,
27-28Masking of data, 
see Statistical disclosure
limitationMatching, see Linkages of records
Matrix masking, 152Media, 
17, 21, 92Medical records, 
40Medicare, 78, 178 nMicrodata files, 48, 52, 64, 92, 94, 97,107, 119, 124-125, 157, 203, 222denied use of, 
95disclosure limitation, 
7, 10, 11, 12,101-102
, 104, 141-142, 144-146,148-149
and informed consent, 
65, 68-69licensing agreements, 
168-169Luxembourg Income Study, 
166-167
organizational data, 
184, 200-201Microdata Review Panel, Census Bureau,
48, 97, 148, 205Misleading statements, to data providers,
8, 76, 220. See also Informed consent and notifica-
tionMultiple imputation, 
153Multipurpose statistical programs, 
1-2, 18,29-30N
National Agricultural Statistics Service
(NASS), 
20, 21, 94, 164data policies and statutes, 41, 110, 134,135, 164, 165-166organizational data, 
191, 194, 197-199,201National Archives and Records Adminis-
tration (NARA), 
113, 174-176
, 177,225National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP), 
121National Center for Education Statistics
(NCES), 
2, 15, 20, 21, 31 
, 40, 110,121-123
CD-ROM encryption, 
94, 167, 201data policies and statutes, 136, 137, 205,206restricted access, 
38-39, 102, 165,168-169
National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS), 
15, 20, 21, 30-31, 43 n, 70,95-96, 172cognitive research, 
55, 82data policies and statutes, 
4, 28, 110,123-127
, 204-205
informed consent procedures, 
70National Death Index, 
68, 172National Educational Longitudinal Study,40National Health Interview Survey (NHIS),
95-96National income accounts, 
29, 170National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, 
128, 164, 172National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST), 
165National Institute on Aging (NIA), 
68-69,96, 206National Institutes of Health, 
43 n, 107National Justice Data Archive, 
39National Longitudinal Survey of Youth,
102National Science Foundation (NSF),
38-39, 206fellowships, 
94, 101, 165-166
, 200Needs-tested entitlement programs, 
74, 78Netherlands, 194, 195New Zealand, 
194Noise introduction, 144, 152, 178 n. See also Statistical disclosure limitation
Nonresponse, 
80, 81North, S.N.D., 
46Notification, 
see Informed consent and
notificationO
Office of Federal Statistical Policy and
Standards (OFPS), 
49, 51, 73Office of Management and Budget
(OMB), 
8, 21, 32, 111, 192-193
,196 
, 207-209, 211, 217, 227INDEX
271
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.confidentiality rulings, 
69, 73, 96, 198,199disclosure limitation research, 
11, 155,224Off-site data access, 
96, 100, 102, 123,168-169
Oil company data, 
34, 129, 185-188
On-line data access, 
7, 92, 166-167
, 200On-site data access, 
7, 96, 101, 173Organizations, 
16, 21, 52, 54, 62, 181-182
access to data on, 
7, 51, 57, 116-117,199-202
, 226and confidentiality, 2, 5, 18, 23, 51, 57,62, 64, 75, 182, 188-190, 219, 225as data collectors, 
15informed consent of, 
8, 184, 197lists of, 6, 95, 128, 190-196
, 203, 225-226proprietary data, 57, 116-117, 182-183,184related legislation, 
182-183, 189, 196,225, 226waivers, 
197-199, 226P
Panel Study of Income Dynamics, 
102Paperwork Reduction Act, 
4, 109, 111Passive consent, 77, 78, 80, 81, 203Permanent Census Act, 
46Personal Privacy in an Information Soci-
ety , 50Personal records, see AdministrativerecordsPledges of confidentiality, 5, 10, 34, 37,40, 55, 66and data users, 104, 105interpretation of, 
80-82Policy and program analysis, 
3, 15-16,25-27, 32, 92, 96, 99and data quality, 26-27, 31, 56historical overview, 
48by outside researchers, 
52, 53, 97, 99and subject notification, 
74, 78, 79-80President's Reorganization Project for the
Federal Statistical System , 
48, 140 nPrivacy, definition of, 
22Privacy Act, 4, 24, 35, 37, 41, 48, 62, 109,111-115
, 132-133
, 135 , 137, 139 n,211informed consent under, 
8, 64-65,69-70, 75, 219and organizations, 
122, 135, 182Privacy Protection Study Commission, 
5,35, 49, 50-51, 140 nPrivate sector data collection, 
15, 29-30,31, 35government maintenance of, 
115-116risk of privacy violations, 
9, 87-88use of government data, 87-88Professional organizations, 
17, 65-67,97-98, 105, 107, 209-210, 222Project Metropolitan, 
54-55, 212-213
Proprietary data, 57, 116-117, 182-183, 184EIA collection of, 
34, 129, 185, 191, 193Protected enclaves, 51, 73Providers of data, 
9, 16, 20-21, 22, 28-29,35, 35-36, 46, 56-57, 57, 61-62, 62-63 See also Cognitive research;
Informed consent and notification;

Mandatory participation;

Organization;

Pledges of confidentiality;

Proxy respondents;

Voluntary survey participation;

WaiversProxy respondents, 22, 74, 203Public Health Data, 
43-44 nPublic Health Service Act, 
28, 124Public information activities, 
36, 56, 88,220about privacy violations, 
10, 86-89, 221Public opinion on data activities, 
35, 55,61, 82-86, 206, 220Public-use microdata files, 
see MicrodatafilesQ
Quality improvement initiative, 
49, 181,196Query restriction, 
151, 200Questionnaires, notification statements, 
70INDEX
272
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.R
Race and ethnicity, 9, 86-87, 96, 163Random digit dialing, 
15Random error, 
144, 152Randomized responses, 
82Records, 
see Administrative records;
Definitions of records;

Linkages of records ;

Tax records
Reidentification problem, 
162, 168Reimbursable surveys, 
120-121Respondents, 
see Providers of data
Response modification, 
151random error, 
144, 152Restricted access, 
7, 32, 38-39, 92-93,94-97, 99-102, 141, 142, 165-169,177, 221, 224-225archived materials, 
174-176
, 177-178conditions of, 
100-101
, 104, 106,157-158
, 222Restricted data, 
141-142. See also Statistical disclosure limitation
Retention of survey data
notification on, 
9, 76, 220Revenue Act, 
47Review boards and mechanisms, 
36, 73,78-79, 107, 214-215
, 216, 217 
, 227for disclosure limitation, 
10-11, 97,148-149
, 205-206
foreign, 
211-214
Routine-use exemption, 
113-115
, 133S
Sampling frames, 
6, 40, 92, 95-96, 99, 221business, 190-191Scope of Federal statistical system, 
1-2,17-18Security classification, 
150-151Sensitive data items
and disclosure-avoidance policies, 
12,156and notification, 
8, 75-76, 80-81, 219Signature requirements, 
80, 81Simulated data, 146, 153, 154Sixteenth Amendment, 
47Small-area data, 
87-88, 163Small business, 184, 191Small Business Administration (SBA),
191, 193Social Security Administration (SSA), 
96,205administrative lists, 
68, 172, 173 see also
 Continuous Work History
Sample;Exact Match Study
Social Security data, 
6, 30, 71-72
, 74, 78,84, 88Social Security numbers, 
9, 67, 69, 70, 76,96, 161-162
, 163, 169, 220Software, 
11, 93, 157, 224Special sworn employees, 
38, 101, 119,121, 159, 164, 166St. Regis Paper Company, 
33-34Standard Industrial Classification (SIC),
190, 191, 193Standard Statistical Establishment List
(SSEL), 37, 191-192, 193State governments, 21, 182, 183cooperation with federal government, 
6,18, 96, 164, 196, 198, 225vital statistics data collection, 
46, 125,126-127
Statistical disclosure limitation, 
10-12
, 39,66, 147-149
, 178 n, 209techniques, 
144-149
, 151-153, 179 nuser impacts, 11, 12, 99, 155-157
, 209Statistical Policy Office, OMB, 
21, 196,207-209
disclosure limitation research, 
11, 155,225Statistical records, definition, 
24, 113, 139nStatistics Canada, 
46, 194-195
, 213-214
Statistics of Income Division, IRS, 
82, 94,127Statistics Sweden, 
54, 212Statutes, see LegislationSummary tape files, 
98Surveillance, 
3, 27Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife
Related Recreation, 
20-21Survey of Income and Program Participa-
tion, 
149Surveys and Privacy , 87Swapping techniques, 
146, 153. See also Statistical disclosure limitations
INDEX
273
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and Accessibility of Government StatisticsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sweden, 54, 194, 211, 212-213Synthetic data, 146, 153, 154T
Tabulationsdisclosure limitation, 
7, 10, 12, 48, 144,146-147
, 148of early census data, 
46, 48organizational data, 
197-198
Tax-exempt organizations, 
57Taxpayer Opinion Survey, 
83-85Tax records, 
40, 47, 48, 62, 71, 83-85, 95,127-128
, 161, 164and notification, 
70Tax Reform Act, 
48, 95, 110, 117,127-128
, 164, 170-171
, 172Telemarketing, 15Telephone surveys, 
37, 62, 70, 81, 204Topcoding, 
144, 162Training of researchers, 105, 107, 222U
United Kingdom, 194Unlawful disclosure, 
see Violations ofconfidentialityUsers of federal data, 
7-8, 16, 21, 35, 46,91-93denials, 
7-8, 
95, 96, 98, 100, 222government interaction with, 
35-36, 51,52, 53, 58, 91, 97-98
legal and ethical responsibilities,
100-107
, 222sanctions against for misuse, 
7, 57, 100,101, 104and statistical disclosure limitation, 
11,12, 39, 98, 99, 101, 155 -157
, 209, 224V
Violations of confidentiality
penalties, 
4, 7, 38-39, 57, 100, 102, 104,112, 135, 137-139, 157, 223and public opinion, 
8, 9-10, 87, 88, 138,221Vital statistics, 46, 96, 125-127, 172, 181Voluntary survey participation, 
28, 50, 52,54-55, 57, 61, 62and informed consent, 
8-9, 36-37, 56,63, 67, 71Voting records, 
71W
Waivers, 
37, 68-69, 77-80, 96, 196, 197,203, 220by organizations, 
197-199
, 226Watergate scandal, 
48World Almanac
 , 21INDEX
274
