DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/21721A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System:Implications and Importance of System Architecture110 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-37178-0 | DOI 10.17226/21721David E. Liddle and Lynette I. Millett, Editors; Committee to Review theEnterprise Architecture, Software Development Approach, and Safety and HumanFactor Design of the Next Generation Air Transportation System; ComputerScience and Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and PhysicalSciences; National Research CouncilA Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.David E. Liddle and Lynette I. Millett, 
EditorsCommittee to Review the Enterprise Architecture, Software Development 
Approach, and Safety and Human Factor Design of the Next Generation 
Air Transportation System
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences  A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 

for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 

appropriate balance.
This project was supported by the Federal Aviation Administration under award 
number DTFAWA-12-A-80013. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recom
-mendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not 

necessarily re˚ect the view of the organizations or agencies that provided support 

for this project.
International Standard Book Number 13:
 978-0-309-37178-0
International Standard Book Number 10:
 0-309-37178-3
Additional copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360

Washington, DC 20001
(800) 624-6242
(202) 334-3313 

http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2015 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 

National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the char
-ter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstand
-ing engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its 
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for 
advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages 

education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. 

Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 

Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 

Dr. Victor J. Dzau is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 

government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 

Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 

Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iv
Other Reports of the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical Options, 2015
Future Directions for NSF Advanced Computing Infrastructure to Support 
U.S. Science and Engineering in 2017-2020: An Interim Report, 2014
At the Nexus of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts 
and Issues, 2014
Emerging and Readily Available Technologies and National Security: A 
Framework for Addressing Ethical, Legal, and Societal Issues, 2014
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current 
Knowledge and Research Gaps, 2013
Professionalizing the Nation™s Cybersecurity Workforce? Criteria for 
Future Decision-Making, 2013
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Summary 
of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps, 2013
Continuing Innovation in Information Technology, 2012
Computing Research for Sustainability, 2012

The Safety Challenge and Promise of Automotive Electronics: Insights 
from Unintended Acceleration, 2012 (with the Board on Energy and 

Environmental Systems and the Transportation Research Board)
Strategies and Priorities for Information Technology at the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2011
The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or Next Level?, 2011

Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options, 2011

Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary 
of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps, 2011
Critical Code: Software Producibility for Defense, 2010

Proceedings of a Workshop on Deterring Cyberattacks: Informing 
Strategies and Developing Options for U.S. Policy, 2010
Achieving Effective Acquisition of Information Technology in the 
Department of Defense, 2010
Limited copies of CSTB reports are available free of charge from:
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
National Research Council
The Keck Center of the National Academies
500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001
(202) 334-2605/cstb@nas.edu
www.cstb.org
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE
 TO
 R
EVIEW
 THE
 E
NTERPRISE
 A
RCHITECT
URE
, 
SOFTWARE
 D
EVELOPMENT
 A
PPROACH
, 
AND
 S
AFET
Y 
AND
 HU
MAN
 F
ACTOR
 D
ESI
GN OF
 THE
  NEXT GENERATION
 A
IR
 T
RANSPORTATION
 SY
STEM
DAVID E. LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners, 
Chair
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University
JOHN-PAUL B. CLARKE, Georgia Institute of Technology

GEORGE L. DONOHUE, George Mason University

R. JOHN HANSMAN, JR., Massachusetts Institute of Technology

MATS P.E. HEIMDAHL, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities

JOHN C. KNIGHT, University of Virginia

LEON J. OSTERWEIL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst

WALKER E. ROYCE, International Business Machines Corporation

GAVRIEL SALVENDY, Purdue University

THOMAS B. SHERIDAN, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

ROBERT F. SPROULL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst

JAMES W. STURGES, Independent Consultant, Greer, South Carolina 

ELAINE WEYUKER, Independent Consultant, Metuchen, New Jersey 
Staff
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director and Senior Program Of˜cer, 
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB)
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer, CSTB
DWAYNE DAY, Senior Program Of˜cer, Aeronautics and Space 
Engineering Board
JON EISENBERG, Director, CSTB

ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant (until March 2015) 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMP
UTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMM
UNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Chair
 LUIZ ANDRE BARROSO, Google, Inc. 
ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC
EDWARD FRANK, Apple, Inc.
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 

LAURA HAAS, IBM Corporation

MARK HOROWITZ, Stanford University

FARNAM JAHANIAN, Carnegie Mellon University

MICHAEL KEARNS, University of Pennsylvania

ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University 

SUSAN LANDAU, Google, Inc.

PETER LEE, Microsoft Corporation 

DAVID E. LIDDLE, US Venture Partners 

BARBARA LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University

JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia

JOHN A. SWAINSON, Dell, Inc.

PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California

KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director and Senior Program Of˜cer

VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer

SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant

EMILY GRUMBLING, Program Of˜cer

RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 

HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist, 
Emeritus
For more information on CSTB, 
 see its website at http://www.cstb.org, write to CSTB, 
 National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001, 
call (202) 334-2605, or e
-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
The Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) is an effort 
begun in 2003 whose goals include improving the capacity, ef˜ciency, and 
safety of the U.S. air transportation system and also enabling reduction 

in noise, pollution, and energy use. The Federal Aviation Administration 

(FAA) and various stakeholders, including equipment providers, airlines, 

and contractors, are currently implementing both near- and midterm capa
-
bilities of this effort.
Section 212 of the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012, Public 
Law 112-95 (Box 1.1) called for an examination of NextGen™s enterprise 

architecture and related issues by the National Research Council (NRC). 

The project that was a result of this call was funded by the FAA. The 

Committee to Review the Enterprise Architecture, Software Development 

Approach, and Safety and Human Factor Design of the Next Generation 

Air Transportation System was formed under the auspices of the NRC™s 

Computer Science and Telecommunications Board in collaboration with 

the Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board in 2012 to conduct the study. 

The statement of task for the study committee can be found in Box 1.2.
The committee released a brief interim report in 2014,
1 providing a 
discussion around the challenges of system architecture for software-

intensive systems.
1 
National Research Council, 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air Trans
-portation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human Factors
, The National 
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2014. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii PREFACE
For its ˜nal report, the committee received a number of brie˜ngs on 
NextGen efforts, particularly as related to the study™s focus on enterprise 
architecture, software development approach, and safety and human fac
-tors. A list of briefers at committee meetings can be found in Appendix B. 

Subsets of the committee also conducted several informal site visits to 

gain insight on the system development process and FAA™s technical 

research. A subset of the committee visited the FAA™s William J. Hughes 

Technical Center in Atlantic City, New Jersey, and heard brie˜ngs on 

human factors research, test and evaluation processes, and cybersecurity 

considerations. Several members of the committee also met with experts 

at Lockheed Martin and Raytheon to learn generally about contractors™ 

software development practices and to better understand FAA™s approach 

to and expectations regarding system integration. Additionally, during 

the committee™s work, MITRE was completing an independent assess
-ment of NextGen at the request of the FAA and provided an overview 

of its work and process to the committee. The committee appreciates the 

insights of the individuals at these organizations who participated in 

those meetings and especially thanks Andy Anderegg, MITRE; Fran Hill, 

Lockheed Martin; Charles Keegan, Raytheon; and Kaye Jackson, FAA, for 

helping to facilitate those visits. 
As discussed in this report, there have been a number of de˜nitional 
and terminological challenges encountered in the course of this study. 

The committee addresses a number of issues, such as a ˚uid de˜nition 

of the NextGen project, the comingling of normal modernization efforts 

with more transformational developments, and an administrative rather 

than technical architectural standard. Those issues at times temporarily 

masked deep and critical issues with which the committee had to grapple 

to reach meaningful ˜ndings and recommendations. We are indebted to 

the staff of the Next Generation Program Of˜ce and their FAA colleagues 

for their patient efforts on behalf of the study committee in striving to 

clarify these issues.
David E. Liddle, 
Chair
Committee to Review the Enterprise Architecture, 

Software Development Approach, and Safety and 

Human Factor Design of the Next Generation Air 

Transportation System 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 

Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 

and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub
-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 

institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 

the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 

con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish 

to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
ELLA ATKINS, University of Michigan,

ARNOLD BARNETT, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

RICHARD BERMAN, LICAS,

KARL HEDRICK, University of California, Berkeley,

RICHARD HILLIARD, Independent Consultant,

BUTLER LAMPSON, Microsoft Research,

JOHN LAUBER, Airbus, SAS (retired),

STEVEN LIPNER, Microsoft Corporation (retired),

BARBARA LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

MARK MAIER, Aerospace Corporation,

WILLIAM SCHERLIS, Carnegie Mellon University,

AGAM SINHA, ANS Aviation International, 

RAYMOND VALEIKA, Delta Airlines, Inc., and

STEVE WINTER, Raytheon.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions 
or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before its 

release. The review of this report was overseen by Ali Mosleh, University 

of California, Los Angeles. Appointed by the National Research Council, 

he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of 

this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and 

that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the 

˜nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and 

the institution.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
Contents
SUMMARY
   
11 RECOGNIZE CONSTRAINTS AND ALIGN EXPECTATIONS
 13
 Scope of Report, 14
 What is NextGenŠAligning Expectations, 17
2 ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 24
 FAA™s Current Approach to Architecture, 25
 Elements of Architectural Leadership, 40
 Recommendations to Improve Architecture and Architectural 
Leadership, 43
3 COPE WITH CHANGE
 49
 Cybersecurity, 49
 Unmanned Aircraft Systems, 53
 Safety in NextGen and Emergent System Properties, 56
 Risk Management, 58
4 MINIMIZE CULTURAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIERS
 64
 Human Factors, 65
 Costs and Bene˜ts, 71
 The Challenge of Being a System Integrator, 74
 Support for Operations and Maintenance, 78
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii CONTENTSAPPENDIXES
A Biographies of Committee Members and Staff
 83
B Briefers to the Study Committee
 93
C Acronyms
  95
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary
Section 212 of the Federal Aviation Administration Modernization 
and Reform Act of 2012, Public Law 112-95, calls for an examination 
by the National Research Council (NRC) of the Next Generation Air 

Transportation System™s (NextGen™s) enterprise software development 

approach and safety and human factor design. In response to this request, 

the NRC formed the Committee to Review the Enterprise Architecture, 

Software Development Approach, and Safety and Human Factor Design 

of the Next Generation Air Transportation System to conduct this study. 
The committee™s overarching conclusions are as follows: The original 
vision for NextGen is not what is being implemented today. Instead, 

NextGen today primarily emphasizes replacing and modernizing aging 

equipment and systems. This shift in focus has not been clear to all stake
-holders. Nevertheless, modernization is critical, and large-scale, software-

intensive systems such as NextGen require ongoing support for opera
-tions and maintenance. 
To be successful, even as a modernization project, NextGen needs a 
system architecture that de˜nes how the pieces of the system ˜t together 

and allows for modeling and reasoning about possible futures. The exist
-ing National Airspace System (NAS) enterprise architecture is not that; 

it primarily documents existing systems and plans. Among other things, 

a system architecture is an essential tool for managing risk. The Federal 

Aviation Administration (FAA) should create an architecture commu
-
nity that can produce and evolve a system architecture and should also 

strengthen its workforce in systems engineering and integration, digital 

communications, and cybersecurity to increase the likelihood it will suc
-A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
ceed in developing the architecture and managing the implementation of 
the systems it describes.
NextGen and its system architecture should be developed to cope 
with change. Two newly important areas, cybersecurity and unmanned 

vehicles, make this need particularly resonant. Human factors will also 

play an important role in NextGen and the NAS as each evolves. Finally, 

regarding anticipated costs and bene˜ts, airlines are not motivated to 

spend money on equipment and training for NextGen because they do 

not receive most of the bene˜ts directly and because of implementation 

schedule uncertainties. The rest of this summary elaborates these and 

related observations in more detail and highlights several of the commit
-tee™s ˜ndings and recommendations in bold. 
ALI
GNIN
G EX
PECTATIONS
 FOR
 N
EXTGEN
Throughout the committee™s work, it became clear that ﬁNextGenﬂ 
means different things to different people, ranging from a wide-ranging 

transformational vision to a much more concrete set of phased incremen
-tal changes to various parts of the NAS. With so many stakeholders and 

so many moving parts, different understandings of ﬁwhat is NextGenﬂ 

arose. As the committee has come to understand it, NextGen today is a 

set of programs to implement a suite of incremental changes to the NAS. 

Although some technologies and/or systems will be new, in most cases, 

current plans call for them to be used to closely replicate existing capabili
-
ties (such as satellite navigation used to replace radar functionality rather 

than the reinvention of ˚ight). 
The executive order establishing the Joint Planning and Develop
-ment Of˜ce (JPDO) was entitled ﬁTransformation of the National Air 
Transportation System,ﬂ
1 and early vision documents referred to ambi
-tious goals such as integrated data streams for situational awareness in 

seamless multi-agency global operations, scalability, the use of emerging 

space-based communications and surveillance technologies.
2 Although 
progress has been made, not all parts of the original JPDO vision will 

be achieved in the foreseeable future. This was true even at the outset of 

NextGen and is understandable, given changes over time.3 However, even 
1 
White House, ﬁTransformation of the National Air Transportation System,ﬂ Executive 
Order, released November 18, 2008, http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/
releases/2008/11/20081118.html.
2 See Appendix B of the 2005 National Research Council report 
Technology Pathways: Assess
-ing the Integrated Plan for a Next Generation Air Transportation System
 (The National Academies 

Press, Washington, D.C.) for an overview of JPDO objectives. 
3 
For instance, the substantial future demand growth anticipated in early planning did 
not materialize. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3the limited vision embraced at the start of NextGen has been reduced over 
time, while increasingly important challenges have not received adequate 

attention.
4 Partly as a result of these issues, stakeholder expectations for 
NextGen have become misaligned with current planning as NextGen 

and its constituent programs have changed over time. This misalignment 

causes challenges both for the FAA and for stakeholders.
 An important part of NextGen is addressing the need to replace aging 
equipment. Such modernization is essential and important. Replacing or 

upgrading systems while continuously and safely operating the whole 

system is an intricate undertaking, a process that the FAA seems to have 

mastered. The successful operation of such systems requires ongoing 

alterations and improvements, not just the occasional repair of faulty 

equipment and software.
 While not the transformation originally envi
-sioned for NextGen, continuing to refresh the technology-driven systems 

is necessary for safety critical systems like the NAS. 
As described to the committee, NextGen also includes efforts to fur
-ther deploy performance-based navigation,
5 redesign certain aspects 
of the airspace, and equip aircraft with technology (such as Automatic 

Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) that can form the basis for 

future capabilities, along with a broad range of activities. These plans are 

expressed in various implementation plans, the NAS enterprise archi
-tecture, roadmaps, and calls for research, experimentation, and further 

incremental programs. NextGen, as currently executed, is not, however, 

broadly transformational. That is, it does not set out a series of planned 

steps toward a fundamentally transformed end-state (such as free ˚ight, 

decommissioning surveillance radar stations, automating air traf˜c con
-trol processes with a completely digital information infrastructure, or 

shifting authority from ground to air). Moreover, the system has not been 

signi˜cantly changed to take advantage of available information and com-
munications technologies or to enable major improvements in how the 

airspace can be organized and managed. Unfortunately, over the course 

of the committee™s work, it was clear that some stakeholders were still 

anticipating these capabilities from NextGen. Such goals await the now-

distant full deployment of technical capabilities, the integration of these 

capabilities to support higher levels of automation and more distributed 

and autonomous operation, full equipage of virtually all aircraft with 

new components, and widespread revisions to procedures. ﬁNextGenﬂ 

has become a misnomer.
4 
For instance, cybersecurity was not a signi˜cant concern in early JPDO planning. 
5 Performance-based navigation refers to a range of approaches that emphasize the perfor
-mance and capabilities of aircraft over more conventional ground-based navigation systems. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), 
Congress, and all National Airspace System stakeholders should 

reset expectations for the Next 
Generation Air Transportation Sys
-tem. The FAA should explicitly qualify the early transformational 

vision in a way that clearly articulates the new realities. 
The committee™s conclusion that NextGen today is primarily an incre
-mental modernization effort should not suggest that NextGen therefore 
has an obvious completed state or that future signi˜cant change should 

not happen. Given the continuing rapid pace of technological evolution 

and ongoing changes in what is demanded of the NAS, the NextGen effort 

is properly seen as an ongoing process, punctuated by particular efforts 

focused on particular capabilities. Resetting expectations with a clear 

baseline will provide a useful foundation on which to build. 
ASSERTIN
G A
RCHITECT
URAL
 L
EADERSHIP
The statement of task for this study (Box 1.2) uses the term ﬁenterprise 
architecture.ﬂ Like other terms associated with software-intensive systems, 

this term is used in different ways by different organizations and in differ
-ent contexts, but typically, an enterprise architecture serves as documenta
-tion and support of existing systems and business processes. An enterprise 

architecture alone cannot usually manage large, distributed, real-time sys
-tems where safety-critical concerns predominate, nor is it clear that even the 

best instantiation of an enterprise architecture is intended for such uses. An 

enterprise architecture is typically interpreted as a set of documents instead 

of a set of decisions. This is consistent with what the committee learned in 

its brie˜ngs about the FAA™s approach to enterprise architecture. However, 

a focus on documentation over decision making is a signi˜cant problem. 
For a system such as NextGen, a more comprehensive notion of archi
-tecture is needed. A system architecture, by contrast with an enterprise 

architecture, models and de˜nes the structure and behavior of a system 

in a way that supports reasoning about the system and its characteristics. 

Accordingly, and consistent with other elements of its task, such as soft
-ware development, the committee explored the question of architecture 

more broadly, focusing also on the system architecture for NextGen. 
Discerning precisely what FAA™s architectural approach and strategy 
is was challenging, and some of it had to be inferred. The current enter
-prise architecture as presented to the committee appears to be a set of 

functional enclaves that are providing individual services, described in 

a set of documents at the NAS enterprise architecture level. Additional 

improvements and modi˜cations seem to be either changes to what is 

already deployed or overlays onto what is already there. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5Ultimately, the committee™s conclusion with regard to the NAS enter
-prise architecture is that the existing design and deployment of the NAS 
embodies a tacit architectureŠthe de facto system architecture is the 

system as it is today. This induced architecture is therefore bottom-up 

and program-driven and imposes implicit limits on what (and how) sys
-tem capabilities can be realized. This has rami˜cations for how effec
-tive it can be, especially in laying groundwork for future ˚exibility and 

enhancements. 
A tacit architecture is not appropriate for a system of NextGen™s scale 
and importance and is at odds with recommendations in standards such 

as ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010.
6 FAA™s approach to architecture (which focuses 
on the enterprise architecture) is not an adequate technical foundation 

for steering NextGen™s technical governance and managing the inevitable 

changes in technology and operations. 
The changes to the NAS envisioned under the NextGen umbrella 
should provoke changes and adjustments in the NAS system architec
-ture. Change can be thought of as the ongoing management of trade-offs, 

which are not clearly identi˜ed in the existing tacit architecture. That tacit 

architecture is diffused through many different programs, not all of which 

are under NextGen control. A system architecture for the NAS should 

help ensure proper operation of the system and allow proper analyses for 

prediction of system behavior and performance and ensure future evolv
-ability. Absent such an architecture, whether NextGen can meet its stated 

objectives and requirements is unknown and, probably, unknowable. That 

the system architecture is not well developed is hard to discern because 

of the nearly exclusive focus by the FAA on the enterprise architecture. 
Unfortunately, having de facto established the existing (baseline) 
architecture as 
the
 architecture without a clear architectural expression of 
future expectations regarding change, trade-offs, and evolvability, many 

opportunities to use the architecture in forward-looking ways have been 

ruled out, and some important advances are going to be extremely chal
-lenging to accomplish (such as the ability to create persuasive and cred
-ible forecasts of change costs, technical risks, capability upgrades, and 

performance improvements). The committee™s recommendations take this 

into account and offer suggestions as to how to move forward most pro
-ductively to develop better architectural approaches.
 The most important thing on which the FAA should focus with respect 
to architecture is building a community of architecture leaders within and 
6 International Organization for Standardization (ISO)/International Electrotechnical 
Commission (IEC)/Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Standard ISO/
IEC/IEEE 42010:2011, ﬁSystems and Software EngineeringŠArchitecture Description,ﬂ 

 December 2011, http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=50508.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
outside the agency. The FAA will need to add more system architecture 
skill and establish a more capable architecture community. Architectural 

leadership should encompass multiple perspectives (including, but not 

limited to, the enterprise architecture) and provide diversity of thought 

and approach, emphasizing ˚exibility and evolvability, consistency and 

alignment, and right-sizing of architectural documentation.
 To be clear, 
the committee does not urge the premature creation of more detailed 

speci˜cations and artifacts absent deeper insights and stronger analyses 

of risks and trade-offs. In many ways, such efforts would be counter
-productive, translating into more overhead (process and documentation) 

and less attention, resources, and expertise focused on better design, deci
-
sions, tests, and earlier integration.
Like other federal agencies, the FAA faces challenges in implement
-ing information technology systems and in recruiting and retaining the 

workforce needed for designing, maintaining, and enhancing systems 

such as NextGen. In particular, the FAA is ill-equipped to perform as a 

systems integrator. If the FAA is to succeed in both the medium and long 

term, it will require enhancements to its technical expertise. Architecture 

and systems engineering, which are needed for successful integration 

of capabilities and platforms into a coherent NAS system, have been 

undervalued. Program management and systems engineering process 

are important, but are not a substitute for talent that can effectively guide 

the design and evolution of NextGen. Even if the FAA were not acting as 

systems integrator, it would still need to be a ﬁsmart customerﬂŠit needs 

expertise that will enable it to effectively structure and manage its sup
-plier relationships. 
Today, the FAA relies greatly on its vendors and other external talent. 
For architectural insight and expertise internally, it depends on a very 

small number of individuals and lacks the critical mass that character
-izes a vibrant and effective technical community. Digital communications 

will take on increasing importance as the NAS is modernized, so the 

FAA will need additional technical expertise in designing modern digital 

networks and protocols. Cybersecurity is a challenge facing all who use 

modern computing and communications technology, and the potential 

threats and risks are magni˜ed for critical infrastructure like the NAS. 

The FAA needs strong cybersecurity expertise in designing, implement
-ing, integrating, and operating NextGen systems. Cybersecurity requires 

a system-wide approach and cannot be addressed piecemeal by each 

contractor (or program) separately. 
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 

should nurture workforce talent in the areas of systems engineer
-ing, architecture, systems integration, digital communications, and 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 7cybersecurity. Signi˜cant effort will be required to attract, develop, 
and retain this talent, given the high demand outside the FAA.
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) should 
initiate, grow, and engage a capable architecture 
 communityŠleaders 
and peers within and outside the FAAŠwho will expand the breadth 
and depth of expertise that is steering architectural changes.
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration should 
conduct a small number of experiments among its system integra
-tion partners to prototype candidate solutions for establishing and 

managing a vibrant architectural community. 
Recommendation: Should the Federal Aviation Administration 
continue to act as the systems integrator of Next 
Generation Air 
Transportation System programs, it should maintain architectural 

leadership and not delegate architecture de˜nition and control to 

contractors.
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration should 
use an architecture leadership community and an effective gover
-nance approach to assure a proper balance between documents and 

artifacts and to provide high-level guidance and a capability that 

(1) enables effective management and communication of dependen
-
cies, (2) provides ˚exibility and evolvability to ensure accommoda
-tion of future needs, and (3) communicates changing circumstances 

in order to align expectations. 
OPERATIONS
 AND
 M
AINTENANCE
A common fallacy with software-intensive systems is that they can 
be built, deployed, and then operated with relatively little ﬁmaintenanceﬂ 

and modernization effort. The surprise, for those unfamiliar with such 

systems, is that operations and maintenance will very often include sub
-stantial modernization effort. This effort is needed both in response to 

new requirements and also in response to rapid growth and change in 

technological infrastructure. This is true for NextGen and the NAS, and 

this fact has implications for how the FAA should explain its needs to 

Congress and its overseers. Although Congress has been supportive of 

FAA efforts, in the committee™s view, there is a speci˜c need for sup
-
port of ongoing maintenance and modernization (upgrades), including 

refreshing and modernizing both the hardware and software so as to 

provide reliable, cost-effective operation. A typical pattern in government 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
is that funds are allocated for speci˜c (new) programs or projects without 
suf˜cient allocation for out-year maintenance or for maintenance and 

refresh of existing (and still important) programs. Modernizing software 

is just as important to safety and operational ef˜ciency as modernizing 

hardware. 
Finding: As a large-scale, software-intensive system, Next
Gen and 
the NAS will bene˜t if ongoing maintenance of the NAS and its 

hardware and software systems are supportedŠin addition to pro
-grammatic investments; such an approach will make the most of 

past and ongoing investments.
MANA
GIN
G R
IS
KThe risks and uncertainties in NextGen are inherently dif˜cult to 
quantify. However, quantifying risks and value offers means for better 

planning and management. The challenge for complex systems such as 

NextGen is not how to eliminate risks but rather how to manage them 

successfully. In all engineering projects, and particularly software engi
-neering projects, this usually means understanding the consequences 

of risky decisions as early in the life cycle as possible, lest the costs of 

unwinding previous bad decisions become prohibitive, and the archi
-tecture becomes a source of change friction that burdens ef˜ciency of 

execution. By contrast, an effective architecture can be a basis for risk 

assessment and mitigation and can be used as a tool to support decision 

making and the recording of decisions. 
NextGen today embodies a set of (often implicit) decisions to not 
dramatically change a wide range of current operations. Those decisions, 

along with an analysis of their implications, are not explicit in the tacit 

architecture. But a decision to not change carries heavy implications for 

the realization of any gains that would require such changes. To cope 

well with uncertainty and risk, it is important to explicitly state value 

attributes (with scales), to develop multiple alternative architectures, and 

to have evaluation models that compare those alternatives to the value 

attributes. The committee was struck by the lack of alternatives analysis 

in NextGen. Nor is there a well-speci˜ed overview of what is and is not 

known about the value of various proposed levels of change (e.g., partial 

deployment of certain technologies or features).
Schedule risks in NextGen have multiple sources, including bud
-get, approval, certi˜cation, and procedure design. With the exception of 

resourcing and budgets, architecture can help mitigate these. However, a 

poorly developed system architecture makes it a challenge to determine 

how well the overall system will address system requirements (e.g., for 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 9security and robustness), causing risks of many kinds, including schedule 
risks. The risks to NextGen are not clearly articulated or quanti˜ed in 

order of importance, making it dif˜cult to make sound decisions about 

how to prioritize efforts and allocate resources.
 Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration should use 

an architecture leadership community and a system architecture, 

with input from specialists in probability and statistics, as key 

tools in managing and mitigating risks and in assessing new value 

opportunities.
COPIN
G 
WITH
 C
HAN
GE The national airspace is a critical infrastructure for the United States. 
In concert with revising the architectural approach for NextGen, plans 

to cope with unanticipated change are needed. Indeed, any architectures 

developed must themselves re˚ect planning for resilience. Cybersecurity, 

safety, and unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) illustrate why planning 

for resilience in NextGen and in the NextGen system architecture is so 

important. UAS were not explicitly anticipated in NextGen. And cyber
-security by its very nature demands constant adaptation to a dynamic 

threat environment. 
NextGen is no exception to modern cybersecurity risks and threats; 
indeed, the safety of life implications and the vital economic importance 

of air travel make the security of NextGen and the NAS critically impor
-tant. As various programs and components of the national airspace are 

modernized, the security implications of the changes will need to be 

taken into account. The criticality of cybersecurity for NextGen increases 

as more services rely on digital technologies, networked communica
-
tions, and commercial-off-the-shelf software. Cybersecurity challenges 

extend from major software platforms into the speci˜cation and design 

of embedded (avionics) equipment that connects directly to the NAS. 

Although there will always be risk, the lack of appropriate architectural 

approaches to security and safety that allow for reasoning about risks, and 

uncertainty only increase the likelihood that risks of unknown magnitude 

can remain embedded in the NAS.
The committee™s impression from brie˜ngs and discussion with the 
FAA is that cybersecurity, although acknowledged as an issue with some 

efforts under way to address it, has not been fully integrated into the 

 agency™s thinking, planning, and efforts with respect to NextGen and 
the NAS generally. In particular, as new technologies and procedures 

are rolled out, there will inevitably be new vulnerabilities. Moreover, 

changes in the way existing, long-stable technologies are used may intro
-A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
duce new security issues. So threat analyses both on existing systems, 
with any expected changes, and on new components are needed. Cyber
-security will need to be an important and integral part of safety activities 

and is an ongoing operational matter (not only a question of design and 

architecture). 
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 

should incorporate cybersecurity as a systems characteristic at all 

levels of the architecture and design. The FAA should begin by 

developing a threat model followed by an appropriate set of archi
-tectural and design concepts that will mitigate the associated risks, 

support resilience in the face of attack or compromise, and allow 

for dynamic evolution to meet a changing threat environment. The 

FAA should inculcate a cybersecurity mindset complementary to 

its well-established safety mindset throughout the organization, its 

contractors, and leadership. 
UAS are already in use as hobbyist craft, and the FAA estimates that 
thousands of small UAS could be active over the next 5 years. Several 
NextGen technologies are essential to the safe integration of UAS: the 

NAS voice system, which will allow UAS pilots to communicate with 

air traf˜c control over ground-to-ground communication networks; Data 

Communications (Data Comm), which will support the transmission of 

digital messages to the ˚ight crew; and System Wide Information Man
-agement (SWIM), which will support more timely and improved informa
-
tion access to all users of the NAS.
However, NextGen planning and architecture did not explicitly antici
-pate the introduction of UAS and thus does not readily lend itself to 

incorporating these new types of aircraft that will place new demands on 

the system. The challenge of integrating UAS into the national airspace 

illustrates the challenges of accommodating changing requirements within 

the current approach to managing architectural and system evolution. The 

expected integration of UAS into the NAS will present new safety issues 

stemming from increased reliance on data links, limited operator sensory 

and environmental cues, and so on. An insuf˜ciently developed system 

architecture is one of several obstacles to introducing UAS into the NAS. 

The integration of UAS is an example of a rapidly emerging requirement 

that could provoke disruptive changes to both technology and to roles and 

responsibilities. 
Per its charge, the committee™s focus has been on architecture, espe
-cially system architecture. The committee urges the FAA to use UAS as 

a use case for developing a better approach to system architecture (and 

associated technical and procedural designs). One measure of the quality 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 11of the NAS system architecture is (and will be) its ˚exibility in addressing 
UAS operations as they unfold, recognizing that UAS requirements and 

capabilities are likely to change a great deal as these technologies mature. 
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and 

its architecture leadership community should look for and apply 

lessons from the challenge of integrating unmanned aircraft systems 

(UAS) into the National Airspace System (NAS) as it develops an 
effective system architecture. The FAA and its architecture leader
-ship community should incorporate measures in the NAS system 

architecture to address 
UAS integration.
INCORPORATIN
G HU
MAN
 F
ACTORS
The medium-term plans for the NAS will not fundamentally change 
the roles and activities of pilots and controllers. However, even with 

modest changes, misunderstandings and errors can result. Numerous 

constraints challenge the ability of the FAA to smoothly and effectively 

make changes to its systems and procedures. Furthermore, human factors 

for crew and controllers alike are an important ingredient in successful 

changes. Procedures and airspace redesign go hand-in-hand with tech
-nical changes and adjustments and are often just as complicatedŠand 

thus a bottleneck to realizing expected bene˜ts of new technologies 

and approaches.
 Human factors need to be incorporated in design, technical, engineer
-ing, and architectural discussions as early as possible, not after the design 

is complete (e.g., as a check on the design). This is both an organizational 

challenge for the FAAŠas it may not have suf˜cient human factors per
-sonnel to integrate contractors™ work with system designŠas well as a 

technical and engineering challengeŠdetermining how requirements and 

constraints ˚ow to early stage technical requirements, so that human fac
-tors perspectives can contribute to early design work. When human  factors 
are not included at the outset, products and services need to be modi˜ed 

subsequently to meet the human factors requirements, which delays the 

release of products and services and signi˜cantly increases cost. 
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 

should recognize and incorporate in early design phases the human 
factors and procedural and airspace implications of stated goals and 

associated technical changes. In addition, the FAA should ensure 

that a human factors specialist, separate from the research and cer
-ti˜cation groups, has sign-off authority within the Next 
Generation 

Air Transportation System approval process.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
ASSESSIN
G C
OSTS
 AND
 B
ENEFITS
As part of its charge, the committee also explored anticipated costs 
and bene˜ts to NextGen and their implications. The FAA has put forward 
a business case for NextGen,
7 and the committee held several discussions 
with FAA staff as well to understand the analysis used to develop the 

costs and bene˜ts of implementing NextGen. 
NextGen plans require a substantial investment, both by the taxpayer 
via the FAA for infrastructure, and by carriers and aircraft owners for 

equipage and training. At best, bene˜tsŠhowever quanti˜edŠto carriers 

will lag deployment costs; and bene˜ts that accrue to the carriers will be 

less than the projected social bene˜ts (quanti˜ed in the form of reduced 

delays to passengers, as is standard for Department of Transportation 

analyses of this sort) to the system as a whole. Many of the bene˜ts of 

NextGen, such as those enabled by increased automatic communication 

between aircraft, cannot be meaningfully realized unless air carriers each 

equip their ˚eets with the requisite technology and, indeed, depend on 

all or nearly all aircraft being so equipped. The carriers will also incur 

training costs, both for new equipage and for new procedures that use old 

equipage. For airlines to gain signi˜cant bene˜t, NextGen capabilities will 

need to be deployed at suf˜cient scale. Given the delay in implementing 

new procedures and technologies at major airports, airlines may not see 

bene˜ts for some time. The costs and bene˜ts analysis presented to the 

committee was sensible; however, that mismatch presents an ongoing 

challenge for the FAA and Congress. Current short- and medium-term 

goals for NextGen emphasize new technologies to improve and enhance 

existing capabilities. Although modernization efforts are important and 

can bring signi˜cant bene˜ts, it remains a challenge to incentivize uptake 

(e.g., equipage, training, or changes in procedures) absent clear bene˜ts.
 Recommendation: Preceding any further equipage mandate, the 

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) should provide an estimated 

statement of costs and bene˜ts that is mutually reviewed and agreed 

upon with the relevant stakeholders. It should be based on a mature 

and stable technical speci˜cation and a committed timeline for FAA 

deliverables and investment (for procedure and airspace design, 
infrastructure deployment, training, and so on). On this basis, 

industry could responsibly invest as required, given a reasonable 

expected return.
7 
Federal Aviation Administration, 
The Business Case for the Next Generation Air Transporta
-tion System: FY 2013
, Washington, D.C., 2013.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
In 2003, an effort to transform the U.S. air transportation system 
was announced and the Joint Planning and Development Of˜ce (JPDO) was 
established by Congress to develop the Next Generation Air Transportation 

System (NextGen).
1 NextGen refers to a set of programs and initiatives to 
be coordinated into an evolving overall air transportation system aimed 

at a continuing transformation of the National Airspace System (NAS).
2 NextGen aims to overhaul the U.S. air transportation system through a 

combination of procedural and technological improvements. It is intended 

to make use of extant capabilities along with newer enabling technologies 

such as precision satellite navigation systems and a digital communications 

infrastructure to share real-time information. Effective use of these tools 

could make it possible to shorten routes, navigate better around weather, 

save time and fuel, reduce delays, increase capacity at airports not already 

capacity-limited by physical infrastructure, and improve capabilities for 

monitoring and managing of aircraft. The Federal Aviation Administration 
1 The Joint Planning and Development Of˜ce (JPDO) was a multi-agency initiative created 
to oversee planning and coordination for NextGen. In 2014, funding for the JPDO was elimi
-nated, and the FAA created a new Interagency Planning Of˜ce to replace it. See reporting 

on a statement FAA provided to AIN at B. Carey, ﬁFAA™s New ‚Interagency Planning Of˜ce™ 

Replaces JPDO,ﬂ 
AIN Online
, May 27, 2014, http://www.ainonline.com/aviation-news/
air-transport/2014-05-27/faas-new-interagency-planning-of˜ce-replaces-jpdo. 
2 
NextGen and other programs or initiatives of similar scale are sometimes referred to 
as ﬁsystems of systems.ﬂ Any system of systems is itself a system, and the committee has 

chosen in this report to use the term ﬁsystemﬂ for simplicity. 
1Recognize Constraints and 
Align Expectations
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
(FAA), working along with a wide range of stakeholders, is currently work
-ing toward both near-term and midterm capabilities.
3 Section 212 of the Federal Aviation Administration Modernization 
and Reform Act of 2012, Public Law 112-95 (see Box 1.1), calls for an exam
-
ination by the National Research Council (NRC) of NextGen™s enterprise 

software development approach and safety and human factors design. To 

respond to this request, the NRC formed the Committee to Review the 

Enterprise Architecture, Software Development Approach, and Safety and 

Human Factor Design of the Next Generation Air Transportation System 

in 2012 to conduct this study. In this ˜nal report, the committee provides 

its analysis and recommendations to the FAA with a particular focus on 

the importance of system architecture and its implications. 
SCOPE
 OF
 R
EPORT
The committee was asked to address a broad suite of topics related to 
NextGen. The material in this chapter provides context and background 

on NextGen and provides some of the committee™s observations about 

how NextGen has, and has not, developed over time. Drawing on the 

technical expertise and experience of its members, the committee chose to 

use system architecture as an organizing principle through which to assess 

the input it received, to organize its recommendations, and to address 

its statement of task (Box 1.2). Chapter 2 explains this in detail. Point 1 of 

the statement of task asks the committee to consider a variety of factors 

with respect to transitioning to the future system envisioned by the JPDO. 

As described, that vision has been overtaken by subsequent events that 

took place before the committee ˜rst convened. 
Accordingly, the committee discusses those factors as they relate to 
NextGen currently. Safety issues are discussed in Chapter 3, and human 

factors are discussed in Chapter 4. Point 2 of the statement of task asks 

the committee to consider risk, bene˜ts, and software development. These 

topics are addressed in Chapter 4. Point 3 of the statement of task asks the 

committee to consider risks of automation and apply lessons from other 

entities. As noted above, NextGen as currently planned will not have 

signi˜cant amounts of new automation (as was envisioned by the early 

JPDO). Chapters 2, 3, and 4 offer the committee™s recommendations to the 

FAA on how to better manage planning and risk based on the committee 

members™ experiences in a variety of other domains. 
3 More information about NextGen can be found in the NextGen Implementation Plan, 
on the Federal Aviation Administration™s (FAA™s) website at http://www.faa.gov/nextgen/
library/.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOGNIZE CONSTRAINTS AND ALIGN EXPECTATIONS
 15BOX 1.1
 Section 212 of the FAA Modernization 
and Reform Act of 2012, Public Law 112-95
SEC. 212. EXPERT REVIEW OF ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE FOR NEXTGEN. 
(a) REVIEW.ŠThe Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall enter 
into an arrangement with the National Research Council to review the enterprise 

architecture for the NextGen. 
(b) CONTENTS.ŠAt a minimum, the review to be conducted under subsection 
(a) shallŠ (1) highlight the technical activities, including human-system design, organizational 
design, and other safety and human factor aspects of the system, that will be 

necessary to successfully transition current and planned modernization programs 

to the future system envisioned by the Joint Planning and Development Of˜ce of 

the Administration; 

(2) assess technical, cost, and schedule risk for the software development that will 

be necessary to achieve the expected bene˜ts from a highly automated air traf˜c 

management system and the implications for ongoing modernization projects; 

and 
(3) determine how risks with automation efforts for the NextGen can be mitigated 

based on the experiences of other public or private entities in developing complex, 

software-intensive systems. 
(c) REPORT.ŠNot later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the 
Administrator shall submit to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure 

of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and 

Transportation of the Senate a report containing the results of the review con
-
ducted pursuant to subsection (a).Questions that are relevant to all of these issues concern how the 
FAA should be organized, what its funding structure should be, and 
what governance structure is most appropriate for the agency as a whole. 

The committee believes there is much to be learned from exploring these 

questions, and they do bear signi˜cantly on planning and architecture 

for NextGen. However, that exploration was beyond the scope of this 

committee™s tasking, and thus the report does not address these questions 

directly.
During the course of this study, there were numerous other efforts 
under way related to NextGen planning. The Department of Transporta
-tion Inspector General issued a report urging sustained FAA leadership 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
BOX 1.2
 Statement of Task
As stipulated in Sec. 212 of the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012, 
PL 112-95, a National Research Council study would review the enterprise archi
-tecture, software development approach, and safety and human factor design 

aspects of the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen). An ad hoc 

committee will conduct a study and prepare a report that will (1) highlight the 

technical activities, including human-system design and testing, organizational 

design, and other safety and human factor aspects of the system, that will be 

necessary to successfully transition current and planned modernization programs 

to the future system envisioned by the Joint Planning and Development Of˜ce of 

the Administration and obtain necessary certi˜cations and operational approval; 

(2) assess technical, cost, and schedule risk for the software development that will 

be necessary to achieve the expected bene˜ts from a highly automated air traf˜c 

management system and the implications for ongoing modernization projects; and 

(3) determine how risks with automation efforts for the NextGen can be mitigated 

based on the experiences of other public or private entities in developing complex, 

software-intensive systems, particularly for life-critical, real-time operational sys
-
tems, and including past aviation system development programs. The committee 

will issue a brief interim report within 12 months providing an initial assessment 

focusing on software development challenges and a ˜nal report within 18 months 

providing a full assessment of the issues listed above.
and action to address NextGen delays.
4 The Government Accountability 
Of˜ce also urged substantial leadership commitment and the empower
-ing of leaders to make critical decisions.
5 MITRE™s Center for Advanced 
Aviation DevelopmentŠFAA™s federally funded research and develop
-ment centerŠrecently recommended six strategic focus areas to move 
forward with NextGen, the ˜rst of which emphasized the importance of 

transformational and foundational infrastructure.
6 The committee™s ˜nal 
report here should be seen as complementary to these, emphasizing the 
4 
Department of Transportation, 
Addressing Underlying Causes for NextGen Delays Will 
Require Sustained FAA Leadership and Action
, Of˜ce of Inspector General Audit Report 
 AV-2014-031, February, 25, 2014, https://www.oig.dot.gov/library-item/28823.
5 
Government Accountability Of˜ce, ﬁFAA Reauthorization Act: Progress and Challenges 
Implementing Various Provisions of the 2012 Act: Statement of Gerald L. Dillingham, PhD, 
Director, Physical Infrastructure,ﬂ Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Aviation, Com
-mittee on Transportation and Infrastructure, U.S. House of Representatives, GAO-14-285T, 

February 5, 2014, http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/660683.pdf.
6 
MITRE Corporation, 
NextGen Independent Assessment and Recommendations, 
MP 140440, 
October 2014, http://www.faa.gov/nextgen/media/MITRE_NextGen_Independent_
 Assessment_and_Recommendations.pdf.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOGNIZE CONSTRAINTS AND ALIGN EXPECTATIONS
 17importance of system architecture and architectural leadership and draw
-ing connections between architectural choices and broader outcomes. 
WHAT
 IS
 N
EXTGEN
ŠA
LI
GNIN
G EX
PECTATIONS
Although technological and procedural improvements have been 
introduced into the NAS over the years to increase capacity, reduce delays, 

and improve safety, elements of the NAS rely on outdated technology. The 

system as a whole has not been signi˜cantly changed to take advantage 

of available information and communications technologies that could 

engender needed improvements in the security, robustness, and evolv
-ability of the NAS and enable major improvements in how the airspace 

can be organized and managed. 
There are numerous complex constraints on the design and operation 
of the NAS to which the FAA and its stakeholders are subject. The FAA 

is well aware of these constraintsŠsome of which affect development 

of systems and some of which affect potential bene˜ts and outcomes. 

Furthermore, the NAS exists in a complex political, organizational, and 

economic milieu that imposes its own constraints and demands as well. 

For example, few airports have the option to build additional runways; 

aircraft capacity decisions are solely in the hands of the airlines and man
-ufacturers; and alternative competitive intercity transportation options, 

such as high speed rail or other ground transportation means, do not exist 

in most major citiesŠall of which continue to place increased pressure on 

Metroplex airports.
7 In the committee™s view, it is helpful to keep these 
often challenging constraints, which include legacy commitments already 

made, in mind when planning, assessing, or evaluating NextGen efforts.
Throughout the committee™s work, it became clear that ﬁNextGenﬂ 
means different things to different people, ranging from a wide-ranging 

transformational vision to a much more concrete set of phased incremen
-
tal changes to various parts of the NAS. With so many stakeholders and 

so many moving parts, different understandings of ﬁwhat is NextGenﬂ 

have arisen. The committee has come to a view of what NextGen is 

(and is not), and that view is described brie˚y below for the purposes 

of this report. Any particular de˜nition is less important, however, than 

ensuring that all stakeholders understand each other™s expectations and 
7 
Metroplex
 refers to ﬁa system of airports in close proximity and their shared airspace that 
serve one or more major cities. A metroplex has at least one, but often two or more major 
commercial airports.ﬂ They include the following: Atlanta, Boston, Charlotte, 
 Chicago, 
Cleveland, Washington, D.C., Denver, Detroit, Houston, Las Vegas Valley, Memphis, 

 Minneapolis-St. Paul, New York/Philadelphia, North Texas, Northern California, Orlando, 
 Phoenix, Seattle, South Florida, Southern California, and Tampa. See FAA, ﬁMetroplexes,ﬂ 
last modi˜ed August 26, 2014, http://www.faa.gov/Nextgen/snapshots/metroplexes/. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
anticipated outcomes and that capabilities, plans, and requirements are 
aligned well. 
The vision and concept of operation for NextGen was set forth in doc
-uments from JPDO. In particular, a 2004 Concept of Operations described 

at a very high level a desired end state for the NAS, and that description 

was developed in more detail in later versions.
8 Brie˜ngs and documents 
provided to the committee have indicated the capabilities expected to be 

deployed in the ﬁmedium termﬂ (a time frame de˜ned by the FAA as ﬁby 

2018ﬂ). These plans call for the execution of several programs that provide 

new or replacement technology.
For example, Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (
 ADS-B) 
provides a new, Global Positioning System (GPS)-based surveillance capa
-bility complementing and partially replacing existing surveillance radars.
9 En Route Automation Modernization (ERAM) replaces the En Route Host 

computer system with new display, communications, and planning tools 

for air traf˜c controllers. An enhanced data communications system (Data 

Comm) will allow for incremental replacement of data-intensive com
-
munications between air traf˜c control and the ˚ight crew with digital 

communications (such as transmitting ˚ight plans to aircraft). The System 

Wide Information Management (SWIM) system enables the sharing of 

real-time digital information between different systems and stakeholders, 

such as carriers, airports, aircraft maintenance operators, and so on. Other 

programs relating to weather support services, air traf˜c management, and 

voice systems are also under way to support NextGen goals. 
The existing documents and decisions specify solutions and technol
-ogy but not operations. A standard good practice is that operations should 

be carefully de˜ned independent of technological implementation. This is 

particularly important where value improvement comes from operational 

changes. New technologies under consideration imply changed opera
-tions to realize large value, but the FAA has not addressed this through 

a detailed operational analysis. Standard practice is that the ﬁowningﬂ 

organization should play close attention to the operational description 
8 
See Chapter 4 of JPDO, 
Next Generation Air Transportation System Integrated Plan
, 2004, 
http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a605269.pdf; JPDO, 
Making the NextGen Vision a 
Reality: 2006 Progress Report to the Next Generation Air Transportation System Integrated Plan
, 2006, http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a502356.pdf; and JPDO, Version 2.0, 2007, 

http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a496134.pdf; JPDO Concept of Operations for 

the Next Generation Air Transportation System Draft 3 Version 1.1a, December 6, 2006; 

FAA NextGen Mid-Term Concept of Operations for the National Airspace System, Version 

2.0, April 30, 2010. 
9 
Automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast (ADS-B) is an aircraft tracking technology 
that relies on the global positioning system (GPS) and a datalink to broadcast (ADS-B Out) 

and receive (ADS-B In) data.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOGNIZE CONSTRAINTS AND ALIGN EXPECTATIONS
 19and should ﬁownﬂ the operational description, even where technology 
choices may be deferred to contractors. This topic is discussed further in 

Chapter 2. 
An additional challenge is that considerable confusion on the part of 
non-FAA observers and stakeholders has resulted from ambiguous use 

of the NextGen label. At times, it has been used to mean the full, original 

JPDO vision; at other times, as a collective name for all the activities of the 
NextGen of˜ce, including basic modernization and replacement of exist
-ing facilities; and on occasion as a shorthand for ﬁlater than 2020.ﬂ In the 

committee™s view, NextGen, as currently instantiated, is a set of programs 

to implement a suite of incremental changes to the NAS. Although some 

technologies and/or systems will be new, in most cases, current plans 

call for them to be used in a way nearly identical to existing capabilities. 

NextGen™s implementation plan employs a strategy that can be described 

as: ﬁdesign a little, build a little, test a little, deploy a little.ﬂ This aspect of 

the plan is understandable and re˚ects lessons learned from past efforts
10
 as well as an industry-wide best practice of incremental change and 

development. 
An important part of NextGen is addressing urgent requirements to 
replace aging equipment. Such modernization is essential and important, 

as the committee noted in its interim report.
11 NextGen also includes 
efforts to further deploy performance-based navigation, to redesign cer
-tain aspects of the airspace (such as rules and procedures and altitudes 

and headings), and to equip aircraft with technology (such as ADS-B) 

that can form the basis for future capabilities. NextGen has also come to 

encompass an additional broad range of activities expressed in various 

implementation plans, the NAS enterprise architecture, roadmaps, and 

calls for research, experimentation, and further incremental programs. 

Replacing or upgrading systems while the whole system must continu
-ously and safely operate is an intricate undertaking, a process that the 

FAA seems to have mastered. These are complex systems that are under
-going constant change as aging equipment is replaced, as software is 

altered to improve resilience, and as operational requirements change. 

The successful operation of such systems requires ongoing alteration 
10 
Such as the FAA™s Advanced Automation SystemŠa failed modernization effort begun 
in the 1980s that did not recognize the complexity associated with making major changes 
to software intensive national-scale systems. That effort resulted in signi˜cant delays and 

cost overruns, due in part to unrealistically ambitious goals without complete stakeholder 

agreement. 
11 
National Research Council (NRC), 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air 
Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human Factors
, The National 

Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2014. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
and improvement, not just the occasional repair of faulty equipment and 
software.
NextGen is not, however, broadly transformational. That is, it does 
not set out a series of planned steps toward a fundamentally transformed 

end-state (such as free ˚ight, decommissioning surveillance radar sta
-tions, automating air traf˜c control processes with a completely digital 

information infrastructure, or shifting authority from ground to air). And 

thus it is not an implementation of the early JPDO vision, which encom
-
passed those ideas.
12
 The executive order establishing the JPDO
 was 
entitled ﬁTransformation of the National Air Transportation System,ﬂ
13
 and early vision documents referred to ambitious goals such as inte
-
grated data streams for situational awareness in seamless multi-agency 

global operations, scalability, the use of emerging space-based commu
-nications and surveillance technologies.
14
 Not all parts of original JPDO 
vision will be achieved in the foreseeable future. This was true even at 

the outset of NextGen and is understandable, given changes over time.
15
 However, even the limited vision embraced at the start of NextGen has 

been reduced over time, while increasingly important challenges have 

not received adequate attention.
16
 Many of the speci˜c goals described 
in early JPDO discussions, such as free ˚ight or air traf˜c control based 

on prede˜ned 4-D ˚ight trajectories, to enable global optimization of the 

airspace will not come to fruition in the foreseeable future. In fact, many 

of them will require signi˜cant research and experimentation before it can 

be known whether and in what form they are feasible. Unfortunately, over 

the course of the committee™s work, it was clear that some stakeholders 

were still anticipating these capabilities from NextGen. Such goals await 

the now-distant full deployment of technical capabilities, the integration 

of these capabilities to support higher levels of automation and more 

distributed and autonomous operation, full equipage of virtually all air
-craft with new components, and widespread revisions to procedures. 

More importantly, however, they will await the organizational will to 
12 
Expressed in JPDO™s ﬁConcept of Operations for the Next Generation Air Transportation 
System,ﬂ Version 3.2, 2011, http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a535795.pdf. See also 
Appendix B of the 2005 NRC report 
Technology Pathways: Assessing the Integrated Plan for a 
Next Generation Air Transportation System
 (The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.) 
for an overview of JPDO objectives.
13 
White House, ﬁTransformation of the National Air Transportation System,ﬂ Executive 
Order, released November 18, 2008, http://georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/

releases/2008/11/20081118.html.
14 
See Appendix B of the 2005 NRC report 
Technology Pathways
 for an overview of JPDO 
objectives. 
15 
For instance, the substantial future demand growth anticipated in early planning did 
not materialize. 
16 
For instance, cybersecurity was not a signi˜cant concern in early JPDO planning. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOGNIZE CONSTRAINTS AND ALIGN EXPECTATIONS
 21modify the human roles and responsibilities of the participants in the 
NAS in order to meaningfully exploit the possibilities offered by these 

technologies. 
A number of constraints may have plausibly contributed to the scal
-ing back of NextGen ambitions, at least for the foreseeable future. These 

include the following:

Recognition that NextGen cannot fully remediate key NAS capacity lim
-its. 
Congestion in the NAS tends to be localized to certain regions, with 
more than one-half of activity in the approximately 20 so-called Metro
-plex sites, where the number of runways is a fundamental constraint on 

NAS throughput. Although there are opportunities to increase runway 

ef˜ciency, such as some reduced separation, more parallel approaches, 

and so on, the realizable bene˜ts of such are not yet clear. For example, 

wake vortex separation requirements may limit separation reduction, and 

local community resistance to noise and night ˚ights may limit the intro
-duction of new approach routes or extended hours that would increase 

the capacity of existing runways. In addition, new runways would be 

required to meet some capacity projections in certain locations.
17
 
Uncertainty about future demand growth. 
NAS capacity needs are 
hard to predict. Business dynamics, passenger demand and fuel costs 

are changing dramatically. The economic cycle in the 2000s weakened 

the capacity case for making wholesale changes in the NAS. 

Impediments to the introduction of more automation, more distrib
-uted control, and signi˜cant changes to procedures. 
Factors such as resis
-
tance (whether direct or due to cultural inertia) to signi˜cantly altering 

the nature of controller work, a conservative safety culture that makes 

changes to procedures slow and expensive, and limited resources and 

capacity to implement widespread changes to procedures have stalled 

efforts to make the fundamental changes to the concept of operations that 

the JPDO envisioned. It is dif˜cult to distinguish speci˜cally how much 

each of these factors contributes, but it will be critical to address these 

organizational and cultural factors if full advantage is to be taken of new 

technological possibilities.
18
 17
 See, for example, Transportation Research Board, 
Airport Cooperative Research Program: 
Evaluating Air˜eld Capacity,
 2012, http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/acrp/acrp_rpt_079.
pdf, and FAA, 
FACT3: Airport Capacity Needs in the National Airspace System
, 2015, http://
www.faa.gov/airports/planning_capacity/media/FACT3-Airport-Capacity-Needs-in-the-

NAS.pdf.
18 
The 2014 NRC report 
Autonomy Research for Civil Aviation: Toward a New Era of Flight
 (The 
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.) explores increasingly autonomous systems 

and their implications for civil aviation.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
In short, NextGen will not provide a means to, say, double air traf˜c 
capacity by 2025,
19
 nor does it offer a way to address increasingly urgent 
requirements for strengthened security, greater robustness, and evolv
-ability to meet new challenges, such as addressing projected unmanned 
aircraft systems (UAS) traf˜c. NextGen is also not currently expected to 

signi˜cantly change roles in place today (e.g., giving pilots more author
-ity). While many readers of this report will ˜nd these assertions obvi
-ously true, during its investigations, the committee heard references 

to and vestiges of these ambitious goals. It is appropriate for NextGen 

goals and aims to have changed over time, and in some cases there were 

ambitions informally af˜liated with NextGen that were not actually ever 

part of the NextGen effort. That being the case, it seems appropriate 

for the FAA, working with stakeholders, to clearly circumscribe these 

goals and ambitions and to clearly articulate the program™s actual cur
-rent goals and ambitions.
With only modest changes to the operation of the NAS through 
2018, NextGen programs are better described as a technology-refresh 

effort rather than the transformational activity envisioned by JPDO. This 

understanding does not undermine the critical importance of NextGen, 

because its programs will replace and modernize critical components of 

the NAS that would otherwise become increasingly dif˜cult and expen
-sive to maintain as a result of age. Thus the bulk of the currently pursued 

programs labeled as ﬁNextGenﬂ are properly thought of as a necessary 

and inevitable upgrade to existing technology, supporting essentially 

unmodi˜ed operating practices. Nevertheless, there are things that can be 

done now to help ease the path toward eventual signi˜cant change. For 

instance, a few of the NextGen programs introduce technologies that, if 

properly embraced by a future-oriented system architecture, could form 

the basis for transformation and pave the way toward more ambitious 

goals. New technologies such as ADS-B and digital communication are 

important digital infrastructure for future enhancements, but their poten
-tial is masked by other impediments, such as those cited above. 
The committee™s conclusion that NextGen today is primarily an incre
-mental modernization effort should not suggest that NextGen, therefore, 

has an obvious completed state. Given the continuing rapid pace of tech
-nological evolution and ongoing changes in what is demanded of the NAS 

(see Chapter 4 for a discussion of UAS and cybersecurity as examples), 
19 
Early planning documents used to motivate NextGen noted that some models projected 
that the number of passengers could more than double by 2025 (see, for example, Gisele 
Mohler, FAA, ﬁAirport Capacity Planning and NextGen,ﬂ presentation to the Eastern Region 

Airport Conference, March 2008, http://www.faa.gov/airports/eastern/airports_news_

events/hershey/media_08/Mohler-Eastern%20Region%20Arpt%20Conf08%20-GM.pdf ). 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOGNIZE CONSTRAINTS AND ALIGN EXPECTATIONS
 23the NextGen effort is properly seen as an ongoing process, punctuated 
by particular efforts focused on particular capabilities. Such an effort will 

require an appropriate systems architecture (discussed in Chapter 2) and 

a risk-managed development process (discussed in Chapter 4).
Much has changed even in the course of the committee™s work, includ
-ing the appointment of a new assistant administrator for NextGen. In a 

recent report to Congress, the FAA has presented a more realistic indica
-tion of what NextGen is relative to what it was envisioned (i.e., how far 

it has been scaled back).
20
 The committee urges that a clear realignment 
of expectations for all parties take place. Revised expectations should not 

only concern what the future state of the NAS will be, but also re˚ect 

the kind of evolvability that needs to be built into the system so that 

later technologies (which may either come along or be modi˜cations of 

planned technologies), new requirements, and changing market condi
-tions can be exploited. Resetting expectations with a clear baseline will 

provide a useful foundation on which to build.
Finding: Stakeholder expectations for Next
Gen have become mis
-aligned with current planning as Next
Gen, and its constituent pro
-grams have changed over time. This misalignment causes chal-
lenges both for the FAA and for stakeholders.
Finding: Although technological and procedural improvements 
have been introduced into the NAS, elements of the NAS rely on 

outdated technology, and the system has not been signi˜cantly 

changed to take advantage of available information and communi
-cations technologies or to enable major improvements in how the 

airspace can be organized and managed. ﬁNext
Genﬂ has become a 
misnomer.
Finding: Modernization is critical. Although not the transformation 
originally envisioned for Next
Gen, refreshing already extant capa
-bilities with improved and more reliable technology is necessary, 

and support for a major push to modernize is needed. 
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), 
Congress, and all National Airspace System stakeholders should 

reset expectations for the Next 
Generation Air Transportation Sys
-tem. The FAA should explicitly qualify the early transformational 

vision in a way that clearly articulates the new realities. 
20 
FAA, 
NextGen Priorities Joint Implementation Plan: Executive Report to Congress
, October 
2014, http://www.faa.gov/nextgen/media/ng_priorities.pdf. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
A key part of the committee™s initial focus was on the enterprise 
architecture of Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen), 
per its tasking. What soon became clear, however, was that an enterprise 

architecture
1 is a necessary but not suf˜cient component of a successful 
ﬁsystem of systems,ﬂ2 such as NextGen. An 
enterprise architecture
 serves as 
documentation and support of existing systems and business processes. 

A system architecture
 models and de˜nes the structure and behavior of a 
system in a way that supports reasoning about the system and its char
-acteristics. See Box 2.1 for more on the distinction between enterprise 

architecture and system architecture. Accordingly, and consistent with 

other elements of its task, such as software development,
3 the committee 
1 The Of˜ce of Management and Budget (OMB) requires that every federal agency have an 
enterprise architecture designed to ﬁpromote mission success by serving as an authoritative 
reference, and by promoting functional integration and resource optimization with both 

 internal and external service partnersﬂ (OMB, ﬁThe Common Approach to Federal Enter
-prise Architecture,ﬂ Washington, D.C., May 2, 2012, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/
default/˜les/omb/assets/egov_docs/common_approach_to_federal_ea.pdf, p. 5). Gener
-ally, an enterprise architecture (and its associated legislation and treatment by OMB) targets 

traditional ﬁenterpriseﬂ information technology systems and are not focused on systems-of 

systems that include real-time control, operations, and so on. 
2 
For simplicity, the committee will usually use the term ﬁsystem,ﬂ because all systems of 
systems are systems themselves. 
3 
The legislation referencing the committee™s task (P.L. 112-95, Section 212) uses the term 
ﬁsoftware development,ﬂ which is sometimes understood narrowly by laypeople as refer
-ring to such things as coding techniques or software development methodology. Here, 
2Assert Architectural Leadership
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 25explored the question of architecture more broadly, focusing also on the 
system architecture for NextGen.
The committee has drawn on its collective experience and expertise 
(in software engineering, as executives at major government contractors, 

and in the architecture of large-scale systems) to develop its recommenda
-
tions, which are focused around the importance and implications of sys
-tem architecture. It is reasonable to hope that there might be architectures 

in other domains, at companies or in other agencies, that would serve as 

useful exemplars. However, it is dif˜cult to point to speci˜c other archi
-tectures as exemplars without having conducted an in-depth analysis 

of them, an effort that would have gone beyond the time and resources 

available for this study. Moreover, NextGen and the National Airspace 

System (NAS) pose distinctive challenges, and the committee notes that 

pointing to any one speci˜c other example would be a distraction, as it 

would too readily raise the possibility of arguments about whether or not 

the comparison is fair, or about ways in which the analogy or comparison 

does not work. Instead, this chapter focuses on the features and aspects 

needed in a system architecture for a system such as NextGen and points 

out lessons to be learned from industrial approaches to architectural gov
-ernance and the development of architectural leadership. This chapter 

discusses the committee™s assessment of the Federal Aviation Administra
-
tion™s (FAA™s) current architectural approach for NextGen, key elements 

of architectural leadership, and recommendations for change. 
FAA™
S CU
RRENT
 A
PPROACH
 TO
 A
RCHITECT
URE
During the course of its study, the committee heard brie˜ngs and 
studied documents related to the FAA™s NAS enterprise architecture and 

its overall approach to system architecture. This section provides the com
-mittee™s impressions regarding what the FAA is currently doing (at the 

time of the committee™s information gathering) with respect to architec
-ture, and the next sections offer recommendations for how the FAA could 

improve its approach. 
too, the committee has taken a broader view more consistent with contemporary software 
engineering theory and practice that, especially in the case of large-scale complex systems, 

the term encompasses such pre-coding activities as requirements speci˜cation, system ar
-chitecture, and design as well as coding and testing. As with its use of the term system 

architecture, this broad notion of the term software development ensures that the full range 

of software issues critical to NextGen success are considered. NextGen contains a large 

software element, and that software element will have an architecture (and should have its 

own architecture description). Standard practice in software architecture recognizes that the 

ﬁdevelopment view,ﬂ the structure of the code being developed, is just one view. Many of 

the important attributes about which one would want to reason are de˜ned only by moving 

outside the development view to a run-time, data, or other view.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
BOX 2.1
 An Enterprise Architecture Is 
Necessary but Not Sufficient
Every system has an architecture, even when that architecture is not docu
-mented. Just as building architects distinguish architectures (what they have in 
mind) from blueprints (how their ideas are recorded), current practice in architect
-
ing distinguishes architectures from the artifacts, documents, models, or other work 

products expressing those architectures. Mature architecting practices include 

making ﬁtacit architecturesﬂ explicit by means of architecture descriptions. Typically, 

these are distinguished as follows:
1Architecture (of a system): fundamental concepts or properties of a sys
-tem in its environment embodied in its elements, relationships, and in the principles 

of its design and evolution. 
Architecture description
: work product used to express an architecture.
The maturation of architecting as a discipline has had to contend with a variety 
of distinctions, such as distinguishing an enterprise architecture from a systems 

architecture and from a software architecture. Each of these as typically understood 

has strengths and weaknesses:
Enterprise architecture
 has evolved out of the management of large infor
-mation technology (IT) systems. Some versions of enterprise architecture are little 

more than ﬁbookkeepingﬂ of IT assets. Other versions have come to focus on critical 

but ﬁsofterﬂ aspects of enterprises, such as business vision, strategy and goals, 

human resources, and organizations.
System architecture
 is perhaps the most mature of the three in its man
-agement of ﬁnon-functionalﬂ concerns such as reliability, affordability, and safety.
Although the FAA noted in brie˜ngs that the NAS enterprise archi
-tecture is meant to serve multiple purposes (ﬁto align systems and tech
-nologies, identify duplication of effort, address the need for increased 
ef˜ciency and interoperability, provide a common language for linkages 

and communications, and provide a framework for managing change 

by facilitating ef˜cient identi˜cation of changes and implementationsﬂ), 

it was described to the committee as an explanatory set of documents, 

which is insuf˜cient to meet NAS and NextGen needs (see Box 2.1). The 

enterprise architecture ﬁdescribes the enterprise that directly supports 

operational air traf˜c servicesﬂ and ﬁdescribes the enterprise that sup
-ports FAA administrative operations.ﬂ
4 Parts of the enterprise architecture 
4 Remarks from FAA brie˜ng ﬁRole of Enterprise Architecture NextGen: Brie˜ng to 
 National 
Research Councilﬂ to study committee, March 2013.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 27Software architecture
 is perhaps the most mature in its modeling practices 
and associated automated tools.
The current state of enterprise architecture is not adequately mature to man
-age large, distributed, real-time systems where safety-critical concerns predomi
-nate nor is it clear that even the best instantiation of an enterprise architecture 

is intended for such uses. Enterprise architecture has focused on ﬁbookkeepingﬂ 

of enterprise IT assets. For a system such as NextGen, a more comprehensive 

notion of architecture is needed. Having high-quality descriptions of a system is 

insuf˜cient to ensure that the depicted system is ˜t for anything. Standard ISO/

IEC/IEEE 420102 addresses this dichotomy. The quality of the design choices have 
to be assessed on their own, and the quality of the drawings is not a surrogate. 
An enterprise architecture is typically interpreted as a set of documents 
 instead of a set of decisions. This is consistent with what the committee learned in 
its brie˜ngs. However, an emphasis on documents and compliance over decision 

making is misplaced. A close reading of architecture description standards, such 

as the Department of Defense Architecture Framework, will show that this issue 

was recognized by the description standard authors. Such frameworks are careful 

to identify the need for an architecture team to identify the purpose of the system, 

the purpose of the architecture, the information needed, and only then fold that 

information into standardized document products. That basic discipline should be 

employed in any assessment of an architecture. The linkage between architecture 

purpose, stakeholder concerns, and the contents of a description document is 

explicit in Standard 42010. In this report, the committee calls for that broader 

 approach and calls it a ﬁsystem architecture.ﬂ 
1 ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011, 2011.2 Ibid.are used to justify expenditures; an enterprise architecture is required as 
programs work through the acquisition management system (AMS) and 

must be approved by the FAA™s Joint Resource Council. The enterprise 

architecture also serves to meet the OMB requirement for agency-wide 

enterprise architecture as laid out in the Clinger-Cohen Act.
5 Given that 
a goal of the act is to ensure ef˜cient capital planning and investment in 

information technology (IT), the enterprise architecture™s focus on busi
-ness structures and process is not surprising. In brie˜ngs, when asked to 

discuss the system architecture, FAA staff noted that there is no ﬁsoftware 
5 The Information Technology Management Reform Act (ITMRA) (Division E) and the Fed
-eral Acquisition Reform Act (FARA) (Division D) were signed into law as part of the National 
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996. The ITMRA and FARA were subsequently 

designated the Clinger Cohen Act of 1996 (P.L.104-106), encompassing both.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
or hardware architectureﬂ per se for NextGen and the NAS as a whole but 
that enterprise architecture at the program level describes how the system 

(comprised of software and hardware) will work.
6 The FAA uses an integrated systems engineering framework (NAS 
ISEF)
7 to build their enterprise architecture, which is based loosely on the 
Department of Defense architecture framework (DoDAF).
8 According to 
brie˜ngs provided to the committee, program of˜ces develop their own 

architectures, in compliance with the NAS ISEF and in compliance with 

high-level interface speci˜cations embodied in additional diagrams con
-tained within the enterprise architecture. Additionally, the Chief Archi
-tect™s of˜ce ensures that the enterprise architecture is integrated horizon
-tally (identifying linkages and interdependencies from system to system 

within the system-of-systems) and vertically within functions or com
-ponents (to address shortfalls and help facilitate prioritization analysis). 
The NAS ISEF supports visualizing the broad scope and complexities 
of the architecture and allows for varying views. These views provide 

overviews and details aimed at speci˜c stakeholders. In addition to the 

views provided by DoDAFŠall view, systems view, operational view, 

and technical viewŠthe NextGen enterprise architecture provides for two 

additional views that are important for acquisition. The executive view 

provides planning roadmaps and highlights the evolution and delivery of 

NAS capabilities, and the ˜nancial view provides expenditure forecasts. 

While these multiple views provide overviews and details aimed at the 

varying levels of the NAS, there is a risk that each program of˜ce will 

see only what it needs to (in a narrow sense) without an understanding 

of the full picture and without ensuring that the various perspectives in 

the architecture are consistent and interoperable. Further, the absence of 

a system architecture for the entirety of NextGen makes it dif˜cult for the 

developers of the individual subsystems and components to reason about 

the impact that the characteristics of their separate systems will have on 

such key overall NextGen system characteristics as safety, security, ef˜
-ciency, robustness, and evolvability.
6 
The FAA is in the process of buying the hardware and software that comprises NextGen, 
and each component will be, in fact, a system in its own right. It will then have an architec
-ture, whether or not the FAA has chosen to make it explicit and effective. For instance, both 
ERAM and STARS/TAMR pre-date NextGen and will need to be adapted to the NextGen 

architecture. As noted in NRC-AF-2008, the quality of the decomposition is likely to be a 

major determinant of success. If the hardware and software architectures have not been 

considered, then there is only chance to rely on for the quality of the decomposition.
7 
Details about this framework are available at Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), 
ﬁPublications,ﬂ https://nasea.faa.gov/publications/main (accessed April 7, 2015). 
8 
Details about the DoDAF are available at Department of Defense, Chief Information 
 +Of˜cer, ﬁThe DoDAF Architecture Framework Version 2.02, Change 1,ﬂ released January 
2015, http://dodcio.defense.gov/TodayinCIO/DoDArchitectureFramework.aspx.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 29Ultimately, the committee™s conclusion with regard to the NAS enter
-prise architecture is that the as-is architecture has evolved to also become 
the dominant understanding of the to-be architecture. That is, the exist
-ing design and deployment of the NAS embodies a tacit architecture that 

is described, at a non-detailed level, by the NAS enterprise architecture 

documentation. This induced, system-of-system architecture is, therefore, 

bottom-up and program-driven, and imposes implicit limits on what 

(and how) system capabilities can be realized. This has rami˜cations for 

how effective it can be, especially for reasoning about safety, security, 

and robustness, and in laying groundwork for future evolvability and 

enhancements. 
As described in the committee™s interim report,
9 the FAA developed 
an enterprise architecture responsive to OMB™s requirements. The com
-mittee was concerned that there was insuf˜cient technical content in the 

enterprise architecture to allow clear traceability to lower-level architec
-ture. As ˜rst de˜ned by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi
-neers in Standard 1471,
10
 a system architecture is ﬁthe fundamental orga
-nization of a system embodied in its components, their relationships to 

each other and to the environment and the principles guiding its design 

and evolution.ﬂ (Box 2.2 describes system architecture in more detail.)
Although the documentation regarding the enterprise architecture is 
extensive, as noted above, the de facto ﬁsystem architectureﬂ for the NAS 

is the unmodi˜ed system as it is today, regardless of any documents to 

the contrary. The current enterprise architecture appears to be a set of 

functional enclaves that are providing individual services, described in 

a set of documents at the NAS enterprise architecture level. Additional 

improvements and modi˜cations seem to be either changes to what is 

already deployed, or overlays onto what is already there. Discerning pre
-cisely what FAA™s architectural approach and strategy is was challenging, 

and some of it had to be inferred. The documents for the as-is architec
-ture that the committee reviewed do not use abstraction to higher-level 

concepts that are used in the mid-term and far-term document sets. (For 

example, one cannot trace an ADS-B target from the ADS-B receiver to a 

display screen without going through several programs™ documentation.) 

Nor is it clear
 that the abstractions generated are suf˜cient to describe the 
9 
National Research Council (NRC), 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air 
Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human Factors
, The National 
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2014. 
10 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Standard 1471:2000 has since 
been retired and replaced by the revised standard, ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011, ﬁSystems 

and Software EngineeringŠArchitecture Descriptionﬂ (International Organization for Stan
-dardization (ISO)/International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)/IEEE, December 2011, 

http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=50508). 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
BOX 2.2
 On System Architecture
The 2010 National Research Council report 
Critical Code: Software Produc
-ibility for Defense
 offers a useful description of architecture and its importance:
1 Just as in physical systems, architectural commitments comprise more than struc
 tural 
connections among components of a system. The commitments also encompass deci
-sions regarding the principal domain abstractions to be represented in the software 
and how they will be represented and acted upon. The commitments also include 
expectations regarding performance, security, and other behavioral characteristics 
of the constituent components of a system, such that an overall architectural model 
can facilitate prediction of signi˜cant quality-related characteristics of a system that is 
consistent with the architectural model. Architecture represents the earliest and often 

most important design decisionsŠthose that are the hardest to change and the most 
critical to get right. Architecture makes it possible to structure require
 ments based on an understanding of what is actually possible from an engineering standpointŠand 

what is infeasible in the present state of technology. It provides a mechanism for 
communications among the stakeholders, including the infrastructure providers, and 
managers of other systems with require ments for interoperation. It is also the ˜rst 
design artifact that addresses the so-called non-functional attributes, such as perfor
-mance, modi˜ability, reliability, and security that in turn drive the ultimate quality and 
capability of the system. Architecture is an important enabler of reuse and the key to 
system evolution, enabling management of future uncertainty. In this regard, architec
-ture is the primary determiner of modularity and thus the nature and degree to which 
multiple design decisions can be decoupled from each other. Thus, when there are 
areas of likely or potential change, whether it be in system functionality, performance, 
infrastructure, or other areas, architecture decisions can be made to encapsulate them 

and so increase the extent to which the overall engineering activity is insulated from 
the uncertainties associated with these localized changes.
A principal goal of a system architecture is to provide a speci˜cation of the 
structure of the system in order to foster the design and implementation of a 
system whose important properties are suf˜ciently well understood, able to be 

reasoned about, and assured.2 The architecture must provide a high-level view of 
the general nature of the system and support an understanding of the lower levels 

of the system that are needed in order to be assured that the system will satisfy 
key properties and behaviors. A well-formed architecture should provide a clear 

and consistent view of how each of its levels relates to the other levels and how 

the components of each of the various levels ˜t with each other. Key mechanisms 

for doing this are hierarchy, abstraction, and separation of concerns. A hierarchical 

architecture speci˜es how each component is comprised of a collection of lower-

level components. Abstraction expresses functions of higher-level components of 

the hierarchy in terms of general concepts that suppress the details of the lower-

level components. Abstraction allows for hiding speci˜cs of decisions so that only 

the properties of concern need be addressed, avoiding inappropriate complex
-
ity. Separation of concerns helps ensure that appropriate decomposition takes 

place and reduces the opportunity for confusing overlaps or mismatches across 

components and views. The speci˜cations, at all levels, are used to reason about 

properties the system must ensure.
A higher-level component speci˜cation is essentially a summary of the key fea
-A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 31tures, aspects, and behaviors that the component must implement. Typically these 
are speci˜ed as the set of interfaces that the component presents to the other com
-
ponents at its architectural level. But this speci˜cation should not address how these 

features and behaviors are to be achieved, except when dominating, systemic con
-
cerns prevail (for example, to specify canonical information sources for certain sorts 

of functions). Speci˜cations of how to satisfy the speci˜cation are abstracted away 

at the higher level in order to provide ˚exibility and evolvability to imple
 menters, 
thereby enabling changes to the actual implementation as system contexts, require
-
ments, and experience change over time. The component™s decomposi
 tion into 
lower-level subcomponents provides these implementation details, specifying how 

the mandated abstract features and behaviors are to be 
 realized. The features 
and behaviors of these lower-level components are speci˜ed, in turn, as sets of 

interfaces to each other that are abstractions of still lower-level subcomponents. 

Ultimately, a hierarchical architecture speci˜cation™s decomposition stops at a set 

of leaf components, namely, the lowest-level components whose structure need not 

be further elaborated in order to reason about the system architecture. 
A hierarchical system architecture can be useful even if its speci˜cations 
are relatively informal, as may well be the case early in the conceptualization and 

initial development of a complex system, or in the case of a system about which 

relatively few assurances are needed. In these cases, the architectural speci˜ca
-
tion may need to be only lightly decomposed, and left relatively informal, with most 

of the development work being left to subsequent designers and implementers. 

If the architecture™s leaf components specify only very-high-level features and 

capabilities, then a very great deal must be assumed about the correctness of the 

implementation of these subcomponents, and there is consequent room for rela
-
tively greater doubt about whether the eventually implemented system will satisfy 

its critical properties and characteristics. 
For complex systems, about which there need to be strong assurances 
about many potentially con˚icting characteristics, more highly elaborated and 

more  detailed architectural speci˜cations are important. Such system architec
-tures will probably start out as relatively informal high-level speci˜cations, but 

should be expected to become increasingly complete and precise over time, as 

requirements, contexts, and available technologies all become better understood.
3 The importance of more complete and precise architecture speci˜cations is that 

they become increasingly effective in supporting increasingly de˜nitive reasoning 

about key characteristics of the overall system. Eventually, the system architec
-
ture should be decomposed to suf˜ciently low levels, in suf˜cient detail and with 

suf˜cient precision, to support needed reasoning about such key overall system 

characteristics as safety, security, speed, robustness, and evolvability.
4 At present, the NextGen system architecture appears to be tacit or at best, 
still at a very high level and largely speci˜ed quite informally. While this might be 

an acceptable, indeed inevitable, state of affairs early in the development of such 

a complex and critical system, it poses considerable risk and dif˜culty at this 

relatively late stage in the development of NextGen. The lack of a well-de˜ned, 

suf˜ciently deeply decomposed system architecture for NextGen poses at least 

two serious problems. First, the fact that the architecture description is insuf˜ciently 

deeply de˜ned means that the speci˜cations for the system™s component parts 
continued
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
may be too vague and incomplete to provide effective guidance to the developers 
of these lowest-level components. Unfortunately, if ˜rm assurances about security 

and robustness (for example) of the overall system are required, then correct 

implementation of these vaguely speci˜ed components will have to be assumed. 

The more vague and incomplete these speci˜cations, the greater the risk that their 

implementations may not be correct, leaving assurance of the desired properties 

in doubt. Second, even if an architecture speci˜cation does indeed decompose 

down to lower-level subcomponents, it is still essential that the interfaces to these 

components be very carefully speci˜ed. Imprecise speci˜cations make it dif˜cult 

to assure that the delivered components will indeed ˜t with each other as needed. 

More important, however, the less precisely the speci˜cations of the components 

and their interfaces are speci˜ed, the less de˜nitively the critical properties of the 

overall system can be determined.
Finally, a system architecture may encompass separate, but related, sub
-architecture (sometimes referred to as architecture views), each of which 
 addresses 
a different set of issues. Thus, for example, a system architecture may well incor
-
porate a data architecture, specifying how data is managed; a user inter
 face archi
-tecture, specifying how various system capabilities are presented to users; a safety 

architecture, specifying how various safety risks are attenuated by the system; a 

resilience architecture, specifying how the system can operate even though some 

components have failed; and a security architecture, specifying how the system 

provides safeguards against possible damage due to attacks. Each of these needs 

to be complementary to the overall system architecture and be consistent with 

each otherŠin other words, both horizontal and vertical correspondences are 

 needed. And for each of these architectures, it is important that each component be 
 described in terms of the abstract features and capabilities that must be provided, 
and that implementation details not be provided. A data architecture, for example, 

might specify that certain types of data must be logically centralized, leaving to the 

elaboration of this speci˜cation details and decisions about whether the data should 

or should not be physically centralized. 
BOX 2.2
 Continued
complete system. Moreover, it is not clear how or if there are systems engi
-neering work products that are derived from the midterm architecture.
As one example, the committee noted that the ˜rst architecture rule 
written in the AV-1 ﬁMid-Term Overview and Summary Informationﬂ 

document states that
NAS [enterprise architecture] products shall be developed and decom
-posed only to the level of detail required to portray enterprise ﬁTo-Beﬂ 
Operational Improvements/Sustainment and transformation priorities. 
The level of detail should articulate enterprise-level operations, functions, 
and systems without infringing on Program-level detail. Thus, the lowest 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 33Note that the need for a coordinated collection of different subarchitectures is 
necessary even for systems and products that are far less complex and far better 
understood than NextGen. Thus, as an analogy, a building architect will typically 

have considerable experience in building of˜ce buildings and a ˜rm grasp on the 

characteristics of materials and structures. Even so, each new of˜ce building 

 project must start with a building architecture that must be rigorous, complete, and 
suf˜ciently precise about electrical systems, plumbing systems, elevator systems, 

and heating/cooling systems, in addition to the con˜guration of the building™s vari
-
ous structural members. The need for analogously complete subarchitectures is 

even more critical in the case of NextGen, which is an interconnected system of 

systems with far more complexity than an of˜ce building. With regard to data alone, 

NextGen has to cope with a range of information from weather data to ˚ight plans 

to real-time traf˜c data to emergency declarations. In both cases, the building archi
-
tecture and the NextGen system architecture, different notations and formalisms 

may be used to support speci˜cation of the different kinds of architectural features. 

But each notation or formalism must be precise, and the speci˜cation must be suf
-
˜ciently deeply decomposed, in order to support reasoning about that architectural 

feature and its relations to the other architectural features.
1 NRC, 
Critical Code: Software Producibility for Defense
, The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2010, pp. 68-69.
2 Architecting is the process of conceiving, de˜ning, expressing, documenting, communicat
-ing, certifying proper implementation of, maintaining, and improving an architecture throughout 
a system™s life cycle, per ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011, (2011, pp. 1-46).
3 A note on precision: precision in this discussion should not be viewed as an absolute, 
rather, precision evolves with the understanding of engineering trade-offs between require
-
ments, designs, and business constraints throughout the life cycle.
4 If very ˜rm assurances about these characteristics are required, then the architecture 
eventually must be de˜ned in a notation that is suf˜ciently formal and precise to support the 

de˜nitive reasoning needed for such assurances.
level of detail (e.g., leaf nodes) of the enterprise-level products should 
serve as the context/highest level of Program-level architecture elements.
11Although the infrastructure set up by the FAA to host its enterprise 
architecture is robust, there seems to be no explicit connection between 
11 
FAA, ﬁMid-Term Overview and Summary Information (AV-1), Version 3.0, Part of Inte
-grated Mid-Term Release Package 3.0,ﬂ document NAS-EA-AV-1-Mid-Term-v3.0-022814, 
National Airspace System Enterprise Architecture, Of˜ce of NextGen, February 28, 2014, 

https://nasea.faa.gov/architecture/enterprise/display/4/tab/Mid-Term, p. 4. This docu
-ment has been superseded by Version 4.0, in which similar language can be found on p. 12. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
the ﬁleaf nodesﬂ and the program-level architectures or descriptive docu
-ments. This may be suf˜cient to meet the OMB mandate for an enterprise 
architecture and to rationalize acquisition efforts, but it is insuf˜cient to 

support the technical steering of an effective system architecture. Captur
-ing and providing appropriately detailed abstract speci˜cations and inter
-faces is essential to the ability to reason about NextGen™s key properties 

and improves the ability to determine where and how to make improve
-ments and how to assess impacts on other subsystems. 
NextGen goals and associated programs should, by de˜nition, pro
-voke changes and adjustments in the NAS system architecture. That tacit 

architecture is diffused through many different programs, not all of which 

are under NextGen control. NextGen™s programs have developed, not 

under the control of the NextGen of˜ce, but under other FAA organiza
-tions. Thus, one program™s engineers must exhaustively search through all 

other programs™ documentationŠhoping that it is up to dateŠto assess 

and understand changes. In such a situation, engineers may be unable to 

gain suf˜ciently clear insights into the nature of needed subsystems and 

subcomponents to assure that the program™s product will integrate cor
-rectly with the other subsystems and make the needed contributions to 

required system-level requirements. 
The committee urges a focus on system architecture that re˚ects a set 
of fundamental, structural decisions about a system and that is distin
-guished from the architecture description, a document that records those 

decisions (much like the FAA uses the enterprise architecture). The FAA 

needs a system architecture for the NAS so as to ensure proper operation 

of the system; allow proper analyses for prediction of system behavior, 

performance, security, safety, and so on; and ensure future ˚exibility. 

A proper system architecture speci˜es the interfaces between different 

subsystems suf˜ciently enough that their design and implementation 

can proceed independently with reasonable con˜dence that they will 

interoperate correctly. (Internet protocols are a textbook example of this.) 

The current situation relates to the basic contract mechanism used by the 

FAA. Different functional elements are being built by different contractors 

selected and managed by different programs that may not have a clear 

view of the system architecture. 
However, certain basic services need to be provided to various higher-
level services as abstractions where the basic services are implemented 

system wide. Examples include security properties to assure that Next
-Gen is resistant to possible attacks, robustness properties to assure that 

the system will degrade gracefully in the presence of equipment failures 

and unexpected contingencies, and evolvability properties to assure that 

NextGen can be modi˜ed and enhanced as new challenges are presented 

and so the advantages of new technologies can be exploited. Abstraction 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 35should allow design decisions such as physical locations, formats of data, 
protocols, and so on to be hidden until the speci˜cs of those decisions are 

needed. An appropriate separation of concerns can ensure that adequate 

information is available for reasoning about systemic properties. 
Data that is crucial to the various services needs be de˜ned carefully 
by an abstraction that is common to all services and that provides site-

independent guarantees on availability, timeliness, ordering, throughput 

of the data, and so on. For example, various high-level functions need 

to be able to store their speci˜c data, but there are important guarantees 

that the high-level functions need about data storage. To achieve this 

effectively, there would need to be a customizable data service structure 

that can be tailored by each high-level service according to its needs but 

which guarantees properties such as availability.
 Similarly, high-level 
functions need to have guarantees that when errors arise (for whatever 

reason) there are alternatives for backup data storage, processing, data
-base availability, and so on.
12
 Without such abstractions and associated 
interfaces, developers of higher-level functions would begin to imple
-ment such elements individually, which is happening, as the committee 

learned through brie˜ngs with both the FAA and contractors. Although 

this is understandable given the current context, it is unlikely to be a very 

satisfactory approach for the system as a whole.
13
 Additional data prop
-erties, such as ownership, span of use, demand, safety, security, latency, 

freshness, and location, often have architectural signi˜cance and need to 

be managed at the architectural level. Moreover, different categories of 

data may necessitate services with very different characteristics. 
As an example of a system-wide service in NextGen, the Surveillance 
and Broadcast Services (SBS) Final System Speci˜cation Rev. 4 states that
SBS is a system of systems, requiring functionality on participating air
-craft and vehicles, in a ground infrastructure, and in participating auto
-mation systems. The SBS System provides ADS-B, TIS-B, ADS-R, Wide 
Area Multilateration (WAM), Airport Surface Surveillance Capability 
(ASSC), FIS-B, VHF Voice Communications, and Weather Observation 

Services. 
Performance for each of the services is speci˜ed and allocated herein
 12 
Modern industrial approaches such as Oracle, SQL Server, or Google™s Spanner are 
examples of the provision of this sort of functionality. 
13 
And indeed, inconsistencies or misunderstandings related to data de˜nitions often lead 
to interface errors among software components. A stark example of this sort of error resulted 
in the loss of the Mars Orbiter in the late 1990s when NASA used the metric system and its 

contractor used English units of measurement. Modern software architecture standards all 

call for a ﬁdata viewﬂ or ﬁlogical viewﬂ or something equivalent. This is usually conceived 

of as an implementation-independent de˜nition of core data, which is transformed into 

physical data models during implementation. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
to the aircraft, surface vehicles, the ground infrastructure, and the ATC 
automation system. [emphasis added]
14
This statement suggests that the NextGen organization provides little 
architectural direction to the enterprise. Although the choice above may in 

the end be a plausible architectural decision, the committee is concerned 

that this choice is being made by default rather than the result of a con
-sidered process through trades on the bases of explicitly stated criteria.
15
 Moreover, insuf˜cient abstractions to high-level services place roadblocks 

in the way of those attempting to insert new technologies or services 

(such as unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) or cybersecurity protections, 

discussed in Chapter 3) into the context of the NAS. 
As noted above, the FAA has adopted the DoDAF in an attempt to 
satisfy both OMB™s requirements as well as the need for a system archi
-tecture required to develop its NextGen systems. Reinforcing the com
-mittee™s conclusion that the enterprise architecture, as currently used and 

understood, falls short in providing what a proper system architecture 

could provide, a recent Department of Transportation Inspector General™s 

assessment of the enterprise architecture shows the FAA falling short in 

the OMB sense:
Overall, the [enterprise architecture]™s usefulness as a strategic planning 
tool for NextGen has been limited due to incomplete information, a lack 

of policy and guidance, and unresolved NextGen design decisions.
16
 That the system architecture is not well developed is hard to discern 
for two reasons: (1) the nearly exclusive focus on the enterprise archi
-tecture, which is important but does not address the technical issues of 
just how a new NAS could be built and (2) the NAS system architecture 

could be shown to meet all of the new requirements that have been com
-municated to the Congress and the public. A complex system (of systems) 

requires several architecture perspectives, each aimed at demonstrat
-
ing how each of several different kinds of requirements are to be met. 

Each perspective needs to be clearly communicated so that developers 

can understand the local intentions and system integrators can reason 
14 
FAA, ﬁFinal Program Requirements, SBS-002, Revision 04,ﬂ Surveillance and Broadcast 
Services Program Of˜ce, June 26, 2012, p. 22. See Appendix C for acronyms.
15 
This is recommended in NRC, 
Pre-Milestone A and Early-Phase Systems Engineering 
(The 
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.), a 2008 report that examines the role systems 
engineering can play in the acquisition lifecycle.
16 
Department of Transportation, 
Addressing Underlying Causes for NextGen Delays Will 
Require Sustained FAA Leadership and Action
, Of˜ce of Inspector General Audit Report 
 AV-2014-031, February 25, 2014, https://www.oig.dot.gov/library-item/28823.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 37about system behaviors and unintended consequences. Indeed, one of 
the main roles of a system architecture is to facilitate the ability to envi
-sion and express how the system will (or could) evolve. It can reveal how 

new capabilities (e.g., ADS-B surveillance) ˜t in and what implications 

they have. A system architecture allows one component™s evolution to 

be planned to co-evolve with other components, and so on. Rather than 

being a simple snapshot or a log of changes to date, a well-developed 

system architecture should play a critical role in system evolution over 

time, providing a way to look forward and map out likely outcomes from 

a variety of scenarios. 
A useful reference with which to examine architectural approaches 
is the 2008 NRC report 
Pre-Milestone A and Early-Phase Systems Engineer
-ing
.17
 Although that report™s recommendations do not universally apply 
to the FAA™s situation, they are nonetheless useful. In particular, the 2008 

report identi˜es certain patterns indicative of success and failure, includ
-ing the need for appropriate engineering talent and clear lines of authority, 

the need to perform trade-offs and manage complexity early in the pro
-cess, the importance of a stable set of system requirements, and the need 

to plan ahead for change through architectural choices. As discussed in the 

rest of this report, the committee observes some of these success patterns 

being ignored in NextGen. 
The upshot of the limitations in the existing enterprise architecture 
discussed above is that programmatic risk and engineering risk are both 

increased. In addition, architectural perspectives have not been exposed 

to users (pilots and controllers) at suf˜cient depth and with suf˜cient 

interaction and discussion about how operations would change as a result 

of implementing new features (which themselves are not documented at 

a depth suf˜cient to foster useful conversations). Furthermore, it will be 

much more dif˜cult to evolve the system to meet requirements and take 

advantage of new technologies. 
See Box 2.3 for a discussion of an ERAM system failure
18 that occurred 
during the course of the committee™s work; the committee™s analysis of 

this failure reinforces the importance and potential of more comprehen
-sive approaches to system architecture. This incident and subsequent 

analysis are suggestive of the need for proper system architectures that 

would allow modeling and reasoning about the system as a whole. ERAM 

was developed as a replacement for the legacy host system; it provides 

core functionality to the NAS. This may have seemed initially like a 

component for component replacement. But ERAM relies on complex 
17 
NRC, 
Pre-Milestone A and Early-Phase Systems Engineering, 
2008. 
18 
The ˜re at Chicago Air Route Traf˜c Control Center in September 2014 provides further 
evidence of an architectural resilience failure in the NAS architecture.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
BOX 2.3
 April 2014 En Route Automation Modernization 
Failure and Architectural Implications
During the course of the committee™s work, the Los Angeles En-Route Air 
Traf˜c Control Center (ZLA ARTCC) experienced failures of the En Route Auto
-mation Modernization (ERAM) Flight Data Manager (FDM) software resulting in a 

ground stop for all ˚ights passing through that center. FAA statements at the time 

summarized the situation: 
On April 30, 2014, an FAA air traf˜c system that processes ˚ight plan information 
experi
 enced problems while processing a ˚ight plan ˜led for a U-2 aircraft that operates 
at very high altitudes under visual ˚ight rules. [–] The computer system interpreted 

the ˚ight as a more typical low altitude operation, and began processing it for a route 
below 10,000 feet. The extensive number of routings that would have been required 
to de-con˚ict the aircraft with lower-altitude ˚ights used a large amount of available 
memory and interrupted the computer™s other ˚ight-processing functions.
1Because ERAM is a major NextGen program, the committee asked for infor
-mation about this failure in order to better understand how such failures come 
about, how they are handled, and what improvements with regard to architecture 

and software development the committee could suggest.
2 While not tasked with 
undertaking a complete analysis of this or any other speci˜c incident, the com
-
mittee offers the following limited analysisŠbased on necessarily limited dataŠof 

why such failures are a concern and how appropriate system architecture and 

software development approaches could help reduce the likelihood of such failures 

in the future.
First, it should be noted that this incident led to a considerable loss of air 
traf˜c control service. The result could have been catastrophic. That it was not 

catastrophic does not mitigate the seriousness of the event. In the committee™s 

view, the investigation of this (or similar events affecting so much of the NAS) and 

the subsequent reporting should have been at the same scale as would have been 

required had there been an accident with loss of life.
The documentation and reporting suggests that ERAM failed essentially in 
its entirety (including its backup system), and that indicates a serious, systemic 

design ˚aw. Incorrect ˚ight data was entered for a particular aircraft that, coupled 

with the activity of the aircraft in question, resulted in exhaustion of a ˜xed-size 

memory area, which ultimately led to a failure of the ˚ight data processor. The 

backup system suffered from the same bad data. There were several ways in which 

this failure exposed poor design choices: 
Failure due to exhaustion of resources.
 The system should be monitoring 
resources, data integrity, equipment availability, response times, queue lengths, 

activity levels, and many other system parameters continuously. Provision for han
-
dling deviations from planned levels should be present for all system parameters.
Unhandled software exceptions in a critical system.
 There was apparently 
an unhandled software exception that led to the exhaustion of resources. 
Mishandling of poor data entry.
 Apparently, the altitude of the aircraft in 
question was entered incorrectly. The very large extent of the consequent adjust
-
ments to civil air traf˜c ˚ight plans could have triggered a resiliency response (such 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 39as an ﬁAre you sure?ﬂ reply to the ˚ight plan as entered). Financial services sites 
routinely do this, for example, when amounts entered for online transactions are 

outside of determined normative bounds. This is all part of a properly designed 

input-validation (and taint removal) process.
Primary and backup systems failed simultaneously.
 The simultaneous 
failure of primary and backup systems is a design ˚aw resulting in part from an 

inadequately considered system architecture. The decision to automatically hand 

something off to a backup computer is appropriate for a hardware failure; it is 

also likely acceptable when the failure is caused by the total state of the system. 

In this case, though, the ˚aw was in how one speci˜c input in combination with a 

particular aircraft™s behavior was handled. The system was always going to fail with 

these bad inputs. Handling such a failover appropriately requires a fundamentally 

different approach to error-handling than is suggested by the high-level overview 

provided to the committee. That this problem was ﬁ˜xedﬂ by increasing a buffer size 

exposes a security problem (in addition to an availability issue). Merely increasing 

a buffer size does not guarantee the system will not fail with some unlikely com
-
plex combination of existing and proposed ˚ight plans. If there is no proof that the 

capacity of the buffer cannot be exceeded by a possible set of inputs, then any 

˜xed buffer size could lead to a system failure. 
Inadequate recovery actions.
 The immediate corrective actions takenŠ
increase the buffer size and change operational proceduresŠare not suf˜cient to 

address the problems exposed by this failure. The system design and architecture 

need to be examined to make the changes necessary to achieve the required avail
-
ability. That faults occur in such systems is well known, as are the techniques to 

cope with such faults. A root cause analysis is needed when errors such as these 

occur in high-reliability systems. 
Lack of coherent approach to common-mode failures.
 A footnote in the 
document the committee was provided states, ﬁThis capability was added to ERAM 

in the most recent software build (EAC1400) as a result of efforts to address 

Common Mode failures. This is the change that added the 128 KB buffer and the 

logic for its use. To date, this ˜x has prevented four failures.ﬂ
3 This statement is of 
concern because common-mode failures are well known and generally the result 

of a design fault, the most dif˜cult type of fault to tolerate. Making a change that 

is described as a ﬁ˜xﬂ suggests that the basic design of ERAM does not have a 

comprehensive architecture-based approach to common-mode failures. The fact 

that ﬁthis ˜x has prevented four failuresﬂ suggests that common-mode failures are 

frequent, which is troubling. 
1 Dan Whitcomb, FAA Says Air Traf˜c Computer Was Overwhelmed by U-2 Spy Plane, 
Reuters, May 5, 2014, http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/05/06/us-usa-airport-losangeles-
idUSBREA4501C20140506; Laura Stampler, FAA Con˜rms Spy Plane Caused LAX Chaos, 
Reuters, May 6, 2014, http://time.com/89130/faa-spy-plane-los-angeles/.
2 FAA, ﬁZLA Air Traf˜c Control (ATC) - Summary of Events Surrounding Declaration of ATC 
Zero at ZLA,ﬂ 2014; received following committee inquiry. 
3 FAA, ﬁZLA Air Traf˜c Control (ATC) - Summary of Events,ﬂ 2014; received following com
-mittee inquiry. See also A. Scott and J. Menn, Exclusive: Air traf˜c system failure Caused 
by computer memory shortage, 
Reuters.com
, May 12, 2014, http://www.reuters.com/
article/2014/05/12/us-airtraf˜c-bug-exclusive-idUSBREA4B02320140512.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
software that likely resulted in many changes to the system (as is appro
-priate). If there were a system architecture with appropriate data, process, 
and other perspectives available, then much of the updated functionality 

could be simulated, modeled, evaluated, and reasoned about.
Rather than being a system that is developed within the concep-tual framework of architectures that have been shown to meet require
-ments, NextGen is instead a collection of projects each aimed at upgrad
-ing or replacing existing componentry and capabilities. The upgrades 

are needed, so NextGen is delivering value. But they are upgrades and 

enhancements of the existing system, based on the longstanding archi
-tectures and designs of the NAS. As such, their ability to meet 
 NextGen™s 
stated objectives and requirements is unknown, and indeed, without 

an appropriately scaled and speci˜ed system architecture, probably 

unknowable.
Finding: The FAA™s approach to enterprise architecture is not an 

adequate technical foundation for steering NextGen™s technical 

governance and managing the inevitable changes in technology 

and operations.
Finding: Absent an appropriately scaled and speci˜ed system 
architecture, the ability of any given change, upgrade, or enhance
-ment to meet stated objectives or requirements is unknown and 

unknowable. 
The committee did learn about the existence of architectural steer
-ing groups, but it was not clear how much authority those groups have. 
Unfortunately, having de facto established the existing architecture as the 

architecture for NextGen, many opportunities to use the architecture in 

forward-looking ways have been ruled out. Thus, through its architec
-tural choices, the FAA has put itself in a position where some important 

advances are going to be extremely challenging to accomplish, such as 

the ability to create persuasive and credible forecasts of change costs, 

technical risks, capability upgrades, and performance improvements. The 

committee™s recommendations in this chapter take this into account and 

offer suggestions as to how move forward most productively in develop
-ing better architectural approaches. 
ELEMENTS
 OF
 A
RCHITECT
URAL
 L
EADERSHIP
Any large-scale, software-intensive systems endeavor requires a sys
-tem architecture that speci˜es how all of its parts ˜t together and interact, 

and which can be used in a dynamic way to help inform and drive plan
-A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 41ning for change and related decision making. A system architecture pro
-vides the capacity to develop and validate analyses that can help detect 
issues such as single points of failure and emergent properties early in the 

process. Architectural leadership is essential to the success of any large 

system of systems, as architecture embodies some of the most important 

design decisions and includes structural and design commitments that 

will constrain and guide subsequent expectations and capabilities. Astute 

architectural leadership encompasses the following elements: 

Recognition that, although there is a single system architecture, no single 
architecture perspective is suf˜cient.
 An enterprise perspective (embodied in 
the NAS enterprise architecture and that sought by OMB) serves differ
-ent purposes from a software architecture, which is different still from a 

security architecture, for example. 

Architectural leadership at the system-of-systems level
 to help maintain 
appropriate alignment among the various architectural perspectives and 

to ensure that as requirements change and development proceeds that the 

architecture is kept consistent. 

Thoughtful and consistent attention to ensuring that the system archi
-tecture is ˚exible and evolvable.
19 While modernization and incremental 
improvements proceed, care should be taken to ensure that the architec
-ture does not become too rigid such that innovative changes cannot be 

put in place later on. A suitable architecture helps to position its users for 

future ˚exibilityŠit can provide an infrastructure that can be exploited 

for possible (unanticipated) future applications and enables thinking 

about the future in a structured and disciplined way. 

Assurance that veri˜cation and validation considerations are incorpo
-rated early in architectural perspectives.
 Veri˜cation and validation efforts 
relate to a wide range of attributes including system functional behavior, 

security, availability and resilience, performance, response to anomalous 

human behavior, and so on. Such an approach ensures that the highest 

value and highest risk elements of system assurance are also addressed 

earlier in the life cycle.

Development and maintenance of effective architectural documentation.
 Exhortations for ﬁbetter architectureﬂ often result only in more volume 

and more detail, but no more (and sometimes even less) insight and effec
-19 
Some efforts go so far as to incorporate an evolution viewpoint to guide the reasoning 
required for dealing with change. In this approach, points of change, their sources, depen
-dencies among changes and impacts are explicitly managed as ˜rst-class entities. See for 
example, M. Razavian and P. Lago, ﬁA Viewpoint for Dealing with Change in Migration to 

Services,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the Joint 10th Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Architecture 
and 6th European Conference on Software Architecture (WICSA/ECSA), 
IEEE Computer Society, 

http://ieeexplore.ieee.org, 2012. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
tive guidance. This is not what the committee advocates. NextGen archi
-tectural leadership should focus instead on identifying system features 
and aspects that have the highest value (taking into account cost) or rep
-resent the greatest risk (see Chapter 3), and align technical projects with a 

coherent understanding of structural, operational, and performance inten
-
tions. An architecture that is documented in an effective useful manner is 

easier to understand, analyze, maintain, update, and use.
20

A practice of effective architecture evaluation.
 Both effective documen
-tation and architecture are encouraged through periodic reviews (archi
-tecture evaluation).
21
 
A common understanding of key performance parameters, along with 
models to assess how each would be affected by various alternative choices within 

NextGen.
22
 In NextGen, such key performance parameters might include 
the ability to incorporate large growth in UAS, or versions of stated goals 

such as shorter routes, improved navigation around weather, reduced 

time and fuel costs, reduced delays, increased airport capacity and so on. 

These may need to be traded against each other, but doing so is best done 

transparently.
23
 
Attention to cost and sustainability.
 A key aspect of architecting in 
the large, beyond devising technical solutions and approaches, is feasible, 

cost-effective, sustainable solutions. In any large-scale system there will 

be numerous trade-offs, just as there are numerous risks (discussed in 
20 
For a given system, such as NextGen, there may be several descriptions of the archi
-tecture used for different purposes. Ideally, these should be kept consistent, but each may 
have different details and emphases. Some will be used for communication among projects 

and with stakeholders, others for speci˜cation of how things must be done in component 

systems, for planning, budgeting, and so on. To serve multiple purposes an architecture 

description should be explicitly linked from its stakeholders (who cares?) to their concerns 

(what do they care about?) to the viewpoints framing those concerns (how are these aspects 

of the architecture modeled?) to the views and models comprising the descriptions (how are 

the concerns of the stakeholders addressed?).
21 P. Clements, R. Kazman, and M. Klein, 
Evaluating Software Architectures: Methods and Case 
Studies
, SEI Series, Addison-Wesley, 2002; H. Obbink et al. 
Report on Software Architecture 
Review and Assessment (SARA)
, Tech. Rep. Version 1.0, The SARA Working Group, February 
2002.
22 
The existence of such models is noted as a key success pattern in the 2008 NRC report 
Pre-Milestone A and Early-Phase Systems Engineering. 
23 Many of these potential key performance parameters are still up for debate and potential 
trades even though the NextGen effort has been under way for quite some time. Resolving 

which of the (many, shifting) implicit and explicit goals of NextGen should be key perfor
-mance parameters is beyond the scope of this committee™s tasking. Instead, the committee 

has focused on the importance of a suitable architectural approachŠregardless of which key 

performance parameters are chosenŠto make progress. A stronger architectural foundation 

will also make it possible to explore the relationship between the key parameters and the 

system design.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 43the next chapter). Architecture leadership should aim to devise solutions 
that are feasible, ˜t within budget, and minimize disruption to existing 

operations.

An architectural community with growing diversity of thought, perspec
-tive, and knowledge.
 In the committee™s view, there is too much reliance at 
the FAA on tacit knowledge in the heads of a very small number of heroic 

architects. Developing and retaining a ﬁdeeper benchﬂ of talent to grow 

FAA architectural capability is essential. 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 TO
 I
MPRO
VE A
RCHITECT
URE
 AND
 A
RCHITECT
URAL
 LEA
DERSHIP
The most important thing on which the FAA should focus with respect 
to architecture is building a community of architecture leaders within and 

outside the agency. The FAA will need to increase its system architecture 

capabilities and establish a more capable architecture community. Good 

architects will tailor the efforts effectively, independent of the processes, 

methods, and artifacts with which they need to work. Architectural leader
-ship requires creative skills and abstract reasoning coupled with domain 

experience. The imposition of additional process requirements or more 

training will not signi˜cantly help to transform an average systems engi
-neer into a capable architect. Developing an effective architectural leader
-ship team is more of a selection and hiring challenge than it is a train
-ing issue. Major software companies and system integrators have highly 

evolved career paths, mentoring programs, and peer selection boards in 

place to identify, develop, and certify quali˜ed architects. The FAA and 

its contractor community could learn much from commercial practice in 

building stronger communities of architectural leadership. 
Good architects need to be empowered with authority, within a suit
-able organizational structure, to succeed. The committee™s impression is 

that on many projects (particularly when OMB rules are in play), architect
-
ing is treated as a parallel activity to engineering and development with 

an emphasis on producing the mandated artifacts. Successful architects 

often must negotiate requirements, in˚uence acquisition, change budgets, 

and recommend signi˜cant changes on-the-˚y. Unfortunately, traditional 

project management structures are often not conducive to ﬁarchitecture-

centricﬂ efforts. Much can be learned from commercial practices (such as 

in software development), although some of these have the advantage 

of being single-product oriented efforts. Another important model, for 

systems of this scale, is the city planner model, which empowers planners 

via legislation and building codes.
As discussed in the section above on architectural leadership, more 
intellectual leadership, diversity of thought and approach, and more 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
 
people challenging the status quo with good ideas are needed. FAA™s 
contractor community itself possesses some of the necessary architec
-tural skills and expertise and could be harnessed to help provide input 

to the overall NAS architecture design and evolution. The FAA could 

leverage the relationships it already has with contractors working on 

particular systems and components and solicit higher-level input and 

advice from them while not abdicating its own overall responsibility for 

the architecture. 
One challenge is that while such a community would be helpful in 
long-range, pre-competitive environments (pre-RFP), there is little incen
-tive for contractors competing for work to share their best ideas in multi-

stakeholder forums. Addressing this structural issue will be a challenge. 

Some consideration should be given to the nature of how the architects 

are organized. The FAA may need to structure an alignment, for its con
-tractors, of decision authority and responsibility that incentivizes them 

both to participate in this collective process and to share responsibility for 

outcomes. One successful modelŠrarely found in government projects, 

but found in building architectureŠseparates the organizations respon
-sible for architecting from organizations responsible for implementation 

or operation and separates architect from client. The architect works for 

the client and oversees and certi˜es implementation. The architect™s role 

is especially critical in managing ﬁsystemic properties,ﬂ such as security, 

safety, availability, end-to-end performance, information management, and 

interoperability, across the portfolio of NAS elements in a coherent manner.
The architecture leadership will need to prioritizeŠfocusing on those 
properties considered systemic and on the evolvability of the system as 

a whole, while delegating implementation choices to speci˜c programs. 

Some government agencies create advisory panels or similar constructs to 

review and comment on plans and efforts. In the FAA™s case, it would be 

important to ensure that there are technically competent people, however 

the leadership community is created, who are familiar with system archi
-tecture and help stimulate creative thinking. One downside of advisory 

panels as typically structured is that they do not have an explicit stake in 

the outcome of the development or responsibility to stay with an effort if 

it goes astray. In whatever form it takes, an architecture leadership com
-
munity is a locus within which to accomplish the following: 



-sition, budgeting, veri˜cation and validation, testing and certi˜cation, 

acceptance, integration, and key changes and their anticipated effects on 

the system as a whole. 








-tion to incremental program steps. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 45














˚exibility and evolvability, so as to be ready for unanticipated demands 
or changes in requirements. These changes may range from new hazards 

that will need to be modeled to new requirements imposed by legisla
-tion. Architectural models will need to manage a variety of potential 

constraints on the architecture. 



abstraction to support basic system infrastructure services. For example, 

the NextGen architecture does not address availability or cybersecurity in 

a comprehensive way, which in part derives from this lack of infrastruc
-ture abstraction.
24
 By abstracting infrastructure aggressively, the system 
avoids reliance on particular hardware choices, but can instead allow the 

hardware (and some systems layers above, perhaps) to stay current with 

mainstream computational infrastructure. If managed well, this confers 

the bene˜t of lower infrastructural operations and maintenance costs 

and the added advantage of a steady increase in capacity to meet rises in 

demand. 










properties from the levels at which they are understood to higher levels 

of abstraction where they can be managed.
25
 



-tural techniques. There are multiple technical and engineering ˜elds that 

are relevant and which have value to large, complex, software-intensive 

efforts such as NextGen. A key insight that architects can provide is that 

complex systems entail multiple concerns, and therefore require a multi-

disciplinary approach.



among stakeholders as needed (as described in Chapter 1)Šperhaps the 

most important activity for which the community will be well positioned. 

A critical role of an effective architecture community is two-fold: (1) play
-ing offense by assessing new features, new value propositions, and 

deployment plans and persuading stakeholders with proposed changes 

that improve ef˜ciency or effectiveness of the system and (2) playing 

defense by quantifying and prioritizing critical risks, trading off mitiga
-24 The need to pay attention to availability was well illustrated by the recent ERAM failure 
described in Box 2.1. Just as security should begin with a threat model, design for availability 
should start with a comprehensive hazard analysis and proceed with suitable models of 

mitigation based on architectural speci˜cs. 
25 
System-level issues such as safety, availability, and the like are typically assessed at the 
level of individual systems. It will be important to address these techniques at the system 

architecture level. Although there is progress in this area, generally, that sort of abstraction 

is also still very much an ongoing research topic. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
tion approaches, and designing solutions that ˜t within programmatic 
constraints. 











sector organizations, for air traf˜c control and airspace management.
To be clear, the committee does not urge the premature creation of 
more detailed speci˜cations and artifacts absent deeper insights and 

stronger analyses of risks and trade-offs. In many ways, such efforts 

would be counterproductive, translating into more overhead (process and 

documentation) and less attention, resources, and expertise focused on 

better design, decisions, tests, and earlier integration. One failure pattern 

in the systems and software industry that the FAA should strive to avoid 

is building an extremely precise version of plans, scope, and architecture, 

with only an imprecise understanding of likely trade-offs, user needs, or 

the team™s capability. Additional premature precision often ultimately 

translates into future rework and waste. 
There are some areas where commitments need to be deferred. Uncer
-tainties associated with these deferred decisions can be encapsulated using 

suitably designed abstractions. Speci˜c commitments should be deferred 

until the choice is both necessary to make and well informed (through 

precedent, modeling, simulation, prototyping, or other means) and both 

the likelihood and extent of adverse consequence of a wrong commitment 

are reduced. Hence, the committee™s emphasis on 
 abstractionŠexposing 
appropriate information and functionality at appropriate levelsŠand per
-spective.
26
 Documentation practices, and architecting in general, should 
be agile: the simplest thing that works with an emphasis on minimal 

documentation targeted to speci˜c needs of speci˜c stakeholders. 
Balance with regard to both documentation and technical commit
-ments is important. Finding an appropriate balance between the level of 

speci˜c technical commitment in a system-architectural model (with all 

the bene˜ts of ˜xing on particular choices in this regard) and the ability 

to respond to the continuing rapid evolution of technology and infrastruc
-
ture is key. This ability to respond is determined both by the quality of 

the abstractions built in to the architectural models (at any given moment) 

and the nimbleness of the process for updating and evolving the archi
-tecture. An unfortunate pattern that can result is that ﬁarchitectureﬂ will 

come to refer to a set of enduring standards that are generally divorced 

from the current state of technology and that, consequently, cannot yield 

the intended bene˜ts of a true system architecture.
26 
Additional precision and detail can and should be added incrementally at appropriate 
levels as sharper perceptions and more solid understandings evolve.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSERT ARCHITECTURAL LEADERSHIP
 47Governance and appropriate authorities are vital for developing 
an effective architecture. The previous section noted the lack of explicit 
connection between ﬁleaf nodesﬂ in the enterprise architecture and the 

 program-level architectures. The programs will need to be compliant 
with speci˜cations in the higher-level architecture and show clearly how 

they satisfy itŠbut facilitating such compliance does not require detailed 

speci˜cations of all the programs in the architecture itself. Because pro
-grams are developed by other parts of the FAA that are not under control 

of the 
 NextGen of˜ce, there needs to be a decision authorityŠinformed 
and guided by an able architecture leadership communityŠto enforce 

governance. 
The architectural leadership should be responsible for balancing 
tensions among a number of competing goals, such as innovation and 

stability or safety, value delivered and costs incurred, security and open
-ness, uncertainty and predictability, process maturity and agility, and so 

onŠavoiding an excessively bureaucratic process- and document-bound 

approach while providing suf˜cient leadership and direction. Governance 

will be needed to facilitate an effective process by which issues can be 

raised, debated, decided, recorded, and implemented. There are obvious 

potential complications and con˚icts of interest in involving architects 

from contractors, from other agencies, and from among and between dif
-ferent FAA projects. Without appropriate architectural governance and 

enforcement, involving the industry™s stakeholders, the community will 

fail to exert in˚uence on NAS development.
Commercial practice has long recognized the need for nurturing and 
identifying strong architectural skills. Global systems integrators and large 

government contractors have disciplined programs for technical career 

paths that attract professionals with exceptional skills for architecting, 

research, and innovation. For example, IBM has evolved corporate stan
-dards for technical roles and technical career paths, including systems and 

software architects. These prestigious positions are achieved through years 

of apprenticeship, a track record of accomplishment, and selection by a 

certi˜cation board composed of technical peers. Job titles such as ﬁdistin
-guished engineerﬂ and ﬁfellowﬂ re˚ect highly in˚uential roles that have 

executive standing within companies like IBM and Microsoft. 
An architectural community represents a set of eclectic skills coupled 
with deep domain experience. Relatively few engineering-trained pro
-fessionals can excel in architectural decision making.
27
 For such a scarce 
resource, the FAA will be challenged to attract and retain such talent. The 
27 
For instance, at IBM where there is a very large pool of technical employeesŠgreater 
than 100,000Šthe percentage of distinguished engineers and fellows is less than 1 percent 
of the technical population.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
˜nancial incentives and dynamic opportunities of commercial markets 
are signi˜cantly more attractive. Therefore, the FAA will need to look 

externally for these skills in resource pools such as academia, systems 

integrators, and professional societies. 
The committee believes that the NextGen challenge represents a 
unique and attractive technical opportunity for quali˜ed architects. Next
-Gen is a world-class challenge with broad impact on the livelihoods of 

many people and a cornerstone of our way of life. It is the sort of system 

that easily ends up making news on the front page of every national 

newspaper if it works well, or if it does not. Marketing this opportunity 

and channeling the best of the available talent pool will require some tech
-
nical leadership and compensation models that are foreign to the FAA and 

government contracts. The technical steering and technical governance 

model of the NAS requires some innovative thinking. 
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) should 

initiate, grow, and engage a capable architecture 
 communityŠleaders 
and peers within and outside FAAŠwho will expand the breadth 
and depth of expertise that is steering architectural changes.
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration should 
conduct a small number of experiments among its system integra
-tion partners to prototype candidate solutions for establishing and 

managing a vibrant architectural community. 
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration should 
use an architecture leadership community and an effective gover
-nance approach to assure a proper balance between documents and 

artifacts and to provide high-level guidance and a capability that 

(1) enables effective management and communication of dependen
-
cies, (2) provides ˚exibility and evolvability to ensure accommoda
-tion of future needs, and (3) communicates changing circumstances 

in order to align expectations. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49
The National Airspace System (NAS) is a critical infrastructure for the 
United States. In concert with revising the architectural approach for 
the Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen), planning to 

cope with change is needed. Change can be thought of as the ongoing 

management of trade-offs, which are not clearly identi˜ed in the existing 

tacit architecture (discussed in Chapter 2). Indeed, any system architec
-ture developed will need to re˚ect planning for resilience in order to 

encapsulate anticipated variability. This chapter discusses cybersecurity, 

unmanned aircraft systems (UAS), and safety to illustrate why planning 

for resilience in the NextGen is so important. The chapter then lays out a 

broader framework for thinking through resilience and risk management 

for software-intensive systems such as NextGen. 
CY
BERSEC
URIT
YAs the committee noted in its interim report,
1 the designers and devel-opers of any software- and communications-intensive system deployed 

today must grapple with questions of cybersecurity.
2 Understanding 
1 
National Research Council (NRC), 
Interim Report of a Review of the Next Generation Air 
Transportation System Enterprise Architecture, Software, Safety, and Human Factors
, The National 
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2014.
2 
Here the committee refers to what some call cybersecurity (system, data, and commu
-nications security), which is distinct from the physical security required for airport and 

aircraft operation, provided in part by the Transportation Security Administration (TSA). 
3Cope with Change
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
cybersecurity risks and threats and developing appropriate threat models 
and mitigations are challenges endemic across government and industry. 

NextGen is no exception; indeed, the safety-of-life implications and the 

vital economic importance of air travel make the security of NextGen and 

the NAS critically important. As various programs and components of the 

NAS are modernized, upgraded, and transformed, the security implica
-tions of the changes will need to be taken into account. The criticality 

of cybersecurity for NextGen increases as more services rely on digital 

technologies, networked communications, and commercial-off-the-shelf 

software. 
Although acknowledging an increase in risk as they move to new, 
more connected technologies, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 

staff noted in brie˜ngs to the committee that they rely heavily on federal 

guidelines for cybersecurity support. For example, the FAA relies on 

the National Institute of Standards and Technology risk management 

framework,3 and the Department of Transportation Inspector General and 
Government Accountability Of˜ce (GAO) periodically audit the compli
-ance with federal and FAA security orders, directives, and guidance.
FAA staff stated that the enterprise-level programs address speci˜c 
information threats; however, they also state that there are no current NAS-

level threat models. Furthermore, from what the committee has learned, 

information security is not currently a consideration during safety analy
-sis. FAA staff did note that the current safety management manual was in 

revision, and there are plans to address the exclusion of security. The FAA 

also noted that threats are addressed at the program level, and all major 

programs must comply with federal guidelines on information security, 

and information security is a component of the acquisition management 

life cycle. NAS-level threats are expected to be addressed through these 

enterprise-level programs. For example, the committee was told that infor
-mation security is an integral part of the acquisition management life cycle. 

The committee was also briefed on a proposed NextGen cybersecurity 

test facility, which would provide some initial movement toward eventual 

capability.
4 The committee remains concerned that cybersecurity, although 
acknowledged as an issue and with some efforts under way to address 
Cybersecurity efforts may themselves require physical security components, such as physi
-cal safeguards to servers, data centers, and workers, to mitigate various kinds of threats. 
3 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Framework for Improving Critical Infrastruc
-ture Cybersecurity. Version 1.0
, February 12, 2014, http://www.nist.gov/
 cyberframework/upload/cybersecurity-framework-021214.pdf.
4 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), ﬁANG-B3 Proposed NextGEN Cyber Security 
Test Facility: Analysis and Research of Common Cyber Security Requirements,ﬂ presented 
to the committee on February 19, 2014.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPE WITH CHANGE 51it, has not been fully integrated into the agency™s thinking, planning, 
and efforts with respect to NextGen and the NAS generally (although it 

recognizes that some of these efforts may be subject to classi˜cation, and 

therefore, the committee may not have a complete view). Because of the 

scale of the NAS, hazard analysis for security must be undertaken for 

individual subsystems and components within the system rather than just 

at a notion of a ﬁperimeter.ﬂ This is an important consideration for any 

larger-scale system and particularly systems that are interconnected with 

other systems. That is, internal service interfaces must be designed to be 

resilient against the possibility that other parts of the system may be con
-trolled by adversaries. In addition, as new technologies and procedures 

are rolled out, there will inevitably be new vulnerabilities (this is true for 

any information technology (IT)-based system and is not speci˜c to the 

FAA). Moreover, changes in the way existing, long-stable technologies 

are used may introduce new security issues. There may also be vulner
-abilities associated with avionics governed by international standards. 

So, threat analyses in both dimensionsŠon existing systems and associ
-ated standards with any expected changes, and on new componentsŠare 

needed. Threat analysis should encompass both the nature of threats 

in the operating environment and the security-focused hazard analysis 

that connects the understanding of possible threats with architectural 

decisions. For these reason, cybersecurity will need to be managed archi
-tecturally. Individual threat analyses of programs need to be ﬁrolled upﬂ 

to an architectural threat model, and that threat model also needs to be 

potentially checked on each program. 
In the committee™s view, as systems are increasingly digital and 
dependent on communications and networks, and as the threat landscape 

for the nation as a whole continues to evolve, cybersecurity will need to 

be an important and integral part of safety activities and is an ongoing 

operational matter (not only a question of design and architecture). The 

committee saw little evidence of adequate measures to defend systems 

against various kinds of attack. Data fusion of wide-area multilateration 

(WAM)
5 with Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast (ADS-B) and 
radar tracks, often cited as an important systemic hedge against certain 

sorts of attacks (e.g., spoo˜ng), is not a suf˜cient safeguard because it 

only protects against a certain class of attacks.
5 Wide-area multilateration is a surveillance capability that ﬁworks by employing multiple 
small remote sensors throughout an area to compensate for terrain obstructions . . . the data 
from multilateration sensors is fused to determine aircraft position and identi˜cationﬂ (FAA, 

ﬁWide Area Multilateration (WAM) Project,ﬂ last modi˜ed August 19, 2014, http://www.

faa.gov/nextgen/programs/adsb/wsa/wam/). 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Consistent with the committee™s observations, a March 2015 GAO
6 report noted: 
The weaknesses in FAA™s security controls and implementation of its 
security program existed, in part, because FAA had not fully established 

an integrated, organization-wide approach to managing information 

security risk that is aligned with its mission. [–] FAA has established 
a Cyber Security Steering Committee to provide an agency-wide risk 
management function. However, it has not fully established the gov
-ernance structure and practices to ensure that its information security 

decisions are aligned with its mission. For example, it has not (1) clearly 

established roles and responsibilities for information security for the 
NAS or (2) updated its information security strategic plan to re˚ect sig
-ni˜cant changes in the NAS environment, such as increased reliance on 
computer networks.

 Until FAA effectively implements security controls, establishes 
stronger agency-wide information security risk management processes, 

fully implements its NAS information security program, and ensures 

that remedial actions are addressed in a timely manner, the weaknesses 

GAO identi˜ed are likely to continue, placing the safe and uninter
-rupted operation of the nation™s air traf˜c control system at increased 
and 
 unnecessary risk.
The system architecture for the NAS and its future goals need to 
embrace comprehensive, system-wide measures to ensure cybersecurity. 
Some cybersecurity requirements are new, based on the fact that some 

upgrades are using new (e.g., digital) technologies, and the requirements 

to meet some risks (e.g., Internet-based hacking) are themselves new. So 

there are new risks, and new requirements that these risks be met and mit
-
igated. Reasoning about such risks will need to be based on clearly stated 

goals and requirements. Reasoning about risk assessment will become 

increasingly thorough and de˜nitive as development proceeds through 

architecture, design, and eventual implementation, although there will 

always be signi˜cant uncertainty. The absence of such architectures pre
-cludes the possibility of such reasoning and leaves doubt about the exact 

security capabilities that NextGen will be able to achieve. Cybersecurity 

requires a system-wide approach that is managed architecturally and can
-
not be addressed piecemeal by each contractor (or program) separately. 

Nor can security be added to the system later. Safety properties them
-selves are dependent on a resilient, trustworthy, secure system, so careful 

integration of cybersecurity models and processes into safety analysis will 
6 
Government Accountability Of˜ce, 
Information Security: FAA Needs to Address Weaknesses 
in Air Traf˜c Control Systems
, GAO-15-221, publicly released March 2, 2015, http://www.
gao.gov/products/GAO-15-221.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPE WITH CHANGE 53become increasingly important. Finally, cybersecurity itself is an ongoing 
challenge in many domains and the subject of ongoing research; it will 

be important to track and integrate relevant results as the ˜eld continues 

to evolve. 
Finding: Cybersecurity is critical to the Next
Gen and the NAS. 
Cybersecurity challenges extend from major software platforms 

into the speci˜cation and design of embedded (avionics) equipment 

that connects directly to the NAS. The cybersecurity challenge for 

the NAS is a direct consequence of increasingly digital communica-
tions and systems.
Finding: Although there will always be risk, the lack of appropriate architectural approaches to security and safety that allow for rea
-soning about risks and uncertainty only increase the likelihood that 

risks of unknown magnitude can remain embedded in the NAS. 
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
should incorporate cybersecurity as systems characteristic at all 

levels of the architecture and design. The FAA should begin by 

developing a threat model followed by an appropriate set of archi
-tectural and design concepts that will mitigate the associated risks, 

support resilience in the face of attack or compromise, and allow 

for dynamic evolution to meet a changing threat environment. The 

FAA should inculcate a cybersecurity mindset complementary to 

its well-established safety mindset throughout the organization, its 

contractors, and leadership. 
UNMANNED
 A
IRCRAFT
 SY
STEMS
The FAA de˜nes a UAS as ﬁan unmanned aircraft and its associated 
elements related to safe operations, which may include control stations 

(ground-, ship-, or air-based), control links, support equipment, payloads, 

˚ight termination systems, and launch/recovery equipment.ﬂ
7 The FAA 
Reauthorization Act of 2012 calls for the safe integration of UAS in the 

NAS by 2015. Several interim steps have been taken, including the estab
-lishment of six UAS test sites and the ˜rst roadmap for the integration of 
7 
FAA, 
Integration of Civil Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) in the National Airspace System 
(NAS) Roadmap
, November 7, 2013.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
UAS that re˚ects near-, mid-, and long-term integration activities.
8 The 
FAA also recently proposed rules for small UAS.
9 UAS are already in use as hobbyist craft, and the FAA estimates that 
thousands of small UAS could be active over the next 5 years.
10
 Many of 
these will be small operationsŠ˚ying below 500 feet, within line of sight, 
or away from controlled airspaceŠand not require air traf˜c services. 

Small UAS have the potential for signi˜cant economic impact; examples 

include surveying and treating crops ˜elds, local news reporting, or sup
-porting local law enforcement operations. When additional guidance is in 

place, higher-altitude operations that ˚y above 500 feet, are beyond line 

of sight, or that need civil airspace infrastructure will presumably need 

to be equipped with applicable technologies to interact with current and 

future air traf˜c services.
Several NextGen technologies are essential to the safe integration of 
UAS: the NAS voice system, which will allow UAS pilots to communi
-cate with air traf˜c control (ATC) over ground-to-ground commu
 nication 
networks; Data Communications (Data Comm), which will support the 

sending of digital messages to the ˚ight crew; and System Wide Infor
-mation Management, which will support more timely and improved 

information access to all users of the NAS. However, NextGen plan
-ning and architecture did not explicitly anticipate the introduction of 

UAS and, indeed, the de facto system architecture, having substantially 

predated the advent of UAS, does not seem to lend itself to incorporating 

these new types of aircraft that will place new demands on the system.
11 The expected integration of UAS into the NAS will present new safety 

issues stemming from increased reliance on data links, limited operator 

sensory and environmental cues, and so on. And insuf˜ciently developed 
8 
A 2014 Department of Transportation (DOT) Inspector General report on FAA™s prog
-ress notes that the FAA faces large delays in the integration and that ﬁdelays are due to 
 unresolved technological, regulatory, and privacy issues, which will prevent FAA from meet
-ing Congress™ September 30, 2015, deadline for achieving safe UAS integration.ﬂ (DOT, 
FAA 

Faces Signi˜cant Barriers to Safely Integrate Unmanned Aircraft Systems into the National Airspace 

System
, Of˜ce of Inspector General Audit Report AV-2014-061, June 26, 2014, https://www.
oig.dot.gov/library-item/31975.
9 FAA, ﬁOverview of Small UAS Notice of Proposed Rulemaking,ﬂ released Febru
-ary 15, 2015, http://www.faa.gov/uas/nprm/; and FAA, 
FAA Aerospace Forecast Fiscal 

Years 2013-2033
, 2013, https://www.faa.gov/about/of˜ce_org/headquarters_of˜ces/apl/
 aviation_forecasts/aerospace_forecasts/2013-2033/, p. 66. 
10 See FAA, 
FAA Aerospace Forecast: Fiscal Years 2014-2034
, 2014, https://www.faa.gov/
about/of˜ce_org/headquarters_of˜ces/apl/aviation_forecasts/aerospace_forecasts/2014-

2034/
 media/2014_FAA_Aerospace_Forecast.pdf, p. 65. 
11 
The FAA™s deputy administrator was quoted saying that UAS ﬁweren™t really part 
of the equation when you go back to the origin of NextGenﬂ in J. Lowy, Drones left 
out of air traf˜c plans, AP News, September 23, 2014. http://bigstory.ap.org/article/

d2f90d7230af40b493a849df06e7512e/ap-exclusive-drones-left-out-air-traf˜c-plans. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPE WITH CHANGE 55system architecture is one of several obstacles to fully integrating UAS 
into the NAS. 
The integration of UAS is an example of a rapidly emerging require
-ment that could provoke disruptive changes to both technology and to 

roles and responsibilities. Allowing detect-and-avoid capability (versus 

see-and-avoid) will require changes to the roles of pilot and controller. 

Emergency procedures will need to be developed and tested (e.g., loss of 

data link).
12
 There are privacy issues that arise, as well as questions about 
airworthiness and associated certi˜cations. And, related to the discussion 

of cybersecurity above, the introduction of UAS into the NAS will be 

another security risk that will need to addressed in the security architec
-ture and mitigated. Further, low-altitude UAS operations will require new 

thinking because most are passing through the usual airspace. UAS mis
-sions and operations may be considerably different in their location and 

˚ight plan (e.g., they may survey an area, rather than transit through a 

space). Finally, some degree of autonomy in UAS operations may become 

increasingly desirable, which would generate a variety of new challenges 

for NAS and NextGen planning.
13
 The committee urges that the FAA use UAS as a use case for develop
-ing a better approach to system architecture (and associated technical and 

procedural designs). As one example, satellite-based surveillance (ADS-B 

Out and ADS-B In), if fully deployed, allows a different class of solutions 

to UAS. A living system architecture that appropriately integrates technol
-
ogy and procedural planning could be used to make claims about how the 

overall system will react (and possibly need to be changed) in response 

to the new usage model presented by UAS. Are the data requirements 

aloneŠcontent and update rateŠfor ADS-B Out and ADS-B In suf˜cient 

to provide safe operations absent a pilot in the cockpit? And has this been 

modeled and veri˜ed in the system architecture? 
Finding: The challenge of integrating 
UAS into the NAS illustrates 
the challenges of accommodating changing requirements within the 

current approach to managing architectural and system evolution.
Finding: One measure of the quality of the NAS architecture is (and will be) its ˚exibility in addressing 
UAS operations as they unfold, 
recognizing that 
UAS requirements and capabilities are likely to 
change a great deal as these technologies mature. 
12 
See the 2014 NRC report 
Autonomy Research for Civil Aviation: Toward a New Era of Flight 
(The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.). 
13 
NRC, 
Autonomy Research for Civil Aviation, 
2014. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and 
its architecture leadership community should look for and apply 

lessons from the challenge of integrating unmanned aircraft sys
-tems (
UAS) into the National Airspace System (NAS) as it devel
-ops an effective system architecture. The FAA and its architecture 

leader
 ship community should incorporate measures in the NAS 
system architecture to address 
UAS integration. 
SAFET
Y 
IN
 N
EXTGEN
 AND
 E
MER
GENT
 SY
STEM
 P
ROPERTIES
The FAA and the United States rightly pride themselves on a devotion 
to safety and an excellent safety record to match. At the same time, a con
-servative safety culture can affect how quickly process and technological 
change can happenŠa challenge in an arena where technologies change 

rapidly. Such a culture may inhibit the adoption of new technologies or 

increased automation that could potentially result in net improvements 

in both safety and ef˜ciency. A strong safety culture can make up for 

some limitations in an architecture. For example, while it is a good thing 

for controllers and pilots to be highly sensitive to close-calls, it would be 

better if the architecture and design precluded those near-misses from 

happening. Moreover, if the FAA is going to be held accountable for an 

extremely conservative safety cultureŠwhich has historically been the 

caseŠthen it should be recognized that such conservatism will under
-standably bias the agency away from innovation. Thus, there are risks 

associated with a safety culture as well, not least of which are opportunity 

costs due to not deploying improved (and potentially even safer) technol
-
ogy and procedures in the long run. In addition, excessive care regarding 

safety can result in the accumulation of technical debtŠthe deferral of 

signi˜cant refactoring and infrastructure refresh. 
The original Joint Planning and Development Of˜ce (JPDO) vision 
of improved safety as a result of NextGen systems and technology has 

not been realized. The ﬁsafety management systemﬂ used by the FAA is 

generally very good for airborne systems but less so for ground systems. 

One issue with ground systems can be seen in a recent ERAM failure (dis
-
cussed in Chapter 2) and in the National Transportation Safety Board™s 

annual appeal for better technology to prevent runway incursions.
Safety engineering is about reducing residual risk as low as possible 
and certainly below a threshold of acceptability. Safety engineers do not 

cease analysis just because a system™s operational record is satisfactory. 

Any accident, especially loss of a commercial transport, is regarded as 

an extremely serious event to be avoided. With that view in mind, the 

modernization efforts under way in NextGen raise two key countervail
-ing safety issues:
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPE WITH CHANGE 571.
  The opportunity to exploit the overall system information infrastructure 
to further reduce residual risk.
 This opportunity has not been well 
exploited. An enterprise architecture, for example, could have pro
-vided clear data architectural views to allow discovery of single 

points of failure in the system
14
 and to expose data limits that 
would cause the system to perform in ways not designed.
15
2.
  New practices and procedures made available by NextGen will transform 

a system with an excellent record into a new system with no operational 

record (even if the change is incremental).
 This is, in part, because 
even for incremental changes, there are at least four implementa
-tion cycles, all of which pose some risk: keeping the current state 

functional; updating and upgrading today™s NAS with existing 

technology; updating the NAS system with future technology; and 

the implementation of these changes along the way. All change has 

some risk; the fact that process and procedure must be changed 

multiple times, especially when there is not a system approach 

to the architecture (discussed in Chapter 2), creates dif˜culties. In 

such circumstances, a comprehensive analysis of the residual risk 

that results from the change, coupled with precise system opera
-tional monitoring until con˜dence in risk levels is established, will 

be important.
The early JPDO vision focused on the ˜rst item. At present, there are 
systems such as minimum safe altitude warning (MSAW) that are designed 

to provide supplementary information to ATC about hazardous states. 

ADS-B and wide area augmentation system (WAAS), for example, provide 

a major improvement in the information available to ATC over what has 

been available with radars. That NextGen does not have a system-wide 

monitoring system above and beyond things like MSAW, traf˜c collision 

avoidance system (TCAS), and enhanced ground proximity warning sys
-tem (EGPWS) is surprising. New sensors and communications and com
-puting capabilities suggest that additional  monitoringŠof hazardous states 
and states that existing sensors are expected to detectŠwill be important.
The second item poses more challenges to safety analysis. With new 
practices and procedures, even if the technology is primarily aimed at 

upgrading systems in place, there will be emergent properties and behav
-
iors, some of which may create new safety risks. Is it understood and 
14 
A recent Chicago Center ˜re took down the whole center by cutting certain communica
-tions. The fact that this occurred is made worse by a previous example of single ˜ber optic 
cable cut that did the same thing. See James Adams, 
The Next World War: Computers Are the 

Weapons and the Front Line Is Everywhere
, Simon and Shuster, New York, N.Y., 1998, p. 173.
15 
See Box 2.2. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
well articulated to stakeholders how changes in the NAS could affect 
the hazard rate? The committee believes this understanding should be 

re˚ected in the system architecture and be readily assessable as proposed 

changes are considered. Stakeholders should ˜nd their concerns re˚ected 

explicitly, and there should be models that evaluate safety requirements 

in terms of the highest-level structural choices in the system. Moreover, 

stakeholders should also be able to see evidence of evaluation of alterna
-tives. There will also, undoubtedly, be opportunities to take advantage 

of new approaches to safety engineering that have emerged in recent 

yearsŠprimarily driven by the broad introduction of digital technology. 
In architectural terms, safety is, presumably, a key performance 
parameter. As such, it should be linked to an understanding of how 

changes in ATC capabilities would affect the accident rate. Those links 

need to be understood, communicated, and explicitly re˚ected in the 

system architecture. A system architecture, as described in Chapter 2, 

would allow evaluation of things like safety in terms of the highest-level 

structural choices in the system. And it would enable generation and com
-
munication of the evidence of evaluation of alternatives. 
RIS
K M
ANA
GEMENT
The discussions of cybersecurity and UAS illustrate the need for a 
dynamic and ˚exible approach to emerging challenges that will inevitably 

present themselves over time. Given expected future changes, the archi
-tectural capability encouraged in Chapter 2 would offer insights on how 

such changes could be incorporated and where the highest risks will be. 

More generally, the NAS will need to be resilient, and the FAA will need 

to ensure appropriate and effective risk management strategies. Such 

strategies will need to encompass safety of ˚ight and security, in addition 

to programmatic, operational, and engineering risk. This section offers a 

brief overview of the challenges to traditional engineering project man
-agement of software-intensive systems. It then focuses brie˚y on manage
-
ment of software risk in particular, in response to the statement of task, 

and describes the committee™s views on risks to NextGen.
As discussed in Chapter 1, NextGen today implicitly embodies a set 
of decisions to not dramatically change a wide range of current opera
-tions. Those decisions, along with an analysis of their implications, are not 

explicit in the tacit architecture. But a decision to not change carries heavy 

implications for the realization of any gains that would require such 

changes. The 2008 NRC report
16 cited earlier and ISO/IEC/IEEE Standard 
16 NRC, Pre-Milestone A and Early-Phase Systems Engineering, 
The National Academies 
Press, Washington, D.C., 2008.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPE WITH CHANGE 594201017 both have a clear perspective on what constitutes good practice in 
architecting. They presume that the heart of good practice is to explicitly 
state value attributes (with scales) at the full system, develop multiple 

alternative architectures (in the sense of systems or systems-of-systems), 

and have evaluation models that compare those alternatives to the value 

attributes. Both recommend that multiple alternatives be explored and 

that the rationale for choice be explicit. The committee was struck by the 

lack of alternatives articulated for NextGen. 
Conventional engineering project management techniques assume 
little uncertainty in their requirements and exploit mature precedents 

for construction and deployment. Large-scale software projects managed 

with such engineering governance models typically uncover changes late 

in the life cycle that are dif˜cult to manage and spend 40 percent or more 

of their effort consumed in late scrap and rework.
18
 Much of NextGen is 
focused on new software and the computer platforms it runs on. The iron 

law of traditional software engineering is this: the later you are in the life 

cycle, the more expensive things are to ˜x.
19
 In the committee™s experience, project managers who are experienced 
and trained in traditional project management disciplines such as detailed 

planning, critical-path analysis, and earned value management may have 

a particularly rough transition to dealing with these types of projects. 

They must move from a world of managing certainty and precision to 

a world of resolving uncertainty based on imprecise probabilistic judg
-ments. Although these ideas are far from new, they are also far from 

being standard practice in most software enterprises and require man
-agement support, leadership, and training to be implemented well. In 

addition, it can be easy for a program of˜ce to go into denial regarding 

risks, especially without incentives to aggressively seek out and identify 

uncertainties. Unless such incentives exist, there is likely to be a cou
-
pling of engineering risk with overall project risk. Another factor that 

can make transparent risk assessment and communication dif˜cult could 

be the technical use of the term ﬁriskﬂ to refer to uncertainties regarding 
17 International Organization for Standardization (ISO)/International Electrotechnical 
Commission (IEC)/Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Standard ISO/
IEC/IEEE 42010:2011, ﬁSystems and Software EngineeringŠArchitecture Description,ﬂ 

 December 2011, http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=50508.
18 
W. Royce, 
Software Project Management: A Uni˜ed Framework
, Addison-Wesley, Reading, 
Mass., 1998.
19 
A study from NASA suggests that costs can increase by more than two orders of magni
-tude as fault discovery and repair are deferred until later in the life cycle. See J.M. Stecklein, 
J. Dabney, B. Dick, B. Haskins, R. Lovell, and G. Moroney, ﬁError Cost Escalation Through 

the Project Lifecycle,ﬂ paper presented at 14th Annual International Symposium, June 19, 

2004, available http://ntrs.nasa.gov/search.jsp?R=20100036670.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
the consequences of potential engineering commitments. There may be 
counter-incentives in place to present a picture in which ﬁrisksﬂ appear 

to be minimized. 
There is a reasonable framing of these sorts of risk-related issues in 
the new book by Boehm et al., ﬁ
The Incremental Commitment Spiral Model: 
Principles and Practices for Successful Systems and Software
,ﬂ20 which focuses on how engineering uncertainties are identi˜ed and resolved, framing 

the activity as a process of making commitments. The use of the term 

ﬁrisk,ﬂ while familiar to software and systems engineers, can be mis
-leading to non-practitioners, who might think, ﬁwe want to avoid risk,ﬂ 

whereas engineers must actively seek identi˜cation and engagement with 

these ﬁrisks.ﬂ It may be useful to think of risk as ﬁengineering uncertain
-ties.ﬂ An overview of the process is as follows: (1) active identi˜cation of 

uncertainties (part of the ongoing architectural exercise), (2) architecture 

work to decouple the various categories of uncertainties, (3) identi˜ca
-tion and consideration of options for handling the various uncertainties 

(through modeling, simulation, prototyping, etc.), (4) appropriately timed 

resolution of individual uncertainties (entailing an engineering commit
-ment), and (5) ongoing reconsideration of commitments in response to 

changes in the operating environment and in the technical infrastructure. 

All of this is enabled by ﬁgoodﬂ architectural design, which minimizes 

the extent of coupling among the various uncertainties and commitments.However it is phrased, for large-scale, critical initiatives such as 
 NextGen, clear assessments, understanding, and communication of risk 
are essential. The risk management foundation underlying the modern 

spiral model and the basic ideas of software engineering economics were 

˜rst laid out in the 1980s and have been updated over time.
21
 Applying 
probability theory to deal with uncertainty is also well established.
22
 As 
an example of how probability can be helpful in managing risks, con
-sider a project that will move forward in three successive phases, where 

the duration of each is governed by independent bell-shaped normal 

distributions. Then the total time to completion is the sum of the three 
20 
B. Boehm, J.A. Lane, S. Koolmanojwong, and R. Turner, 
The Incremental Commitment 
Spiral Model: Principles and Practices for Successful Systems and Software,
 Pearson Education, 
Upper Saddle River, N.J., 2014.
21 
See B. Boehm, A spiral model of software development and enhancement, 
Computer
 21(5):61-72, 1988; B. Boehm, 
Software Engineering Economics
, Prentice Hall, 1981; and Boehm 
et al., 
The Incremental Commitment Spiral Model, 
2014. In addition, the 2010 NRC report 
Criti
-cal Code: Software Producibility for Defense 
(The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.) 
also discusses the concept of risk in the engineering process. 
22 S. Bif˚, A. Aurum, B. Boehm, H. Erdogmus, and P. Grünbacher, eds., 
Value-Based Software 
Engineering
, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2006; H. Erdogmus, Valuation of learning 
options in software development under private and market risk, 
Engineering Economist 47(3):308-353, 2002. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPE WITH CHANGE 61normal random variables, and the total uncertaintyŠas measured by the 
standard deviationŠis not the sum of the three individual uncertainties 

(it could be considerably less). Moreover, the probability of completion in 

any particular time frame (e.g., 3 years) could be speci˜ed.
New, iterative development methods have emerged organically 
from diverse software development communities to improve navigation 

through uncertainty. Such navigation requires measured improvement 

with dynamic controls, instrumentation, and intermediate checkpoints 

that permit stakeholders to assess what they have achieved so far (the 

as-is situation), what adjustments they should make to the target objec
-tives (the predicted-to-be situation), and how to refactor what they have 

achieved to adjust those targets in the most economical way (the roadmap 

forward). The key results could be reduced overhead and a signi˜cant 

reduction (perhaps as high as 50 percent) in scrap and rework.
23
Uncertainty can be quanti˜ed by measuring the reduction in variance 
in the distribution of resource estimates to complete.
24 A reduction in vari
-ance, even when means are unchanged, is an important sort of progress 

because reduction in uncertainty regarding cost to complete is valuable 

progress. A reduction in the standard deviation could help reveal how the 

spread of the distribution around its mean has shrunk. Or, a reduction in 

the probability of some particularly adverse outcome (which may not be 

proportional to variance in the distribution of resources) might be a use
-ful quanti˜cation. These estimates are random variables and should be 

represented by their probability distributions, not just the mean values. 

In a healthy software project, each phase of development produces an 

increased level of understanding by reducing uncertainty in the evolv
-ing plans, speci˜cations, and demonstrable releases. At any point in the 

life cycle, the precision of the subordinate artifacts, especially the code 

and test base, should be in balance with the evolving precision in under
-standing and at compatible levels of detail. Specialists in probability 

and statistics can play an important, ongoing role in risk management 

for NextGen. Some such specialists are available to the FAA through the 

National Center of Excellence in Operations Research. 
The risks of NextGen™s software development approach are inher
-ently dif˜cult to quantify. However, quantifying risks and value offers 

means better planning and management. The challenge for complex sys
-tems such as NextGen is how to quantify and prioritize risks so that 
23 
W. Royce, Measuring agility and architectural integrity, 
International Journal of Software 
and Informatics
 5(3):415-433, 2011.
24 
The reduction in variance of a forecasted value is a measure of ﬁvalidated learning,ﬂ 
which is elaborated further in the discussion of entrepreneurial risk management presented 
in 
The Lean Startup: How Today™s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create Radically 
Successful Businesses
 by Eric Reis (Crown Business, New York, N.Y., 2011).
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
projects can be steered effectively and uncertainties can be systematically 
resolved earlier in the life cycle. In all engineering projects, and particu
-
larly software engineering projects, this usually means understanding as 

early in the life cycle as possible, the consequences of risky decisions. If 

the consequences are not understood until late in the process, then the 

costs of unwinding previous bad decisions may become prohibitive, and 

the architecture becomes a source of change friction that burdens ef˜
-ciency of execution. If the consequences can be understood and managed 

earlier, then the architecture can be effectively refactored and optimized. 

An effective architecture can be a basis for risk assessment and mitigation 

and can be used as a tool to support decision making and the recording 

of decisions. 
A good ﬁwindowﬂ through which one can manage risks and assess 
the value that NextGen is likely to deliver is inherent in how the FAA™s 

predictions of risk have changed over time. Unfortunately, this window 

is far too opaque for the committee to draw quanti˜able conclusions. The 

risk management employed by the FAA as described to the committee 

is heavy on process and procedure, but there is little insight inherent in 

the artifacts and outcomes of their risk management process. Although 

requested, the committee did not receive a clear description of the ﬁtop 

˜veﬂ risks to NextGen and did not receive any quanti˜ed representation 

of the top risks, whether they be schedule, cost, technical, or cultural. In 

the committee™s view, in an environment with an effective risk manage
-ment process, the top several risksŠwhatever they were, and there will 

always be risksŠwould be well known and internalized by everyone.
 With regard to speci˜c risk drivers, the committee observed that some 
important choices and considerations are driven by what appear to be 

hardware ˜xed-points, rather than being driven by a systems architecture. 

In some ways, the engineering agenda seems to be set by assumptions 

about hardware procurement (e.g., the hardware selected for ADS and 

Data Comm). In such a case, incompatibilities, risks, overall system costs, 

and life-cycle trade-offs might not have been adequately considered and 

appropriately factored into the decisions that led to the selection of these 

hardware components and the incurring of their now-sunk costs. There 

are also risks caused by the protracted development cycles of ATC tech
-nologies.
25
 These challenges impede prospects for future evolution and 
impinge signi˜cantly on architecture. The current mandates for hardware 

would have bene˜ted from in-depth architectural appraisal along with an 

analysis of trade-offs between hardware and software. 
25 
For instance, ADS-B has been under development since the 1990s and will not be fully 
in service until the 2020s, and ADS-B was developed with little consideration for cyberse
-curity concerns.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPE WITH CHANGE 63With regard to the speci˜c question of schedule risk, in the commit
-tee™s view, the schedule risks in NextGen have multiple sources, including 
budget, approval, certi˜cation, and procedure design. With the exception 

of resourcing and budgets, architecture can help mitigate these. Risk and 

project management needs are well served by an effective architecture 

that can be used for risk assessment and planning. However, the under 

development a system architecture makes it a challenge to determine 

how well the overall system will address system requirements (e.g., for 

security and robustness), causing risks of many kinds, including schedule 

risks. A conventional cost and schedule risk analysis would need to assess 

the program variance in reaching particular objectives, but NextGen func
-
tional and performance objectives are not really de˜ned, or worse, they 

are inconsistently understood from stakeholder to stakeholder. 
 
Finding: The risks to Next
Gen are not clearly articulated and quan
-ti˜ed in order of importance, making it dif˜cult to make sound 

decisions about how to prioritize effort and allocate resources. 
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration should use 
an architecture leadership community and a system architecture, 

with input from specialists in probability and statistics, as a key 

tool in managing and mitigating risks and in assessing new value 

opportunities.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
External Next Generation Air Transportation System (NextGen) stake
-holders have a variety of interests, demands, and constraints. Agreement, 
or at least rough consensus, on requirements is important (albeit challeng
-
ing to achieve). Signi˜cant effort is required to ensure that these various 

interests do not prevent the realization of the public bene˜ts for which 

the nation has invested. Some NextGen programs and components will 

undoubtedly have implications for the workforce, especially controllers 

and pilots. The capacity, skill sets, size, and expectations of the associated 

workforces must be taken into account when developing and deploying 

new or changed capabilities.
1 The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has made numerous efforts 
toward stakeholder engagement. The committee believes that the archi
-tecture, if moved in directions as described in early chapters, can be a 

vital communications tool among all stakeholders. The system architecture 

should be expressed (documented) in a form that readily facilitates commu
-
nication, inspection, and debate with stakeholders and advisers. The archi
-tecture leadership community that the committee recommends can help 

ensure that any documentation that is produced is at appropriate 
 levels of 
abstraction to enable productive discussions among all stakeholders. 
1 The 2007 National Research Council (NRC) report 
Human-System Integration in the System 
Development Process: A New Look
 (The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.) explores 
iterative development processes suitable for systems that have intensive human interaction 

and with humans having functional roles within the system (e.g., pilots, controllers, and 

so on.) 
4Minimize Cultural and 
Organizational Barriers
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MINIMIZE CULTURAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIERS
 65In addition to the challenges of meeting the needs of a large and 
diverse stakeholder community, the FAA must contend with internal 
organizational, cultural, and structural barriers. The rest of this chapter 

offers the committee™s recommendations on a number of related issues: 

human factors, a look at costs and bene˜ts of NextGen, the challenge of 

being a system integrator, and the need for sustained support for opera
-tions and maintenance.
HU
MAN
 F
ACTORS
In any complex system, human factors should be incorporated in 
design, technical, engineering, and architectural discussions as early as 

possible.
2 Human factors should not only be addressed after the design 
is complete (e.g., to check on or tune the design), but much earlier in the 

process. For the FAA, this is both an organizational challengeŠit may not 

have suf˜cient human factors personnel to integrate contractors™ work 

with system designŠas well as a technical and engineering challengeŠto 

determine how requirements and constraints ˚ow to early-stage technical 

requirements so that human factors perspectives can contribute to early 

design work. When human factors are not included at the outset, products 

and services need to be modi˜ed subsequently to meet the human factors 

requirements, which then delays the release of products and services and 

signi˜cantly increases cost. 
NextGen depends on existing technology and future development 
and on creating processes for both to work together. Consequently, human 

factors efforts will be retroactive in some cases while simultaneously 

looking to the future. The National Airspace System (NAS) has many 

moving parts that are being upgraded and updated. Thus, a challenge of 

human factors is the introduction of concepts while the system is being 

maintained, upgraded with existing technology, and then being further 

updated with newer technology. This complexity reinforces the need for 

human factors input at all phases. 
Although human factors expertise exists within a research group in 
the NextGen organization
3 and in the safety organization, there seems to 
2 
The use of the term 
human factors
 in this report is meant to encompass more modern 
terms such as ﬁhuman-system interactionﬂ (HSI) and ﬁuser experience designﬂ (UX). Atten
-tion to the entirety of the interaction, including protocol, robustness (against human error, 
human inattention, etc.), visualization, affordances, and so on, is needed. The business of 

ﬁhuman factorsﬂ goes well beyond response latencies and interfaces ﬁon the screenﬂ such 

as pixels and fonts.
3 
The Human Factors Research and Engineering Division (ANG-C1) is located within the 
NextGen Advanced Concepts and Development Of˜ce (FAA, February 2015 Organizational 

Chart, http://www.faa.gov/about/of˜ce_org/headquarters_of˜ces/ang/of˜ces/media/

orgChartANG.pdf).
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
be no human factors representation at higher levels of NextGen manage
-ment to participate in and sign off on designs and to track and ensure 
contractor inclusion of appropriate human factors considerations in 

implementation. This lack has apparently existed at NextGen from the 

beginning. Human factors has played an insuf˜ciently substantive role 

in the design integration of NextGen systems and procedures. Human 

factors seems to be viewed as research and as relevant to testing and inte
-gration but not as a signi˜cant part of system designŠand certainly not as 

a core activity. And given the traditionally late integration of human fac
-tors expertise, this is understandable. But NextGen poses a major human 

factors system design problemŠnamely, developing con˜dence through 

participation in design and simulation, especially for off-nominal sce
-narios that enable controllers and pilots to understand the capabilities 

and limits of NextGen capabilities and be able to perform without undue 

workload, delay, or error. 
The human factors research group operates a high-quality laboratory 
at the Atlantic City Tech Center. That laboratory conducts human-in-

the-loop simulations (HITLS) on selected early-stage concepts. In addi
-tion, it sponsors some university research and publishes reports that 

are made available to whomever would like to read them. In addition, 

NASA Ames Research Center conducts human factors and simulation 

research (including HITLS) in its Aeronautical Research Division. (A 

recent example focused on terminal sequencing and spacing.
4) However, 
research is not system design, and individuals involved in those projects 

are too few to participate in any meaningful way in the many stove-piped 

programs charged with generating design speci˜cations or contracting 

for and testing of component subsystems of NextGen. The committee™s 

under
 standing is that ANG-C1 human factors experts are not invited to 
reviews, and those in the programs often do not know that experts are 
available. The human factors research group is occasionally asked to help 

review such designs, but without any formal sign-off responsibility. When 

human factors experts are not involved in the very early stages of technol
-
ogy and procedure design, a likely result is that many systems (displays, 

controls, procedures, and subsystems) will not be subject to human factor 

critiques until contractors take over, if then. 
Changes in equipment and procedures beget human errors. The 
proven means to uncover unintended and unexpected events in human-
4 
See, for instance, J. Thipphavong, J. Jung, H. Swenson, L. Martin, M. Lin, and J. Nguyen, 
ﬁEvaluation of the Terminal Sequencing and Spacing System for Performance-Based Navi
-gation Arrivals,ﬂ paper presented at 32nd Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), 
October 2013, available at http://www.aviationsystemsdivision.arc.nasa.gov/publications/

atd1/tech-transfer/index.shtml.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MINIMIZE CULTURAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIERS
 67system interactions prior to operational deployment is by HITLS. Full-
˜delity HITLS can be expensive and time consuming. The FAA has done, 

or is planning to do, a few of these and cites cost as the main reason 

for not doing more. However, for purposes of learning, particularly for 

uncovering unexpected issues of multi-system, multi-person interactions, 

full ˜delity is not necessary. One can gain a great deal from part-task sim
-ulations or even what are called ﬁcognitive walk-throughs.ﬂ The latter are 

play-acting exercises where an experimenter confederate plays the part of 

another human (pilot, controller), and the ﬁequipmentﬂ is a crude mock-

up. These exercises would be much less costly than full-˜delity HITLS 

and could provide useful early-stage input into design and requirements. 
One might like to use fast-time analytic models and simulations, but 
unfortunately there are few human-system analytic models that are very 

predictive, and they are also very context sensitive. There are very few 

analytic models that are up to being very helpful for NextGen, other than 

for modeling basic vision and hearing. One highly relevant model is that 

the time required for a human to receive an alert of some abnormality, 

understand the issue, make a decision, and take proper action exhibits 

a probability distribution with a very long ﬁright-hand tail.ﬂ
5 There is 
hard evidence for this. It means that when a human is a serial element 

in a system, even though the mean and median response times may be 

short, the wait time required to achieve 95 or 99 percent con˜dence will 

be very long. 
Human factors has an important role to play in the FAA program 
management of system engineering and in acquisition. The research 

group in Atlantic City is used primarily for advanced concept explora
-tion and testing and tuning of systems as they are deployed. The group 

is not currently used as part of system design, which is done by contrac
-tors, nor does it have direct input or sign-off authority in acquisition 

decisions. However, an FAA human factors group could represent the 

FAA workforce; provide continuity across time and contractor (so that, 

for instance, two contractors do not work at cross-purposes); represent 

training and concept-of-operations (CONOPS) issues that the FAA must 

face; and provide crucial input to key acquisition decisions. Although 

some of these issues can be speci˜ed by a program of˜ce in a contract, 

some of the human factors consequences are revealed only by experts, 

HITLS, and so on. 
5 
T.B. Sheridan, Human response is lognormal; plan on waiting if you want reliability, 
Ergonomics in Design
 21(1):4-6, 2013.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Implications for Operations and Procedures
The medium-term plan will not fundamentally change the roles and 
activities of pilots and controllers. However, even with modest changes, 
experience shows that if the result is multiple (modest) changes to sys
-tems from what people are accustomed, misunderstandings and errors 

can result. 
Looking ahead, the implications for operations and procedures of 
NextGen™s long-term goals and associated technical changes could be sig-
ni˜cant. Thus, procedure redesign and airspace design can become a large 

bottleneck to making progress. The 2013 Implementation Plan
6 provides 
a nice summary of the FAA vision (at that point) of how things would 

eventually work gate-to-gate. That discussion makes clear that there are 

many new systems, all being developed under different programs and at 

different stages of implementation, being tested at different airports and 

coming online at different times. The timing of the implementation of the 

various elements complicates the human factors challenges. Within actual 

˚ight operations, there has been little opportunity as yet to observe inter
-actions between the many new systems and procedures, since few airlines 

are equipped with required avionics beyond what exists a priori within 

the ˚ight management systems. Further, a key assertion being made by 

proponents of ﬁresilience engineering,ﬂ with which the committee con
-curs, is that errors and failures tend to occur when changes are introduced 

in systems, and the more simultaneous the changes, the greater the risks. 
Some of the anticipated automation in NextGen will likely result in 
challenging and (at least initially) error-prone new tasks for controllers 

and pilots. Although automation is expected to provide bene˜ts over 

the long term, major new tasks for pilots and controllers that merit close 

attention to procedure design, airspace design, and human factors include 

the following: 








and many new navigation aids, especially for arrivals but also including 

navigation around weather cells and surface movements. New computer-

based decision aids are bound to make controllers more dependent on the 

computer advice given. How is that expected to affect policies for assign
-ing authority and responsibility? New thinking is required beyond the 

naïve assumptions that the human operators must always be in charge. If 

computers can recognize invalid input, improper action and/or inatten
-tion, under what circumstances should the automation take over control 
6 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), 
NextGen Implementation Plan
, Washington, D.C., 
June 2013. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MINIMIZE CULTURAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIERS
 69from the human controller? One could imagine a mechanism for rapid 
shifting of decision-making roles in off-nominal situations. 










-tion. This transition will inevitably create new opportunities for human 

error (for example, misreading of text input).








which is supposed to relieve controllers of having to stare at screens to 

vector aircraft moment to moment, enabling them to take on more plan
-ning functions, and enable ˚ow controllers to anticipate traf˜c ˚ow con
-gestion around airports well upstream.













-ences as well as spatial geometryŠwhich can get confusing.




for real-time coordination between sector controllers, ˚ow controllers, 

tower controllers, and pilots for some aspects of NextGen. For example, 

where controllers used to be responsible for only what was in their own 

sector, there is an effort is to get them to anticipate upstream and down
-stream activity more broadly by using new weather and traf˜c decision 

support tools. What means are being used to ensure that all parties to the 

cooperation are seeing the same picture?
Ultimately, realizing any intended bene˜ts to the NAS from improved 
operations and procedures will require pursuing and completing opera
-tional integration. The committee learned that required navigation per
-formance (RNP) and area navigation (RNAV) routes and procedures 

often go unexploited. Even if aircraft are equipped and pilots are trained, 

insuf˜cient RNP/RNAV routes have been designed to make a signi˜cant 

difference in the overall performance of the NAS, and there seems little 

incentive for approach controllers to issue them to arriving aircraft that 

are properly equipped.
7 This will require funding and commitment to see 
these things through. Funding development of new capabilitiesŠmany 

of them quite promisingŠand then curtailing deployment to economize 

on the backend is not prudent. 
7 
A detailed examination of the RNP approach at Midway airport with Southwest Airlines 
(SWA) equipage found that the system-wide fuel savings did not justify the equipment costs 
to SWA in and of itself. The bene˜ts were more to other airlines operating out of O™Hare 

airport due to complex airport airspace interactions. See Akshay Belle, ﬁA Methodology 

for Analysis of Metroplex Air Traf˜c Flowsﬂ Ph.D. dissertation, George Mason University, 

November 2013. Also see A. Belle, M. Wambsganss, and L. Sherry, ﬁA Methodology for Air
-port Arrival Flow Analysis Using Track DataŠA Case study for MDW Arrivals,ﬂ 
Integrated 

Communications, Navigation and Surveillance Conference (ICNS), 2013
, 2013, http://ieeexplore.

ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=6548547&tag=1. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
A Living CONOPS
Early in the NextGen development, the FAA put out a CONOPS with 
some useful detail on the expected new roles of pilots and con
 
trollers.
8 Since then, however, it has not been updated frequently, and what is 
available now does not seem to be aligned with the changes that have 

taken place in NextGen over time. The Implementation Plan has details 

about programs and includes ˚ight operations in a very general sense, 

but has very little substance on operations from the pilot and control
-ler perspectives. The 2007 NRC report 
Human-System Integration in the 

System Development Process
9 emphasized the importance of a frequently 
updated visualization of the whole system design with off-ramp refer
-ences to detailed working papers, and so on. This could be thought of as 

an updated working CONOPS, just as the system architecture should be 

thought of as a living architecture (and not static descriptions of systems 

after major decisions have been made). The CONOPS that was issued was 

perhaps useful to audiences outside of the FAA and NextGen, but not as 

helpful to system developers or others situated within stovepipes; it has 

likely resulted in inappropriate expectations about NextGen that persist 

today. A living CONOPS is related to the system architecture ideas dis
-cussed earlier. Both allow for clear, high-level exposition of NextGen and 

NAS properties that is kept up to date and that informs all stakeholders 

about the continuing evolution of the NAS. Although they are two distinct 

perspectives, both are useful. 
Finding: Numerous constraints challenge the ability of the FAA to 

smoothly and effectively make changes to its systems and proce
-dures. Human factors for crew and controllers are important to suc
-cessful changes. Procedures and airspace redesign go hand-in-hand 

with technical changes and are often just as complicatedŠand thus 

a bottleneck to realizing expected bene˜ts of new technologies and 

approaches. 
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
should recognize and incorporate in early design phases the human 
factors and procedural and airspace implications of stated goals and 

associated technical changes. In addition, the FAA should ensure 

that a human factors specialist, separate from the research and certi-8 
Joint Planning and Development Of˜ce, 
Concept of Operations for the Next Generation Air 
Transportation System
, Version 3.2, http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a535795.pdf. 
9 
NRC, 
Human-System Integration in the System Development Process: A New Look
, The 
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MINIMIZE CULTURAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIERS
 71˜cation groups, have sign-off authority within the Next 
Generation 
Air Transportation System approval process.
COSTS
 AND
 B
ENEFITS
The NAS is a national infrastructure to which signi˜cant resources 
are devoted. As such, it has numerous stakeholders, and there are few 
individuals or businesses in the country that do not have an interest in 

or expectations regarding its performance. Thus, the NAS, the FAA, and 

NextGen efforts are subject to signi˜cant scrutinyŠnot only from users 

(such as trade groups, airlines, airports, and af˜liated labor groups), but 

from Congress, other federal agencies, and the ˚ying public as well. And 

as a federal agency, the FAA must operate within the federal political 

environment and under whatever ˜nancial and performance constraints 

and expectations are produced within it. 
The FAA lays out a business case for NextGen in 
The Business Case for 
the Next Generation Air Transportation System: FY 2013
.10 The committee 
held several discussions with FAA staff as well to understand the analysis 

used to develop the costs and bene˜ts of implementing NextGen. In sum
-mary, the FAA suggests that NextGen midterm improvements will generate 

$182 billion in bene˜ts through 2020 and cost approximately $39 billion. 
NextGen™s bene˜ts are expected to accrue to stakeholders; however, 
many of those bene˜ts cannot be fully realized without participation and 

(sometimes costly) adoption by the relevant stakeholders.
11 Nor is there 
a well-speci˜ed overview of what is and is not known about the value 

of various proposed levels of change (e.g., partial deployment of certain 

technologies or features). The architecture leadership community has a 

role to play with respect to managing system-level trade-offs and how 

they bear on cost and schedule, as discussed in Chapter 2. 
Although many of the NextGen advances should bene˜t participants 
in the NAS writ large, the fact that some of the bene˜ts may accrue to 

competitors could be a disincentive to participation by private entities. 

Thus, for some NextGen goals, the FAA is caught in a bind due to the 

distributed costs of deployment and the uncertainty of those costs if broad 

deployment does not occur. The expectation that economic bene˜ts will 

suf˜ciently motivate airline equipment purchases may be misplaced, call
-
ing into question whether the anticipated voluntary uptake will occur. 
10 
FAA, 
The Business Case for the Next Generation Air Transportation System: FY 2013
, Wash
-ington, D.C., 2013.
11 
For example, ADS-B must be installed not only in larger commercial aircraft but also in 
smaller general aviation aircraft to make full use of the system everywhere and there are 
costs (˜nancial and also process) associated with deploying this technology. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
NextGen plans require a substantial investment, both by the taxpayer 
via the FAA for infrastructure and by carriers and aircraft owners for 
 equipage and training. At best, bene˜tsŠhowever quanti˜edŠto car
-riers will lag deployment costs, and bene˜ts that accrue to the carriers 
will be less than the projected social bene˜ts to the system as a whole. 

Whether something is cost bene˜cial to a speci˜c entity (FAA, the airlines 

as a group, a speci˜c airline, or general aviation) can vary greatly and 

poses a major challenge for NextGen equipage, implementation, train
-ing, and so on. Moreover, the required spending is in real dollars, while 

nearly two-thirds of the economic social bene˜t is quanti˜ed in the form 

of reduced delays to passengers, as is standard for Department of Trans
-portation analyses of this sort.
12
 The FAA does incorporate some savings 
in aircraft operations in its bene˜ts total, but most of the anticipated ben
-e˜ts stem from estimated costs of passenger time and environmental and 

safety bene˜ts;
13
 the passenger delay reduction accounts for $107 billion 
of the expected bene˜ts. 
The FAA does not fully control NextGen; many of the participants 
have to actively choose to acquire elements and participate. Voluntary 

systems are much more likely to succeed when the preferred con˜gura
-tion is locally preferred for each participant, and not just globally pre
-ferred on a cost-bene˜t basis. But, as outlined above, many of the bene˜ts 

may be socially accrued, resulting in a cost-bene˜t equation may not 

actually be positive for many of the required decision makers. In addi
-tion, carriers typically expect a return on investment of less than 3 years, 

whereas the FAA™s development cycle can be much longer. These issues 

constitute a major risk. However, the solution to this problem is not nec
-essarily technical. It may be that it would be best addressed by policy 

changes or other approaches, which are beyond the scope of this report. 
Many of the bene˜ts of NextGen cannot be meaningfully realized 
unless all, or nearly all, air carriers equip their ˚eets with the requisite 

technology.
14 The carriers will also incur training costs, both for new 
equipage and for new procedures that use old equipage. For airlines to 

gain signi˜cant bene˜t, NextGen capabilities will need to be deployed at 
12 Polly Trottenberg, U.S. Department of Transportation, memorandum to Secretarial 
 Of˜cers and Modal Administrators, ﬁRevised Departmental Guidance on Valuation of Travel 
Time in Economic Analysis,ﬂ September 28, 2011, http://www.dot.gov/sites/dot.dev/˜les/

docs/vot_guidance_092811c.pdf.
13 
The passenger value time is based on Department of Transportation guidance from 
2011 and is $43.50 per hour, with a 1.6 percent growth per year. Quantifying environmental 

and safety impacts is also dif˜cult and the methodology can found in the FAA™s report 
The 

Business Case for the Next Generation Air Transportation System 
(2013).
14 
General aviation faces cost challenges as well, especially related to ADS-B Out avionics, 
which are still quite expensive compared to other operating and capital costs.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MINIMIZE CULTURAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIERS
 73suf˜cient scale, and given the delay in implementing new procedures and 
technologies at major airports, airlines may not see bene˜ts for some time. 

Some of the bene˜ts from new technologies and associated procedures 

will not be realized until the system is operating at scale. However, some 

of the demand and capacity pressure present when NextGen was ˜rst 

envisaged have been reduced, which has reduced the urgency for achiev
-ing some of the anticipated bene˜ts. In addition, the FAA™s current analy
-sis does not take into account potentially negative costs related to possible 

security breaches absent improvementsŠa dif˜cult thing to quantify, to 

be sure, but consideration of these sorts of aspects could be illuminating. 

Particular NextGen technologies and likely cost-bene˜t implications of 

each are discussed below. 

ADS-B Out.
 There is a mandate in place that will require ADS-B 
Out equipment by January 1, 2020, on all aircraft operating in nearly all 

NAS Controlled Airspace.
15
 The costs of the equipage must be borne by 
the operators, but the bene˜ts mostly accrue to the FAA in the form of 

streamlined ATC procedures and information and (theoretically, at least) 

the retirement of some old and costly surveillance radar. This, of course, 

requires the mandate, because all aircraft have to be similarly equipped. 

ADS-B In
. This capability, when available, could provide signi˜cant 
bene˜ts to the aircraft, including much improved situational awareness, 

predictive traf˜c information, and delegated separation. Unfortunately, 

there is no technical speci˜cation for these details and no schedule for a 

mandated implementation to drive the development of one. Moreover, 

achieving some of these bene˜ts will require changes in software and 

controller procedures. Without a credible implementation schedule, car
-riers will discount or dismiss the value of these capabilities. 

Performance-based navigation (PBN). Almost all Part 121 (Air 
 Carrier) 
aircraft are equipped with some level of highly capable RNP, as are many 

general aviation aircraft. But use of these procedures at airports remains 

low.
16
 The problem with extracting associated bene˜ts from the use of 
PBN is the absence of necessary procedure design by the FAA. In order 

to demonstrate progress some years ago, many existing procedures using 

ground-based navigational aids were simply converted using identical 

trajectories that simply overlay GPS waypoints. New procedures are 

required that truly utilize the precision of a modern ˚ight management 
15 
FAA, ﬁAutomatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast Operations,ﬂ Advisory Circular, 
October 28, 2014, http://www.faa.gov/documentLibrary/media/Advisory_Circular/
AC_90-114A_FAA_Web_%282%29.pdf.
16 Matthew Hampton, Assistant IG for Aviation Audits, memorandum, ﬁAudit 
 AnnouncementŠFAA Progress in Deploying Controller Automation Tools for Performance-
Based Navigation Flight Procedures,ﬂ July 1, 2014.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
system in terminal procedures and in parallel-track en route navigation. 
The community has already invested heavily in this underutilized equip
-ment, which makes them reluctant to rely on FAA schedules or commit
-ments regarding other efforts. 

Other NextGen capabilities, like Data Communications (Data Comm) 
and Digital Voice, eventually will yield some ef˜ciencies and reduce some 

human error but the emphasis has been on technology, not on quanti
-˜ed bene˜ts. Although the FAA offers some modest incentives for Data 

Comm equipage, in general, there is little incentive for carriers to imple
-ment early and participate in a redesign of the airspace, which should 

be accompanying all this new technology. Instead, much of the airspace 

remains in the con˜gurations established 50 years ago by the constraints 

of ground-based radio frequency navigational aids.
Finding: The costs and bene˜ts analysis presented to the commit
-tee was sensible; however, an ongoing challenge for the FAA and 

Congress is that most of the bene˜ts accrue to the public at largeŠ

largely in the form of reductions in delaysŠwhile costs are borne 

by others, such as the carriers. 
Finding: Current short- and medium-term goals for NextGen 
emphasize new technologies to improve and enhance existing 

capabilities. Although modernization efforts are important and can 

bring signi˜cant bene˜ts, it is a challenge to incentivize uptake for 

equipage, training, or changes in procedures absent clear bene˜ts. 
Recommendation: Preceding any further equipage mandate, the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) should provide an esti
-
mated statement of costs and bene˜ts that is mutually reviewed 

and agreed upon with the relevant stakeholders. It should be based 

on a mature and stable technical speci˜cation and a committed 

timeline for FAA deliverables and investment (for procedure and 

airspace design, infrastructure deployment, training, and so on). 

On this basis, industry could responsibly invest as required, given 

a reasonable expected return.
THE
 C
HALLEN
GE OF
 BEIN
G 
A SY
STEM
 I
NTE
GRATOR
The FAA does not operate in a vacuum. When it comes to large 
government systems and software projects, it faces many of the same 

challenges as many other government agencies, among them are the 

following: a reliance on waterfall approaches to software development, 

dif˜culty in hiring and retaining skilled information technology (IT) pro
-A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MINIMIZE CULTURAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIERS
 75fessionals, policies and requirements developed without suf˜cient tech
-nical or engineering input, and acquisition and budgeting processes not 
designed for the way modern software systems are built.
17
 The problems with air traf˜c control and airspace modernization, 
in the face of rapid technology change and challenging governmental 

budgeting requirements, have not been unique to the United States. Most 

modern industrialized countries have experienced the same problems. 

Most noticeable and relevant to the U.S. system are the Canadian, 
 British, 
German, and Australian systems. Each has proceeded in its own way 

to separate the (mostly industrial) function of air traf˜c control from 

the essential governmental oversight function and responsibility that is 

demanded of sovereign nations under the Chicago Convention Treaty 

of 1944.
18
 The managerial and technical expertise required to constantly 
upgrade modern telecommunications systems is challenging for any gov-
ernment agency to attract and maintain. In addition, culturally, most 

government employees are risk averse and conservative in action due to 

the high level of public accountability and close oversight intrinsic to any 

government operation. This is not an environment in which most highly 

skilled engineers choose to be employed.
19
Most NextGen software development is outsourced to contractors, 
thus obliging the FAA to act as the system integrator. However, the FAA™s 

NextGen team is ill-equippedŠin terms of having suf˜cient broad and 

deep expertise and in terms of resourcesŠto perform as a system inte
-grator. Without suf˜cient system architecture competence and mature 

architectural approaches, the probability of success is compromised. Of 

particular note, the committee did not hear much from the FAA or its 

contractors about change managementŠespecially in the case of impor
-tant changes required by the agency rather than those managed entirely 

within the contractor™s own software and system development processes. 
Second, the committee has a concern about the criteria being used to 
evaluate and assess software contractors. In brie˜ngs to the committee, 

there was signi˜cant emphasis placed on contractor software develop
-ment maturity (e.g., capability maturity model integration, or CMMI) 

and less emphasis on contractor track record for value delivery. Federal 

procurements use a ﬁbest valueﬂ criterion above all others with strong 
17 For more information about transforming large-scale government acquisition of 
software-intensive systems in a more agile manner, see NRC, 
Achieving Effective Acquisi
-tion of Infor
 mation Technology in the Department of Defense
, The National Academies Press, 
 Washington, D.C
., 
2010. 
18 
The Convention on International Civil Aviation was signed on December 7, 1944, and is 
available at http://www.icao.int/publications/Documents/7300_orig.pdf.
19 
Due to the nature of the challenges, threats, and incentives, the Department of Defense 
may be a possible exception to this observation.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
emphasis on past performance. One element may be a CMMI rating, but 
that is one of many factors.
20
 However, like the risk management process, 
the software and the acquisition approaches seem to be overly process 

driven, not outcome driven. The committee™s impression is that there was 

little apparent concern for increased ef˜ciency that can be channeled into 

cost reduction, timeliness improvement, or quality improvement. While 

high ratings for capability maturity are desirable, they do not suf˜ciently 

re˚ect the quality of products delivered, or the effectiveness of the con
-tractor in exploiting software to leverage existing capabilities, or exploit 

emerging technologies to best effect. At the same time, contractor efforts 

to work collaboratively with others on better integration are undoubtedly 

hampered by stovepiping and procurement regulations. 
If the FAA is to succeed in both the medium and long term, it will 
require enhancements to its technical expertise. Architecture and systems 

engineering, which are needed for successful integration of capabilities 

and platforms into a coherent NAS system, have been undervalued. Pro
-gram management and systems engineering process are important but 

are not a substitute for talent that can effectively guide the design and 

evolution of NextGen. This is especially important if the FAA continues to 

act as the systems integrator of NextGen programs. In that role, the FAA 

should maintain architectural leadership and not delegate architecture 

de˜nition and control to contractors. 
Today, the FAA relies greatly on its vendors and other external talent. 
Internally, the FAA depends on a very small number of individuals and 

lacks the critical mass that characterizes a vibrant and effective technical 

community. Digital communications will take on increasing importance as 

the NAS is modernized, so the FAA will need additional technical exper
-tise in designing modern digital networks and protocols. Historically, air 

traf˜c control has relied heavily on analog voice communications, but 

with programs like Data Comm, digital communication will increasingly 

become primary. Cybersecurity is a challenge facing all who use modern 

computing and communications technology, and the potential threats and 

risks are magni˜ed for critical infrastructure, like the systems that make 
20 Indeed, government contractors generally (beyond FAA contractors) have been required 
to complete CMMI assessments since the 1990s, but government software acquisition pro
-grams continue to suffer from delayed schedules and inadequate product performance. A 
2014 GAO report on information technology reform initiatives noted that ﬁfederal IT projects 

too frequently fail and incur cost overruns and schedule slippages while contributing little to 

mission-related outcomesﬂ (GAO, 
Information Technology: Reform Initiatives Can Help Improve 

Ef˜ciency and Effectiveness
, Statement of David A. Powner, Director, Information Technology 
Management Issues, Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Ef˜ciency and Effectiveness of 

Federal Programs and the Federal Workforce, Committee on Homeland Security and Gov
-ernmental Affairs, U.S. Senate, http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-14-671T). 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MINIMIZE CULTURAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIERS
 77up the NAS. The FAA needs strong cybersecurity expertise in designing, 
implementing, integrating, and operating NextGen systems. Finally, while 

the FAA should emphasize organic talent, it will also be fruitful in today™s 

world for the FAA to regularly tap into outside communities of expertise. 

Even if the FAA were not acting as systems integrator, it would still need 

to be a ﬁsmart customer,ﬂŠmeaning that it needs expertise that will 

enable it to effectively structure and manage its supplier relationships.
Developing and retaining this expertise will be a challenge. However, 
proceeding with inexperienced or less than the best personnel in key 

leadership positions is a signi˜cant risk.
21
 The FAA will likely need to 
tap into its ﬁgovernment-sideﬂ network of partners in federally funded 

research and development centers, systems engineering and technical 

assistance contractors, and similar organizations in order to gain access 

to suf˜cient expertise. It will also need to examine the incentive structure 

it creates for its primes (and into the supply chain as well) to better align 

incentives around the risk-managed, architecture-led processes above. 

These incentives can include earned-value models, rewards, and penal
-ties. There also need to be processes for the various NextGen primes (and 

potentially bidders) to participate in the architecting process in a way that 

the architectural decisions that emerge will be respected and supported 

by those involved in program execution (rather than being used as an 

excuse to incur additional costs). 
Finding: Like other federal agencies, the FAA faces challenges 

implementing IT systems and in recruiting and retaining the work
-force needed for designing, maintaining, and enhancing systems 

such as Next
Gen. In particular, the FAA is ill-equipped to perform 
as a systems integrator.
Recommendation: The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
should nurture workforce talent in the areas of systems engineer
-ing, architecture, systems integration, digital communications, and 

cybersecurity. Signi˜cant effort will be required to attract, develop, 

and retain this talent, given the high demand outside the FAA.
Recommendation: Should the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) continue to act as the systems integrator of Next 
Generation 
21 
From NRC, 
Pre-Milestone A and Early-Phase Systems Engineering,
 2008: ﬁPerhaps the big
-gest risk of all in undertaking large development programs is to proceed with less than the 
best personnel, particularly in the key leadership positions in government and industry. 

High-quality program managers and system engineering leaders, in particular, are critical. 

High aptitude and extensive experience, combining to create high domain knowledge, are 

required for individuals to be fully effective in these positionsﬂ (p. 82). 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Air Transportation System programs, it should maintain architec
-tural leadership and not delegate architecture de˜nition and control 
to contractors. 
SU
PPORT
 F
OR
 O
PERATIONS
 AND
 M
AINTENANCE
A common fallacy with software-intensive systems is that they can 
be built, deployed, and then operate with relatively little ﬁmaintenanceﬂ 

and modernization effort. The surprise, for those unfamiliar with such 

systems, is that operations and maintenance will very often include sub
-stantial modernization effort. This effort is needed both in response to 

new requirements and also in response to rapid growth and change in 

technological infrastructure. This is true for NextGen and the NAS, as 

the rest of this report has described, and this fact has implications for 

how the FAA should explain its needs to Congress and its overseers. 
Congress plays an important and complex role in its relationship with 
the FAA and NextGen. One facet of its role is oversight, which it has done 

diligently ever since the formation of the FAA in 1958 and especially since 

the time of the controllers™ strike and the FAA™s response and later the 

Advanced Automation System (AAS) problems. However, in its role of 

authorization and appropriations, it has increasingly played an indirect 

role in the management of the FAA and has always acted as its banker. 

Since the AAS, Congress has passed legislation aimed at improving the 

FAA™s ability to modernize the ATC system. 
In the 1996 Appropriations Bill, the FAA was given nearly unique 
authority to revise its acquisition regulations (FAA™s Acquisition Manage
-
ment System is broader and less prescriptive than the Federal Acquisition 

Regulation) and its personnel system. The aim was to allow the agency 

to attract the necessary technical personnel and to more rapidly and ef˜
-ciently acquire the telecommunications equipment, software, and systems 

integration required of a modern air traf˜c control system. Some of these 

reforms were especially useful in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Despite 

these measures, today™s FAA, like many other government agencies, has 

trouble attracting and retaining suf˜cient technical talent to support its 

missions. And in 2004, the community was calling for even better perfor
-mance and a more bold vision of the future. Congress then approved the 

formation of the Joint Planning and Development Of˜ce (JPDO), allowed 

for the new position of chief operating of˜cer to be recruited from indus
-try, and reorganized the FAA air traf˜c control organization, based on an 

airline industrial model. Congress further authorized the formation of an 

oversight committee composed of industry and government experts and 

managers. In spite of these proactive measures on the part of Congress, 

the FAA™s NextGen program is still moving at a pace slower than desired 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MINIMIZE CULTURAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL BARRIERS
 79and is now facing the new requirement of accommodating unmanned 
aircraft systems into civil airspace. 
As for any large-scale government IT effort, a long-term commitment 
is important. Although Congress has been supportive of FAA efforts, 

as the above discussion makes clear, in the committee™s view, there is a 

speci˜c need for support of ongoing maintenance and modernization 

(upgrades) and refreshing and modernizing of both hardware and soft
-ware to provide reliable, cost-effective operation.
22
 Too often in govern
-ment, funds are allocated for speci˜c (new) programs or projects without 

suf˜cient allocation for the full life-cycle costs and for maintenance and 

refresh of existing (and still important) programs.
23
NextGen is and will be a continuously evolving system-of-systems 
and should not be thought of as one large monolith. NextGen needs to 

continually evaluate new technologies and approaches and then make 

decisions about what to incorporate and how. This means that there will 

be some reconceptualization going on while there is also a great deal of 

implementation happening, perhaps of components that are already being 

scheduled to be phased out. A system architecture, as discussed earlier in 

the report, is essential, always. But there must be ˚exibility for the system 

architecture to evolve, too, with consequent changes down the line lead
-ing ultimately to the implementation of a deployed system. In this respect, 

NextGen needs to be managed and evolved very much like other large 

systems (e.g., ˜nancial systems and retail systems) that are constantly 

evolving, requiring that management and ˜nancing recognize this need 

for evolvability. A large software-intensive system is not ﬁboughtﬂ once 

and for all, but rather put into place and then continually maintained and 

evolved at continuing cost and effort.
24
 Finally, as discussed in Chapter 1, 
Congress itself can partner with the FAA in acknowledging the changing 

context and adjusting expectations as appropriate.
22 
Learning from the NavCanada experience would be useful. A ˜nancially stable, long-
term business model is required to both organize and attract the necessary technical talent/
expertise with a dependable income stream to provide project stability and predictability to 

design and deploy such a complex system. 
23 
Lessons from the private sector suggest that there are many other equally signi˜cant 
oppor
 tunities for support of such systems, such as continuity and timeliness of funding, 
color of money, directed funding, addressing the lack of discretionary funds, and more 
readily moving funds where needed the most. These are common practices in running a 

corporation that are not typically available within the government structure. 
24 
This is increasingly inconsistent with waterfall-style software development approaches 
that discourage revisiting early concepts and architectures and that can thwart innovation 

and evolution. 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Finding: As a large-scale, software-intensive system, Next
Gen and 
the NAS will bene˜t if ongoing maintenance of the NAS and its 
hardware and software systems are supportedŠin addition to pro
-grammatic investments; such an approach will make the most of 

past and ongoing investments.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.83
DAVID E. LIDDLE, 
Chair,
 has been a partner at U.S. Venture Partners, 
a Silicon Valley-based venture capital ˜rm since 2000. He co-founded 
 Interval Research Corporation, a Silicon Valley-based laboratory and 
incubator for new businesses focusing on broadband, consumer devices, 

interaction design, and advanced technologies, where he served as presi
-dent and CEO between 1992 and 1999. Previously, Dr. Liddle co-founded 

Metaphor Computer Systems, Inc., in 1982 and served as its president and 

CEO until 1991. He has also held executive positions at Xerox Corpora
-tion and IBM. Prior to co-founding Interval with Paul Allen, Dr. Liddle 

founded Metaphor, which was acquired by IBM in 1991, which named 

him vice president of business development for IBM Personal Systems. 

His extensive experience in research and development has focused largely 

on human-computer interactions and includes 10 years at Xerox Palo 

Alto Research Center (PARC), from 1972 to 1982. He has been a direc
-tor of MaxLinear, Sybase, Broderbund Software, Borland International, 

and Ticketmaster and is currently on the board of the New York Times 

Company and InPhi, Inc. His board involvement at U.S. Venture Part
-ners includes AltoBeam, Karmasphere, and LineStream. Dr. Liddle served 

on the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Informa
-tion Science and Technology Committee and as co-chair of the National 

Research Council™s (NRC™s) Computer Science and Telecommunications 

board. His contributions to human-computer interaction design earned 

him the distinction of senior fellow at the Royal College of Art. He is on 

the boards of SRI International, the College of Engineering at Stanford 
A Biographies of Committee 
Members and Staff
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
University and The Public Library of Science. Dr, Liddle earned a B.S. in 
electrical engineering at the University of Michigan and a Ph.D. in EECS 

at the University of Toledo, where his dissertation focused on recon
-˜gurable computing machines and theories of encryption, encoding, and 

signal recovery. He recently served as chair of the NRC study on wireless 

technology prospects and policy options, and on the subsequent PCAST 

study on realizing the full potential of government-held spectrum to spur 

economic growth. He is a type-rated Citation pilot with more than 2,000 

hours in jets. 
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN is the Percy K. and Vidal L. W. Hudson 
 Professor 
of Computer Science at Columbia University, where he does research 
on networks, security, and especially why the two do not get along. He 

recently served as the chief technologist for the Federal Trade Commis
-sion. He joined the faculty at Columbia in 2005 after many years at Bell 

Labs and AT&T Labs Research where he was an AT&T fellow. He received 

a B.A. degree from Columbia University and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees 

in computer science from the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 

While a graduate student, he helped create Netnews; for this, he and 

the other perpetrators were given the 1995 Usenix Lifetime Achieve
-
ment Award (The Flame). In 2007 he received the National Institute of 

Standards and Technology/National Security Agency National Computer 

Systems Security Award. He is a member of the National Academy of 

Engineering (NAE) and is serving on the Department of Homeland Secu
-rity™s Science and Technology Advisory Committee and the Technical 

Guidelines Development Committee of the Election Assistance Commis
-sion. He was a member of the Internet Architecture Board from 1996-2002 

and was co-director of the Security Area of the Internet Engineering Task 

Forcefrom 2002 through 2004. Dr. Bellovin is the co-author of 
Firewalls and 

Internet Security: Repelling the Wily Hacker,
 and holds a number of patents 
on cryptographic and network protocols. He has served on many NRC 

committees, including those on information systems trustworthiness, the 

privacy implications of authentication technologies, and cybersecurity 

research needs. He was also a member of the information technology 

subcommittee of an NRC study group on science versus terrorism. 
JOHN-PAUL B. CLARKE is an associate professor in the Daniel 
 Guggenheim 
School of Aerospace Engineering with a courtesy 
 appointment in the 
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering and 
director of the Air Transportation Laboratory at the Georgia Institute of 

Technology. He received S.B., S.M. , and Sc.D. degrees in aeronautics and 

astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). His 

research and teaching in the areas of control, optimization, and system 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 85analysis, architecture, and design are motivated by his desire to simultane
-ously maximize the ef˜ciency and minimize the societal costs (especially 
on the environment) of the global air transportation system. Dr. Clarke 

has made seminal contributions in the areas of air traf˜c management, air
-craft operations, and airline operationsŠthe three key elements of the air 

transportation systemŠand has been recognized globally for developing, 

among other things, key analytical foundations for the Continuous Descent 

Arrival and novel concepts for robust airline scheduling. His research has 

resulted in signi˜cant changes in engineering methods, processes, and 

productsŠmost notably the development of new arrival procedures for 

four major U.S. airports and one European airportŠand changes in airline 

scheduling practices. He is an associate fellow of the American Institute of 

Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) and a member of the Airline Group 

of the International Federation of Operational Research Societies, Institute 

for Operations Research and the Management Sciences, and Sigma Xi. His 

many honors include the AIAA/AAAE/ACC Jay Hollingsworth Speas 

Airport Award (1999), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Excel
-lence in Aviation Award (2003), the NAE Gilbreth Lecturership (2006), and 

the 37th SAE/AIAA William Littlewood Memorial Lecture Award (2012). 
GEORGE L. DONOHUE was granted the status of professor emeritus 
in 2010 and has been a professor of systems engineering and operations 

research at George Mason University since 2000. He has an M.S. and a 

Ph.D. in mechanical and aerospace engineering from Oklahoma State Uni
-
versity and a BSME from the University of Houston. From 1994 to 1998, he 

was the associate administrator for research and acquisitions at the FAA 

and is the founding director of the Center for Air Transportation Systems 

Research in the Volgenau School of Engineering. Dr. Donohue is a former 

vice president of the RAND Corporation and director of 
 PROJECT AIR 
FORCE (1989-1994). Previously he was the director of DARPA™s Aerospace 

and Strategic Technology Of˜ce (1988-1989), a vice president of Dynamics 

Technology (1979-1984). He served as head of the Advanced Technology 

Division (1977-1979) and head of the Fluid Mechanics Branch (1973-1976) 

at the U.S. Naval Ocean System Center in San Diego, California. In the 

interim, he served as a program manager in DARPA™s Tactical Technology 

Of˜ce (1976-1977). He has been awarded an NRC post-doctoral fellow
-ship with the U.S. Navy (1973-1974), the Secretary of Defense Meritorious 

Civilian Service Medal (1977), the Air Traf˜c Control Association Clifford 

Burton Memorial Award (1998), and the Embry Riddle Aeronautical Uni
-versity Pinnacle Award for initiating the Alaska Capstone ADS-B Program 

(2007). He was named one of 
Federal Computer Week™s
 top 100 Executives 
in 1997 and was also named one of the top 100 decision makers in Wash
-ington, D.C., by the 
National Journal
 in 1997. Dr. Donohue was chosen to 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
head the U.S. Delegation to the International Civil Aviation Organization
-Conference on Air Traf˜c Management Modernization in 1998. He is a 
member of Tau Beta Pi, Pi Tau Sigma, Omicron Delta Kappa, and Sigma 

Xi honorary societies. He is a fellow of AIAA and a licensed private pilot 

with a single-engine land rating. In addition to more than 60 published 

unclassi˜ed papers, he has been the principal author of two books on 

air transportation, the most recent is titled 
Terminal Chaos: Why U.S. Air 

Travel is Broken and How to Fix It
. He has testi˜ed before Congress on both 
military and civil aviation issues on numerous occasions. Dr. Donohue is 

currently acting as an academic advisor to undergraduate and doctoral 

students. He is a member of the NRC™s NASA Aeronautics Research and 

Technology Roundtable, and a member of the Mechanical and Aerospace 

Engineering Advisory Board, Oklahoma State University.
R. JOHN HANSMAN, JR. is the T. Wilson Professor in the Department 
of Aeronautics and Astronautics at MIT, where he is head of the Humans 

and Automation Division. He also is director of the International Center 

for Air Transportation. His current research interests focus on advanced 

cockpit information systems, including ˚ight management systems, air-

ground datalink, electronic charting, advanced alerting systems, and 

˚ight crew situational awareness. Dr. Hansman received a Ph.D. from 

MIT. He holds six U.S. Patents and has authored more than 250 technical 

publications. He is also an internationally recognized expert in aviation 

meteorological hazards such as icing and windshear. He is a member of 

the NAE and a fellow of AIAA. He received the 1998 Bose Award for 

Excellence in Teaching, the 1997 FAA Excellence in Aviation Award, the 

1994 AIAA Losey Atmospheric Award, the 1990 OSTIV Diploma for Tech
-
nical Contributions, and the 1986 AIAA Award for Best Paper in Thermo
-physics. He recently served as co-chair of the MIT Presidential Task Force 

on Student Life and Learning. Dr. Hansman consults and serves as a 

member of numerous advisory and technical committees, including the 

Congressional Aeronautics Advisory Committee, the FAA Research and 

Development Advisory Committee, the FAA WAAS Independent Review 

Board, and the NASA Advanced Air Transportation Technologies Execu
-tive Steering Committee. He serves on several editorial boards, including 

Air Traf˜c Control Quarterly
. He has more than 5,650 hours of pilot in-
command time in airplanes, helicopters, and sailplanes, including meteo
-rological, production, and engineering ˚ight test experience.
MATS P.E. HEIMDAHL is the director of the University of Minnesota Soft
-ware Engineering Center where he specializes in software engineering and 

safety critical systems. Dr. Heimdahl is the recipient of the National Science 

Foundation™s CAREER award and University of 
 Minnesota™s 
 McKnight 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 87Land-Grant Professorship, the McKnight Presidential 
 Fellow Award, and 
the Award for Outstanding Contributions to Post-
 
Baccalaureate, Gradu
-ate, and Professional Education. His research group, the Critical Systems 
Research Group, is conducting research in software engineering and is 

investigating methods and tools to help develop software with predictable 

behavior free from defects. Research in this area spans all aspects of system 

development ranging from concept formation and requirements speci˜ca
-tion through design and implementation to testing and maintenance. In 

particular, he is investigating model-based software development for criti
-
cal systems, focusing on how to use various static veri˜cation techniques 

to assure that software requirements models possess desirable properties, 

how to correctly generate production code from software requirements 

models, how to validate models, and how to effectively use the models in 

the testing process.
JOHN C. KNIGHT is a professor of computer science at the University 
of Virginia. He holds a B.Sc. (Hons) in mathematics from the Imperial 

College of Science and Technology (London) and a Ph.D. in computer 

science from the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. Prior to joining the 

University of Virginia in 1981, he was with NASA™s Langley Research 

Center. He was the general chair of the 2000 International Symposium 

on the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE), and general chair of 

the 2007 International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). He 

served as editor in chief of 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
 from 
January 2002 to December 2005. He was honored by the IEEE Computer 

Society as the recipient of the 2006 Harlan D. Mills Award ﬁfor encourag
-ing software researchers to focus on practical results as well as theory, and 

for critically analyzing their assumptions and evaluating their research 

claims.ﬂ He was honored by the Association for Computing Machinery™s 

(ACM™s) Special Interest Group on Software Engineering (SIGSOFT) as 

the recipient of the 2008 Distinguished Service Award.
LEON J. OSTERWEIL is a professor in the Department of Computer Sci
-ence and co-director of the Laboratory for Advanced Software Engineering 
Research at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. He served as dean 

of the College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics at the University of 

Massachusetts, as chair of the Information and Computer Science Depart
-
ment of the University of California, Irvine, and chair of the Computer 

Science Department at the University of Colorado, Boulder. Dr. Osterweil 

received the Outstanding Research Award for lifetime achievement in 

research and the In˚uential Educator Award, both from ACM SIGSOFT. 

His paper suggesting the idea of process programming was recognized as 

the Most In˚uential Paper of the 9th International Conference on Software 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Engineering, awarded as a 10-year retrospective. Dr. Osterweil has served 
on the editorial boards of several journals, including 
IEEE Software, IEEE 

Transactions on Software Engineering,
 and ACM Transactions on Software 

Engineering and Methodology.
 He has served as program chair for many 
conferences, including the 16th ICSE, and as general chair of the 28th ICSE 

and the 6th FSE. He was a member of the Software Engineering Institute™s 

Process Program Advisory Board for several years following its inception 

and has been an advisor or consultant for such organizations as SAIC, 

MCC, AT&T, Boeing, KLA-Tencor, TRW, and IBM. He has been a keynote 

speaker at many conferences around the world. Dr. Osterweil is a fellow 

of the ACM and an ACM Lecturer.
WALKER E. ROYCE is the chief software economist in IBM Software 
Group. He is a principal consultant and practice leader specializing in 

measured improvement of systems and software development capabil
-ity. He is the author of three books: 
Eureka! Discover and Enjoy the Hidden 

Power of the English Language
 (2011), 
The Economics of Software Development
 (2009) and 
Software Project Management, A Uni˜ed Framework
 (1998). From 
1994-2009, Mr. Royce was the vice president and general manager of 

IBM™s Rational Services organization and built a worldwide team of 500 

technical specialists in software delivery best practices and $100 million 

in consulting services. Before joining Rational/IBM, he spent 16 years 

in software project development, software technology development, and 

software management roles at TRW Electronics and Defense. Mr. Royce 

was a recipient of TRW™s Chairman™s Award for Innovation for his con
-tributions in distributed architecture middleware and iterative software 

processes (1990) and was a TRW technical fellow. He received his B.A. in 

physics from the University of California and his M.S. in computer engi
-neering from the University of Michigan. 
GAVRIEL SALVENDY is professor emeritus of industrial engineering at 
Purdue University and chair professor emeritus and former head (2001-

2011) of the Department of Industrial Engineering at Tsinghua University, 

Beijing, and P.R. of China. He is the author or co-author of more than 550 

research publications, including more than 300 journal papers, and he is 

the author or editor of 42 books. His publications have appeared in seven 

languages. He is the major professor to 67 former and current Ph.D. stu
-dents. His main research deals with the human aspects of design, opera
-tion, and management of advanced engineering systems. Dr. Salvendy is 

the founding editor of 
International Journal on Human-Computer Interaction
 and 
Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing and Service Industries
. He was the founding chair of the International Commission on Human 

Aspects in Computing, headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland. In 1990, 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 89he became the ˜rst member of either the Human Factors and 
 
Ergonomics 
Society or the International Ergonomics Association to be elected to the 
NAE. He was elected ﬁfor fundamental contributions to and professional 

leadership in human, physical, and cognitive aspects of engineering sys
-tems.ﬂ In 1995, he received an honorary doctorate from the Chinese Acad
-
emy of Sciences ﬁfor great contributions to the development of science 

and technology and for the great in˚uence upon the development of sci
-ence and technology in Chinaﬂ and is the fourth person in all ˜elds of 

science and engineering in the 45 years of the Academy ever to receive 

this award. In 2006, he received the Friendship Award presented by the 

People™s Republic of ChinaŠthe highest honor the Chinese government 

confers on foreign experts. In 2007, he received the John Fritz Medal, 

which is the engineering profession™s highest award, for his ﬁfundamen
-tal international and seminal leadership and technical contributions to 

human engineering and industrial engineering education, theory, and 

practice.ﬂ The journals 
Ergonomics
 (2003), 
Computers in Industry
 (2010), 
and 
Intelligent Manufacturing
 (2011) have published special issues in his 
honor. He is an honorary fellow and life member of the Ergonomics Soci
-ety and a fellow of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, the Insti
-tute of Industrial Engineers, and the American Psychological Association. 

He has advised organizations in more than 31 countries on the human 

side of effective design, implementation, and management of advanced 

technologies in the workplace. He earned his Ph.D. in engineering pro
-duction at the University of Birmingham, United Kingdom. 
THOMAS B. SHERIDAN is the Ford Professor of Engineering and 
Applied Psychology, Emeritus, in the Department of Mechanical Engi
-neering and the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics at MIT, 

where he has spent most of his professional career serving as director 

of the Human-Machine Systems Laboratory. Dr. Sheridan™s research 

interests are in experimentation, mathematical modeling, and design of 

human-machine systems in air, highway, and rail transportation, space 

and undersea robotics, process control, arms control, telemedicine, and 

virtual reality. He has authored and edited numerous books, co-founded 

the MIT Press journal 
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments
 and 
served on several editorial boards. Dr. Sheridan chaired and continues to 

serve on the NRC™s Committee on Human Systems Integration and has 

served on numerous government and industrial advisory committees. 

Since retiring from MIT, he has served the U.S. government as a senior 

research fellow for the U.S. Department of Transportation Volpe Center 

and as chief system engineer for human factors for the FAA. He is a 
 fellow 
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society and a recipient of their 

Paul M. Fitts and Arnold Small Awards and the President™s Outstanding 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Career Award, as well as a former president of the society. He was elected 
to the NAE in 1995. Dr. Sheridan holds a bachelor™s degree from Purdue 

University, an M.S. degree from the University of California, Los Angeles, 

and a Sc.D. degree from MIT.
ROBERT F. SPROULL recently retired as vice president and director of 
Oracle Labs, an applied research group that originated at Sun Micro
-systems. Since his undergraduate days, Dr. Sproull has been building 

hardware and software for computer graphics, clipping hardware, an 

early device-independent graphics package, page description languages, 

laser printing software, and window systems. He has also been involved 

in very-large-scale integrated circuit design, especially of asynchronous 

circuits and systems. Before joining Sun Microsystems in 1990 (acquired 

by Oracle in 2010), he was a principal with Sutherland, Sproull and Asso
-ciates, an associate professor at Carnegie Mellon University and a mem
-ber of Xerox PARC. He is a coauthor with William Newman of the early 

text 
Principles of Interactive Computer Graphics.
 He is also an author of 
the book 
Logical Effort,
 which deals with designing fast complementary 
metal-oxideŒsemiconductor circuits. He is a member of the NAE, a fel
-low of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and has served on 

the U.S. Air Force Scienti˜c Advisory Board and as a technology partner 

of Advanced Technology Ventures. He is currently the chair of the NRC™s 

Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, a director of Applied 

Micro Circuits, Inc., and an adjunct professor of computer science at Uni
-versity of Massachusetts, Amherst. Dr. Sproull received a B.A in physics 

from Harvard College and an M.S. and Ph.D. in computer science from 

Stanford University.
JAMES W. STURGES is an independent consultant specializing in program 
management and systems engineering for very large, complex aerospace 

and defense systems. He retired in 2009 from Lockheed Martin Corpora
-
tion where he had been director, engineering processes, and director, mis
-sion assurance. Prior to that he was vice president, engineering and total 

quality, at Loral Air Traf˜c Control/Lockheed Martin Air Traf˜c Manage
-ment, and C3I strategic business area director for Loral Tactical Defense 

Systems, Arizona. He is an associate fellow and past member of the Stan
-dards Executive Council and chair of the Systems Engineering Technical 

Committee of AIAA and was twice chair of the Corporate Advisory Board 

for the International Council on Systems Engineering. Early in his career, 

he was a naval aviator, instrument instructor, and check pilot and was 

an anti-submarine warfare of˜cer for the U.S. Navy. He has a B.A. from 

the University of North Carolina and an M.S. and aeronautical engineer 

degree from the Naval Postgraduate School at Monterey.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 91ELAINE WEYUKER is an ACM fellow, an IEEE fellow, an AT&T fellow, 
and NAE member. Dr. Weyuker is currently an independent consultant 

specializing in software testing, reliability, and metrics, and a visiting 

scholar at the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer 

Science of Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey. She is the author 

of 170 papers in journals and refereed conference proceedings. Prior to 

moving to the Research Division of AT&T Labs, she was a professor of the 

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences of New York University, was 

a faculty member at the City University of New York, a systems engineer 

at IBM, and a programmer at Texaco. She served as chair of the ACM 

Women™s Council from 2004 to 2012, is a member of the steering com
-mittee of the Coalition to Diversify Computing, a member of the Rutgers 

University Graduate School Advisory Board, and was a member of the 

board of directors of the Computing Research Association. Dr. Weyuker 

is or was a member of the editorial boards of 
IEEE Transactions on Software 

Engineering, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, IEEE 

Spectrum, the Empirical Software Engineering Journal,
 and the 
Journal of Sys
-tems and Software,
 and she was a founding editor of 
ACM Transactions of 
Software Engineering and Methodology
. She was the secretary/treasurer of 
ACM SIGSOFT and was an ACM national lecturer. Dr. Weyuker received 

a Ph.D. in computer science from Rutgers University, an M.S.E. from the 

University of Pennsylvania, and a B.A. in mathematics from the State 

University of New York, Binghamton.
STAFF
JON EISENBERG is director of the Computer Science and Telecommuni
-cations Board (CSTB). He has also been study director for a diverse body 

of work, including a series of studies exploring Internet and broadband 

policy and networking and communications technologies. From 1995 

to 1997 he was a AAAS Science, Engineering, and Diplomacy Fellow 

at the U.S. Agency for International Development, where he worked 

on technology transfer and information and telecommunications policy 

issues. Dr. Eisenberg received his Ph.D. in physics from the University 

of 
 Washington and B.S. in physics with honors from the University of 
 Massachusetts, Amherst.
LYNETTE I. MILLETT is associate director of CSTB and director of the 
Forum on Cyber Resilience. Ms. Millett has extensive experience as pro
-gram manager, team leader, analyst, researcher, and writer with speci˜c 

expertise in information technology policy. She is skilled in working with 

diverse and expert work groups and since 2000 has been developing, 

directing, and overseeing NRC studies and teams of national experts 
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
examining public policy issues related broadly to information technol
-ogy, computing, software, and communications. Her portfolio at the NRC 
includes a suite of studies on computing research, the most recent being 

2012™s 
Computing Research for Sustainability
; several examinations of gov
-ernment information technology and infrastructure needs, such as 2011™s 

Strategies and Priorities for Information Technology at the Centers for 
 Medicare 
and Medicaid Services; and in-depth examinations of privacy, identity 

and cybersecurity, including 2010™s 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and 

Opportunities
. She has an M.Sc. in computer science from Cornell Uni
-versity, where her work was supported by graduate fellowships from 

the National Science Foundation and the Intel Corporation; and a B.A. 

in mathematics and computer science with honors from Colby College.
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI is a program of˜cer for the CSTB of the NRC 
of the National Academies. She formerly served as a program associate 

with the Frontiers of Engineering program at the NAE. Prior to her work 

at the Academies, she served as a senior project assistant in Education 

Technology at the National School Boards Association. Ms. Bacon Talati 

has a B.S. in science, technology, and culture from the Georgia Institute 

of Technology and an M.P.P. from George Mason University, with a focus 

in science and technology policy.
ERIC WHITAKER was a senior program assistant at CSTB until March 
2015. Prior to joining CSTB, he was a realtor with Long and Foster Real 

Estate, Inc., in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. Before that, he 

spent several years with the Public Broadcasting Service in Alexandria, 

Virginia, as an associate in the Corporate Support Department. He has a 

B.A. in communication and theater arts from Hampton University.
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.93
Sherry Borener, Federal Aviation Administration
Steven Bradford, Federal Aviation Administration

Edgar Calderon, Federal Aviation Administration

Vincent Capezzuto, Federal Aviation Administration 

Rachel Carr, House Aviation Subcommittee, Minority Staff

Sean Cassidy, Air Line Pilot Association 

Stephen Dickson, Delta Air Lines

Gerald Dillingham, Government Accountability Of˜ce

Glen Dyer, Excelis

Paul Fountain, Federal Aviation Administration

Giles Giovinazzi, House Aviation Subcommittee, Minority Staff

Fran Hill, Lockheed Martin

Michael Hritz, Federal Aviation Administration

Margaret Jenny, RTCA

Charles Keegan, Raytheon 

Tom Kramer, Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association 

Heather Krause, Government Accountability Of˜ce

Paul Krois, Federal Aviation Administration

Andrew Lacher, MITRE 

Molly Laster, Government Accountability Of˜ce

Natesh Manikoth, Federal Aviation Administration

Mike Matousek, House Aviation Subcommittee, Majority Staff

Jay Merkle, Federal Aviation Administration

Michele Merkle, Federal Aviation Administration
BBriefers to the Study Committee
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
Robert Nichols, Federal Aviation Administration
Roberto Ortiz, Federal Aviation Administration

Madhav Panwar, Government Accountability Of˜ce

Simone Perez, House Aviation Subcommittee, Majority Staff

Joseph Post, Federal Aviation Administration

Andrew Rademaker, House Aviation Subcommittee, Majority Staff

Mike Riso, Professional Aviation Safety Specialists

Ron Stroup, Federal Aviation Administration

Rich Swayze, Senate Commerce Committee, Majority Staff

Joseph Teixeira, Federal Aviation Administration

Karlin Toner, Joint Planning and Development Of˜ce

Dan Watts, Federal Aviation Administration 

Pamela Whitley, Federal Aviation Administration

Jesse Wijntjes, Federal Aviation Administration

Holly Woodruff Lyons, House Aviation Subcommittee, Majority Staff

Dale Wright, National Air Traf˜c Controllers Association
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.95
4-D 
 four dimension (time as the 4th dimension)
AAS 
 Advanced Automation System
ADS-B 
 Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast
ADS-R 
 Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Rebroadcast
AMS 
 acquisition management system
ASSC 
 Airport Surface Surveillance Capability 
ATC 
 air traf˜c control
CMMI 
 capability maturity model integration
CONOPS 
 concept of operations
DoDAF 
 Department of Defense Architecture Framework
DOT 
 Department of Transportation
EGPWS 
 enhanced ground proximity warning system
ERAM 
 En Route Automation Modernization
FAA 
 Federal Aviation Administration 
FAR 
 Federal Acquisition Regulation
FDM
 Flight Data Manager
FIS-B 
 Flight Information ServiceŒBroadcast
GA 
 general aviation
CAcronyms
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96 A REVIEW OF THE NEXT GENERATION AIR TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
GAO 
 Government Accountability Of˜ce
GPS 
 Global Positioning System
HITLS
 human-in-the-loop simulations
HSI
 human service interaction
IEEE 
 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
ISEF 
 integrated systems engineering framework
IT 
 information technology
JPDO 
 Joint Planning and Development Of˜ce 
MSAW 
 minimum safe altitude warning
NAS 
 National Airspace System
NAS ISEF 
 National Airspace System integrated systems engineering 
framework
NextGen 
 Next Generation Air Transportation System 
NIST 
 National Institute of Standards and Technology
NRC 
 National Research Council
OMB 
 Of˜ce of Management and Budget
PBN 
 performance-based navigation
Pre-RFP 
 pre-request for proposal
RF 
 radio frequency
RNAV 
 area navigation
RNP 
 required navigation performance
SBS 
 Surveillance and Broadcast Services
STARS/TAMR
 Standard Terminal Automation Replacement System/ 

Terminal Automation Modernization and Replacement
SWIM 
 System Wide Information Management
TCAS 
 traf˜c collision avoidance system
TIS-B 
 Traf˜c Information Service-Broadcast
TSA 
 Transportation Security Administration
UAS 
 unmanned aircraft system
UX
 user experience design
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 97VHF 
 very high frequency
WAAS 
 wide area augmentation system
WAM 
 Wide Area Multilateration
ZLA ARTCC 
 Los Angeles En-Route Air Traf˜c Control Center
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: Implications and Importance of System ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.