DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/21762Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical SystemsEducation50 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-37594-8 | DOI 10.17226/21762Committee on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems Education; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilInterim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems Education
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical SciencesInterim Report on 21st Century 
Cyber-Physical Systems Education
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 

for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 

appropriate balance.
This project was supported by the National Science Foundation under award 
number CNS-1341078. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations 

expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily 

re˚ect the view of the organizations or agencies that provided support for this 

project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-37594-8
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-37594-0
Additional copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360

Washington, DC 20001
(800) 624-6242
(202) 334-3313 

http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2015 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 

National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the char
-ter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstand
-ing engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its 
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for 
advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages 

education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. 

Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 

Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 

Dr. Victor J. Dzau is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 

government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 

Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 

Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vOTHER
 R
ECENT
 R
EPORTS
 OF
 THE
 C
OMP
UTER
 SCIENCE
 AND
 T
ELECOMM
UNICATIONS
 B
OARD
A Review of the Next Generation Air Transportation System: 
Implications and Importance of System Architecture (2015)
Bulk Collection of Signals Intelligence: Technical Options at the Nexus 
of Cybersecurity and Public Policy: Some Basic Concepts and Issues 
(2015)
Emerging and Readily Available Technologies and National Security: A 
Framework for Addressing Ethical, Legal, and Societal Issues (2014)
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current 
Knowledge and Research Gaps (2013)
Professionalizing the Nation™s Cybersecurity Workforce? Criteria for 
Future Decision-Making (2013)
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Summary 
of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps (2013)
Continuing Innovation in Information Technology (2012)

Computing Research for Sustainability (2012)

The Safety Challenge and Promise of Automotive Electronics: Insights 
from Unintended Acceleration (2012, with the Board on Energy and 

Environmental Systems and the Transportation Research Board)
Strategies and Priorities for Information Technology at the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services (2011)
The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or Next Level? 
(2011)
Wireless Technology Prospects and Policy Options (2011)

Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary 
of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps (2011)
Limited copies of CSTB reports are available free of charge from:
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
National Research Council
The Keck Center of the National Academies
500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001
(202) 334-2605/cstb@nas.edu
www.cstb.org
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMMITTEE
 ON
 21
ST
 C
ENT
URY CY
BER
-PHYSICAL
 SY
STEMS
 E
DUCATION
JOHN A. (JACK) STANKOVIC, University of Virginia, 
Co-Chair
JAMES (JIM) STURGES, Lockheed Martin Corporation (retired), 
Co-Chair
ALEXANDRE BAYEN, University of California, Berkeley
CHARLES R. FARRAR
, Los Alamos National Laboratory
MARYE ANNE FOX, University of California, San Diego

SANTIAGO GRIJALVA, Georgia Institute of Technology

HIMANSHU KHURANA, Honeywell International, Inc.

PANGANAMALA R. (PR) KUMAR, Texas A&M University, College 
Station
INSUP LEE, University of Pennsylvania

WILLIAM MILAM, Ford Motor Company

SANJOY K. MITTER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

JOSÉ M.F. MOURA, Carnegie Mellon University

GEORGE J. PAPPAS, University of Pennsylvania

PAULO TABUADA, University of California, Los Angeles

MANUELA M. VELOSO
, 
Carnegie Mellon University
Staff
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer, 
Study Director
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
JON EISENBERG, Director, Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
COMP
UTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMM
UNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 
Chair
 LUIZ ANDRE BARROSO, Google, Inc. 
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University

ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC

EDWARD FRANK, Apple, Inc.

SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 

LAURA HAAS, IBM Corporation

MARK HOROWITZ, Stanford University

FARNAM JAHANIAN, Carnegie Mellon University

MICHAEL KEARNS, University of Pennsylvania

ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University 

SUSAN LANDAU, Google, Inc.

PETER LEE, Microsoft Corporation 

DAVID E. LIDDLE, US Venture Partners 

BARBARA LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University

JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia

JOHN A. SWAINSON, Dell, Inc.

ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California

KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director 

VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer

SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant

EMILY GRUMBLING, Program Of˜cer

RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
For more information on CSTB, see its website at http://www.cstb.org; write to CSTB, 
National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001; call (202) 334-2605; 

or email CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
Preface
Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are increasingly relied on to provide 
functionality and value to products, systems, and infrastructure 

in sectors including transportation (aviation, automotive, rail, and 
marine), health care, manufacturing, and electrical power generation and 

distribution. CPS are smart, networked systems with embedded sensors, 

computer processors, and actuators that sense and interact with the physi
-
cal world (including people); support real-time, guaranteed performance; 

and are often found in critical applications. Cyber-physical systems have 

the potential to provide much richer functionality, including ef˜ciency, 

˚exibility, autonomy, and reliability, than systems that are loosely cou
-pled, discrete, or manually operated, but also can create vulnerability 

related to security and reliability. Advances in CPS could yield systems 

that can communicate and respond faster than humans (e.g., autonomous 

collision avoidance for automobiles) or more precisely (e.g., robotic sur
-gery); enable better control and coordination of large-scale systems, such 

as the electrical grid or traf˜c controls; improve the ef˜ciency of systems 

(e.g., ﬁsmart buildingsﬂ); and enable advances in many areas of science. 

As CPS become more pervasive, so too will demand for a workforce with 

the capacity and capability to design, develop, and maintain them. 
Building on its research program in CPS, the National Science Foun
-dation (NSF) has begun to explore requirements for education and train
-ing. As part of that exploration, NSF asked the National Research Council 

(NRC) of the National Academies to study the topic and prepare interim 

and ˜nal reports examining the need for and content of a cyber-physical 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE
systems education. The committee™s statement of task is provided in 
Box P.1. The results of this study are intended to inform those who might 

support efforts to develop curricula and materials (such as NSF), faculty 

and university administrators, industries with needs for CPS workers, 

and current and potential students about intellectual foundations, oppor
-tunities, and curricular needs. 
To gather perspectives on these topics, the Committee on 21st Century 
Cyber-Physical Systems Education, appointed by the NRC, convened two 

workshops (on April 30, 2014, and October 2-3, 2014, in Washington, D.C.) 

and received brie˜ngs from additional experts from the Jet Propulsion 

Laboratory on June 26, 2014, via teleconference. Chapter 1 summarizes 

material presented at the workshops and in the brie˜ngs. The committee 

has also conducted initial deliberations and identi˜ed several emerging 

themes, which are discussed in Chapter 2. Following issuance of this 

interim report, the committee will continue its information gathering and 

deliberations and issue its ˜nal report providing its ˜ndings and recom
-mendations later in 2015. 
Jack Stankovic and Jim Sturges, 
Co-Chairs
Committee on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems Education 
BOX P.1 Statement of Task
An ad hoc committee will conduct a study on the current and future needs in education for cyber-physical systems (CPS). Two workshops would be convened 
early on to gather input and foster dialogue, and a brief interim report would be 

prepared to highlight emerging themes and summarize related discussions from 

the workshops. The committee™s ˜nal report would articulate a vision for a 21st cen
-
tury CPS-capable U.S. workforce. It would explore the corresponding educational 

requirements, examine efforts already under way, and propose strategies and pro
-
grams to develop faculty and teachers, materials, and curricula. It would consider 

core, cross-domain, and domain-speci˜c knowledge. It would consider the multiple 

disciplines that are relevant to CPS and how to foster multi-disciplinary study and 

work. In conducting the
 study, the committee
 would focus on undergraduate edu
-
cation and also consider implications for graduate education, workforce training 

and certi˜cation, community colleges, the K-12 pipeline, and informal education. It 

would emphasize the skills needed for the CPS scienti˜c, engineering, and techni
-
cal workforce but would also consider broader needs for CPS ﬁ˚uency.ﬂ
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance 

with procedures approved by the National Research Council™s 
Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is 

to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in 

making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the 

report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and respon
-siveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript 

remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We 

wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Ella Atkins, University of Michigan,

Bernd Girod, Stanford University,

Scott A. Hareland, Medtronic, Inc.,

Chenyang Lu, Washington University in St. Louis,

Douglas A. Stuart, Boeing
 Company,
Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University,

Daniel Weihs, Technion Œ Israel Institute of Technology,

Yannis Yortsos, University of Southern California, and

Feng Zhao, Microsoft Research Asia, Microsoft Corporation.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSbefore its release. The review of this report was overseen by Venkatesh 
Narayanamurti, Harvard University. Appointed by the National Research 

Council, he was responsible for making certain that an independent 

examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institu
-tional procedures and that all review comments were carefully consid
-ered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely with 

the authoring committee and the institution.
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Contents
1  
SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOP 
 1 DISCUSSIONS
 Industry Cyber-Physical Systems Needs, 1
 Gaps in Skills and Knowledge, 3
 The Evolution of Engineering Education, 5
 Creating CPS-Focused Courses and Programs, 6
  
Creating an Introductory CPS Course, 6
  
A Proposed CPS Engineering Curriculum, 8
  
Building on the Experience of Creating a Computer 
    
Engineering Program to Create a CPS Program,  8
 Incorporating CPS into Engineering Fields, 8
  
Aerospace Engineering, 10
  
Civil and Environmental Engineering, 11
 Challenges in Building a CPS Curriculum, 12
 Making CPS More Attractive to Students, 13
 CPS Education Opportunities Beyond the Undergraduate 
    
Classroom, 13

  
Industry-Academic Partnerships, 13
  
Internships, 14
  
Massive Open Online Courses, 15
  
K-12 Education, 16
2 PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS
 18
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv CONTENTSAPPENDIXES
A Biographies of Committee Members and Staff
 25
B Presentations to the Committee
 35
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11Summary of Presentations and 
Workshop Discussions
The committee held two workshops in 2014Šon April 30 and Octo
-ber 2-3 in Washington, D.C.Što explore the knowledge and skills 
required for cyber-physical systems (CPS) work, education, and 
training requirements and possible approaches to retooling engineering 

and computer science programs and curricula to meet these needs. This 

chapter provides a brief summary of material presented and discussed at 

the workshops and during a June 26, 2014, brie˜ng with the Jet Propulsion 

Laboratory (JPL) via teleconference, organized around themes chosen by 

the committee. 
IND
USTR
Y 
CYBER
-PH
YSICAL
 SYSTEMS
 NEEDS
 Several speakers from industry spoke about the expected demand for 
CPS talent. Asked how many individuals with CPS engineering knowl
-edge Ford Motor Company needed, Craig Stephens, with Ford Research 

and Advanced Engineering, responded ﬁ[the] short answer is more than 

we can get.ﬂ Joseph Salvo, director at GE Global Research, observed that 

ﬁgoing forward . . . almost all of our employees are going to be touched 

by this.ﬂ
Describing why demand for CPS talent is growing in the automo
-tive industry, Stephens noted that while basic automobile engineering 

knowledge (power train, combustion, emissions, etc.) remains funda
-
mental, automotive engineers must also be able to design, develop, and 

test systems that include communication and sensing technologies and 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
more sophisticated computer controls. These new skills are especially 
important in new applications such as electri˜cation, vehicle-to-vehicle 

communication, active safety features, and automated or autonomous 

driving. Stephens noted that industry has been successful in providing 

the necessary training, but, looking ahead, companies like Ford hope that 

employees will enter with a stronger foundation in CPS. Dan Johnson, 

Honeywell International, Inc., cited aeronautics and aerospace as another 

transportation industry in which CPS play an increasingly important 

role. For example, numerous CPS-intensive systemsŠaircraft, airports, 

air traf˜c control, maintenance, passenger services, etc.Šmake up the air 

transportation environment. 
Jon Williams, a system architect at John Deere, observed that the agri
-cultural and construction equipment sector is increasingly CPS-intensive 

as well. For example, Deere manufactures partially and fully autonomous 

vehicles, provides mesh wireless and telematics links between vehicles, 

updates and repairs its products remotely, and is developing applications 

for the agronomic data that its products collect. Moreover, Williams noted, 

a large industrial farm today is a system of systems and requires a systems 

approach to developing and deploying products and services rather than 

the traditional focus on individual products. 
John Mills, from SimuQuest, Inc., a software company that develops 
products that support model-based systems engineering, identi˜ed key 

knowledge areas that he is looking for in employees: plant modeling, 

algorithm design, control system design, network understanding, and 

engineering process. There is also a new emphasis on CPS skills, includ
-ing determinism, managing timing and latency, and co-simulation. Mills 

noted that while Ford, GE, and Deere may have the resources to train 

their employees in CPS skills, a smaller company like SimuQuest has a 

harder time doing so.
Scott Hareland, from the medical devices ˜rm Medtronic, Inc., 
discussed the increasing capability of medical devices to monitor and 

diagnose health conditions, be life-sustaining (pacemakers), or simply 

improve life through pain reduction. He noted that while today™s engi
-neers are equipped with some of the skills needed to develop future medi
-
cal devices, there are still several skills they lack.
Clas Jacobson, United Technologies Corporation, contrasted CPS 
and systems engineering. He noted that systems engineering is centered 

around four elements: requirements, architecture, model-based develop
-ment, and design ˚ows. CPS skills complement those of systems engi
-neers, who are able to quickly build models but are unable to analyze and 

verify them at a system level. Individuals with CPS engineering knowl
-edge are needed to improve quality as functionality is added to systems. 
David Nichols and Daniel Dvorak, JPL, briefed the committee on the 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS
 3CPS needs of JPL, which designs, builds, deploys, and operates spacecraft 
systems such as the Mars Science Laboratory, the Curiosity rover, and 

the Cassini orbiter. Jobs at JPL that require CPS skills include mission 

formulation dealing with autonomy requirements; engineering design 

at the assembly, subsystem, and system levels; design activities speci˜
-cally related to autonomous control (fault management, veri˜cation and 

validation, and mission operations); systems engineering at all levels; 

and mission, software, and safety assurance. JPL tends to develop ˚ight 

project engineers internally because JPL ˜nds it hard to identify gradu
-ates who already possess all the needed CPS and other engineering skills. 

Indeed, about four-˜fths of JPL™s science and engineering new hires are 

recent graduates that JPL intends to develop through hands-on project 

work and mentoring from senior engineers.
GAPS
 IN
 SK
ILLS
 AND
 KNOWLEDGE
Several of the speakers from industry noted that engineers who deeply 
understand and can apply systems thinkingŠthat is, a deep understand
-ing of how individual parts of a system interrelate with one another and 

within the system as a wholeŠand related concepts such as abstraction 

and system interaction and who can carry out systems analysis using 

formal methods and model-based veri˜cation are in short supply. Nichols 

and Dvorak from JPL observed that few universities seemed to be empha
-
sizing mission- or safety-critical systems and that hands-on project work 

tends to ignore properties like fault tolerance and robustness. Stephens 

from Ford Motor Company also noted that there is a focus on developing 

new functions over understanding the tools and techniques needed to test 

and maintain current systems. Mills pointed out that SimuQuest seeks to 

hire ﬁsuper engineers,ﬂ individuals with knowledge in computer science 

and object-oriented programming; embedded software engineering; expe
-
rience with hardware, ˜rmware, drivers, BIOS, and controls systems; and 

plant modeling. Finding individuals with such a wide breadth of skills 

may seem impractical but is integral in developing new technologies.
Johnson from Honeywell underscored the importance of cybersecu
-rity for engineers in ˜elds like aerospace engineering, where knowledge 

is needed in such areas as risk management and product integrity, cryp
-tography, and the security of network and communications protocols as 

well as behavioral and social aspects of security. Williams added that it 

was important to understand security at the system as well as component 

level. 
Several speakers pointed to challenges working across disciplines. 
Hareland noted that students need to learn how to work in the cross-

functional teams that are needed to build CPS, something that requires 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
both broad knowledge of multiple areas of expertise and excellent com
-munication skills. Unfortunately, Hareland observed, there are counter
-vailing trends toward very deep, narrow, and isolated work, perhaps 
ampli˜ed by the ﬁpublish or perishﬂ academic culture, which often serves 

as a disincentive to interdisciplinary work. 
Other ﬁsoft skillsﬂ were identi˜ed as important to creating well-
rounded CPS engineers. Nichols and Dvorak noted, for example, that 

engineers sometimes fail because they simply cannot ﬁread a roomﬂ to 

understand what information at what level is needed by a customer. 

Additionally, Williams observed that soft skills are especially important 

when designing for a global market. For example, the diverse regulatory, 

legal, and standards requirements found around the globe have signi˜
-cant implications for the design process. Solid technical writing and other 

communications skills are also essential. 
Academic presenters identi˜ed what they saw as gaps in CPS educa
-tion today. Sanjai Rayadurgam, Software Engineering Center, University 

of Minnesota, observed that although traditional undergraduate curricula 

cover the fundamentals of math and science, programming, and problem 

solving well, they do less well with applications, software engineering, 

and problem identi˜cation. Students are able to analyze the correctness of 

components but less equipped to address integration, composition, and 

other system-level concerns. Rayadurgam noted that students not only 

need to be able to verify the correctness but convince others of this cor
-rectness. Alberto Sangiovanna-Vincentelli, Department of Electrical Engi
-neering and Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, com
-mented that it was far more important for students to learn design science 

principles than to master a particular design technique or tool suite. Janos 

Sztipanovits, Departments of Electrical Engineering and Computer Engi
-neering, Vanderbilt University, discussed the need for a cross-disciplinary 

view of design. Sztipanovits observed that the traditional way to design 

starts with functional decomposition to identify major components. These 

components are then designed, often with a discipline-centric focus; the 

components are integrated; and the resulting system is subjected to test
-ing and veri˜cation. This process often fails because interdependencies 

are not properly accounted for. 
Douglas Adams, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineer
-ing, Vanderbilt University, suggested that project-based learning should 

be integral to any CPS curriculum. Students need to work on complex 

interdisciplinary projects that encourage systems-level thinking. Doing so 

requires test beds that allow for the codesign of physical and computa
-tional components that demonstrate the bene˜ts of integrating simulation 
and experimentation. Sztipanovits observed that design studios, where 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS
 5students can work on integrative CPS projects with multidisciplinary 
teams, are important. 
Further discussion by workshop participants identi˜ed other skills 
and knowledge areas needed by a person working in CPS. These include 

behavior modeling, control systems, uncertainty, information manage
-ment, embedded systems, embedded system design, and experience 

working with hardware and ˜rmware. 
THE
 EVOL
UTION
 OF
 ENGINEERING
 ED
UCATION
CPS are only one of several current drivers of change in engineering 
education. Norman Fortenberry, American Society for Engineering Edu
-cation, described some of the attributes expected of modern engineers: 

˚exibility to manage rapidly evolving technologies; an ability to de˜ne 

as well as solve problems; skill and experience with creativity, entrepre
-neurship, and public policy implications; and facility with both theory 

and application. 
Several speakers noted that engineering students increasingly seek 
hands-on experience early in their student careers, want to engage in 

meaningful work with real-world impact, and wish to be entrepreneur
-ial. Furthermore, students tend to be motivated by societally important 

ﬁgrand challenges.ﬂ For example, students ˜nd large-scale projects that 

address real-world problems in areas like urban sustainability appealing. 
Shankar Sastry, University of California, Berkeley, discussed how 
his institution has responded to such interests. In 2005, Berkeley started 

the Center for Entrepreneurship and Technology to support the proto
-typing of projects and a connection to businesses. The Blum Center for 

Developing Economies, launched in 2007, provides global ˜eld study 

opportunities and other international experiences. The Fung Institute for 

Engineering in 2010 began offering entrepreneurship opportunities via its 

Global Venture Lab. The Jacobs Institute for Design Innovation provides 

hands-on, design, and ﬁmakerﬂ experiential learning opportunities for 

students and working studios for design, iteration, optimization, and 

commercialization.
Traditionally, students have spent the early part of their undergradu
-ate years ful˜lling basic course requirements, whereas students today, 

some of whom may have been building things in high school, want to 

continue building new things. Kevin Massey from the Defense Advanced 

Research Projects Agency, cautioned that students risk jumping too far 

ahead, not appreciating that an ability to work with plug-and-play hard
-ware and software is not, ultimately, a substitute for foundational knowl
-edge. Massey asked whether it is possible to develop a curriculum that 

blends both aspects in a way that is both immediately appealing to stu
-Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
dents and provides them the solid educational foundation they need to 
be successful in their careers. 
CREATING
 CPS-F
OC
USED
 CO
URSES
 AND
 PROGRAMS
Several presentations provided examples of creating a CPS course or 
building CPS curricula or programs. 
Creating an Introductory CPS Course
Edward Lee, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sci
-ence, University of California, Berkeley, discussed his experiences teach
-ing a course titled ﬁIntroduction to Embedded Systemsﬂ with the goal of 

introducing students to the design and analysis of computational systems 

that interact with physical processes. Lee also noted that the traditional 

view of embedded systems assumes special-purpose hardware and that 

the chief problem is the interface between sensors and actuators and the 

system™s resource constraints. CPS is differentŠand more interestingŠ

because of the interactions with the physical world. 
The principal focus of the course was the interplay of practical design 
with formal models of systems, including both software components and 

physical dynamics, with a major emphasis on building high-con˜dence 

systems with real-time and concurrent behaviors. Traditional embedded 

systems classes tend to focus on building the core technical competencies 

to build systems. By contrast, Lee™s course also emphasized critical think
-ing about systems. What are the pitfalls? Where can improvements be 

made? Figure 1.1 compares elements of a traditional embedded systems 

course and a CPS-focused course.
As part of preparing for the course, Lee and coauthor Sanjit Seshia 
wrote a textbook titled 
Introduction to Embedded Systems: A Cyber-Physical 

Systems Approach
.1 The text incorporates three distinct threads: modeling 
(the process of gaining deeper understanding of a system through imita
-tion), design (the structured creation of artifacts), and analysis (the pro
-cess of gaining understanding through system dissection). Material from 

a classical embedded systems course makes up much of the design cat
-egory. The modeling side is focused on cyber-physical system modeling. 

Topics include modeling the physical using ordinary differential equa
-tions, combining discrete dynamics with continuous dynamics, simula
-tion using actor models, and modeling concurrency. The analysis thread 

provides an introduction to formal methods. Any one of these threads 
1 
Edward A. Lee and Sanjit A. Seshia, 
Introduction to Embedded Systems: A Cyber-Physical 
Systems Approach
, Edition 1.5, published by authors, 2014, http://leeseshia.org/. 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS
 7could be the subject of a course on its own; in any introductory course, the 
goal is to introduce these elements and explore their interplay.
Introduction to Embedded Systems
 supports the threads being read con
-currently and also ˜ts nicely within a 15-week semester. Included with 

the text is a free laboratory manual, which was developed with support 

from National Instruments. Laboratory projects over the ˜rst 6 weeks 

cover sensors, operating-system-less programming, direct-memory map
-ping to interact with input/output devices, C language programming, 

and model-based design, culminating in a robotics challenge. A 9-week 

capstone project, de˜ned by the students, follows these laboratories. Lee 

noted that the laboratory portions of any course can became unwieldy to 

manage, especially as class size grows. 
Lee concluded his remarks by expressing hope that by emphasizing 
modeling, design, and analysis, his course could help students avoid the 

sort of bruteforce and over-engineering all too often used to build embed
-
ded systems today. Also, if students are to be positioned to build the sys
-tems of tomorrow, they need to understand not just today™s best practices 

but the weaknesses in those approaches. Lee explained, ﬁOur view is that 

the ˜eld of cyber-physical systems is very young, and it would not serve 

our students well to leave them with the illusion that completing the 

course is equated to mastery of the subject.ﬂ 
TraditionalFocusCyber-Physical SystemsFocusHardwareinterfacingInterruptsMemorysystemsCprogrammingAssemblylanguageFPGAdesignReal-timeoperatingsystemdesignModelingTimingDynamicsImperativelogicConcurrencyNetworki
ngVetionFIGURE 1.1
 Elements of traditional embedded systems and CPS-focused courses. 
NOTE: FPGA, ˜eld-programmable gate array. SOURCE: Edward A. Lee, Univer
-sity of California, Berkeley.
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
A Proposed CPS Engineering Curriculum
Tarek Abdelzaher, Department of Computer Science, University of Illi
-nois, Urbana-Champaign, presented a conceptual CPS curriculum. Com
-paring a more traditional embedded systems course with a CPS-course, 
Abdelzaher noted that a CPS course must teach students to reason about 

a system (not just components) that combines interacting computational 

and physical components and address reliability, robustness, timeliness, 

performance, and stability requirements. These skills map to fundamental 

background knowledge in areas such as probability, control, and queuing 

theory and real-time systems, dynamic systems, and operating systems. 

Furthermore, students must be able to understand architectural trade-offs 

and analysis techniques and gain experience designing and implementing 

CPS given high-level speci˜cations. Abdelzaher™s proposed curriculum, 

including these elements and drawing on existing electrical engineering 

and computer science curricula, is shown in Figure 1.2. 
Building on the Experience of Creating a Computer 
Engineering Program to Create a CPS Program
André DeHon, University of Pennsylvania, described how Penn™s 
experience developing a computer engineering (CE) program might 

inform the development of a CPS program. At Penn, the CE program is 

separate from the electrical engineering (EE) and computer and informa
-tion science (CIS) departments. It emphasizes embedded systems but 

is not exclusively CPS. The course requirements for CE include several 

courses offered by the EE and CIS departments together with a few new 

CE courses (see Figure 1.3). Several of the courses are not required for 

either the EE or CIS undergraduate degree but are requirements for the 

CE degree. As a result, although much of the coursework overlaps with 

that of other departments, the required coursework is quite different from 

that in either EE or CIS. 
DeHon concluded by considering what would need to be added to 
the CE program to create a CPS-focused curriculum. He suggested that 

additional courses would be needed in linear algebra, control, design, and 

mechatronics or robotics.
INCORPORATING
 CPS 
INTO
 ENGINEERING
 FIELDS
The committee is interested not only in how one might go about 
establishing a CPS-focused curriculum or program, but also in how CPS 

knowledge currently is and might be incorporated into existing engineer
-ing programs. 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9Advancedelectives, 8thsemester,graduateFormalMethodsAdvancedCyber-Physical SystemsandAppnsAdvancedControlApplicationAreaElectives DynamicSystems 6th Œ 7thSemesterCyber-PhysicalSystemsQueuingTheoryFeedbackControl5thŒ6thSemesterEmbeddedSystems(BasicConcepts)ProbabilityTheoryDynamicSystems3rd Œ 4thSemesterSystemsProgramming(Entry-Level
OS) BasicComputerArchitectureFIGURE 1.2
 A model for CPS curriculum. Courses highlighted in gray focus speci˜cally on CPS, while the other courses are exist
-ing courses. SOURCE: Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
Aerospace Engineering
Jonathan How, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), dis
-cussed the need for CPS skills in aerospace engineering. He started by 
describing emerging applications of aerospace engineering, such as sup
-porting wired and wireless network communications, expanding use of 

unmanned vehicles, commercial access to low Earth orbit, and addressing 

environmental and energy challenges as air travel continues to grow. How 

noted that MIT™s AeroAstro department has been working to identify the 

long-term competencies associated with these applications and build up 

its faculty in those areas, many of which overlap with CPS knowledge and 

skills. Key areas include design of aerospace vehicles; real-time aerospace 

information science; advanced computation methods to support design 

and decision-making; human-system collaboration; atmospheric science 

and how it informs system design; and the design, implementation, and 

operation of complex aerospace systems. 
Cutting across these core competencies, there is a broad focus on 
systems. Students learn to appreciate the challenges of larger-scale ﬁmis
-sionsﬂ and the cost, complexity, and time that must be invested in both 

hardware and software aspects of a system. Other cross-cutting themes 

include software, which has become ubiquitous in aerospace systems, and 

communications networks and security. 
Coursework places a signi˜cant emphasis on experimental and sys
-CoursesfromComputer and InformationScienceCoursesfromElectricalEngineeringProgrammingDiscretemathData structures/algorithmsComputer organizationComputer architectureOperatingsystemsElectronics(RLCcircuits)Digital designEmbeddedsystemsNetworkingNew ComputerEngineering CoursesCourses toAddfor a Cyber-PhysicalSystemsProgramLife-criticalembeddedsystemsCircuitdesignfor digitalengineeringDigital audioLinearalgebraControlDesignMechatronics orroboticsFIGURE 1.3 Coursework for computer engineering (and cyber-physical systems). 
NOTE: RLC,
 resistance (R), inductance (L), and capacitance (C). SOURCE: André 
DeHon, University of Pennsylvania.
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS
 11tems design, allowing students to develop technical depth through hands-
on activities. 
How listed the following areas where CPS curriculum could improve: 
˜˚
Give students design problems with larger scope and cross-
disciplinary mission goals, including problems that involve multiple 
departments and run across multiple semesters. 
˜˚
Emphasize development of communications skills. 
˜˚
Evolve the core control curriculum, which has been static for many 
years, to better re˚ect CPS fundamentals and applications. 
˜˚
Increase the emphasis on software and computing in the design 
process for systems taught to students.
˜˚
Address technologies for use of multiple sensors.
˜˚
Place greater emphasis on human-systems interaction and human 
factors design issues.
How concluded by underscoring that it was important not only to impart 
particular knowledge and develop particular skills, but also to create 

lifelong learners who can adapt to new technologies, tools, and problems.
Civil and Environmental Engineering 
Jerry Lynch, University of Michigan, discussed how CPS technologies 
have had signi˜cant impact on civil and environmental engineering (CEE) 

in applications such as intelligent transportation systems, earthquake 

early-warning systems, ˚ood control, and real-time monitoring of smart 

buildings. CPS-rich intelligent infrastructure is an emerging and impor
-tant subdiscipline of CEE. CPS technologies make it possible to detect and 
collect large sets of data from structures and create new opportunities to 

monitor and study them. CPS technologies are attracting students both 

because they make CEE appear more ﬁhigh techﬂ and because they help 

make possible advances in two compelling applications of CEEŠurban 

sustainability and community resiliency. In response to new technology 

opportunities and changing student interests, the University of Michigan 

has hired CPS-oriented faculty and created a new graduate program in 

intelligent infrastructure. Much of the faculty who participate have dual 

degrees in CEE and electrical and computer engineering. 
Lucio Soibelman, University of Southern California, discussed the 
graduate program his school has created in advanced infrastructure 

systems. He noted that a particular challenge is teaching the necessary 

graduate-level computer science material to civil engineering graduates, 

who often lack a strong foundation in computer science. 
Christopher Gill, Washington University in St. Louis, used a current 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
research project on structure modeling to demonstrate the importance of 
interdisciplinary CPS research teams. One of the project™s experiments 

used the response to stress of a piece of a structure in a simulation of the 

full structure. Such work requires knowledge and skills from computer 

science, computer engineering, mechanical engineering, and civil engi
-neering. Gill also noted a con˚ict between what can be done and what 

needs to be done. Data can be provided very quicklyŠa millisecond 

interval for refreshing and delivering actuation commandsŠbut do civil 

engineers need that much data? Does the physical phenomenon have 

such a high dynamic? Can the model provide additional detail over faster 

data during the time interval? In conclusion, Gill reiterated that separate 

disciplines have much to teach each other, and research topics that inter
-lock with other disciplines help students develop both depth and breadth. 
CHALLENGES
 IN
 BU
ILDING
 A CPS 
CURRIC
ULUMSeveral speakers addressed the related questions of how the teaching 
and research capacity needed to support CPS education can be built and 

what other resources are needed to support CPS education.
In his remarks, Christopher Gill observed that the situation with CPS 
today resembles the one roughly two decades ago with distributed real-

time embedded systems, when knowledge and skills from the distinct 

areas of real-time systems, software engineering, and distributed systems 

had to be integrated. Support from varying organizations and agencies 

helped to build communities across previous boundaries, and today, with 

CPS knowledge spread across multiple research disciplines and educa
-tional programs, a similar integration effort is needed. Gill noted that 

agency coordination and investment is needed.
Jerry Lynch observed that the next generation of faculty in many 
areas of engineering and computer science will need a broad exposure 

to CPS. However, Lynch also noted that faculty members need to be 

deep experts in a core discipline (e.g., civil engineering) and that their 

preparation should re˚ect a balance between theory and applied research. 

Lynch further noted that applications for faculty positions concentrated 

on CPS may not have been strong because the candidates do not have the 

expected depth in more traditional areas. Similarly, junior faculty may 

˜nd themselves in departments where the senior faculty have dissimilar 

backgrounds and research and teaching interests. 
Several speakers stressed the value of hands-on projects. Philip 
Koopman, Carnegie Mellon University, noted that the tools needed to 

provide students with this experience must incorporate the challenges 

of large-scale systems and are often expensive and require frequent tech
-nology refreshes. Koopman also explained that developing problems 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS
 13that represent the complexity of CPS is dif˜cult. Projects and problems 
must be realistic and motivating but also incorporate domain knowledge 

that is accessible to students. There is a risk that problems can become 

overly complicatedŠprojects must be designed with the right amount 

of ﬁmessy.ﬂ 
MAKING
 CPS M
ORE
 A
TTRACTI
VE TO
 S
TUDENTS
In addition to recruiting faculty, universities will need to ensure that 
CPS is attractive to students. Several presenters reported that students 

tend to be attracted to courses that emphasize robotics or the Internet of 

things but hesitate to register for courses that speci˜cally reference CPS. 
Additionally, presenters from both industry and academia observed 
that large information technology (IT) ˜rms like Facebook and Google 

have captured the imagination of undergraduates in a way that many 

CPS-intensive ˜rms have not, even though CPS work also provides signif
-
icant opportunities to innovate and have considerable real-world impact. 

Several asked how these opportunities can best be communicated to cur
-rent and prospective students. 
CPS E
DUCATION
 O
PPORT
UNITIES
 B
EYOND
 THE
 U
NDERGRAD
UATE
 CLASSROOM
 Although the workshop presentations and JPL brie˜ng were largely 
focused on 4-year undergraduate programs and subsequent graduate 

programs (to some degree), some talks also touched on opportunities to 

introduce CPS concepts in K-12 education and supplement CPS education 

and training through industry-academic partnerships, internships, and 

online, post-graduate continuing education. 
Industry-Academic Partnerships
Dimitri Mavris discussed efforts in his laboratory, the Georgia Insti
-tute of Technology™s Aerospace Systems Design Laboratory (ASDL), to 

bridge the gap between the kinds of CPS-related research that students 

are typically exposed to in academia and the kinds of research carried out 

in industry. In the ASDL program, students are engaged for two semesters 

in open-ended, interdisciplinary, and large-scale projects. The problems 

require practical implementation of advanced methods that go beyond 

those needed in typical senior design problems. In one case, General Elec
-tric provided ASDL with a set of problems whose solution would require 

student teams with strong foundations in power technology, software, 

and complex system design and analysis. Five interdisciplinary teams 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
were created with students from electrical engineering, systems engi
-neering (from the aerospace engineering department), and management 

programs. An industry representative who provided practical advice and 

technical feedback, and course correction as needed, advised the students.
Mavris described several challenges faced by students grappling with 
the inherently interdisciplinary nature of the problems. For example, sys
-tems engineering students felt they lacked suf˜cient expertise in electrical 

engineering while at the same time the EE students did not always accept 

the architectural work being done by the systems engineers. Over time, 

the students™ knowledge and appreciation of the contributions that each 

discipline could make to the team effort grew, as did trust and the quality 

of the collaboration.
Also, the teams found they had gaps in their collective knowledge in 
such areas as practical consideration of real power ˚ow systems, systems 

engineering fundamentals, economic and market opportunity analysis, 

and impact of grid regulation on solution viability. Students also struggled 

with the business aspects of the projectŠoverexplaining the structure and 

value of smart grid systems solutions and struggling with business plan 

development for products or services. Students also tended to rush into 

design activities before fully exploring alternatives. 
Mavris cited several ingredients for a successful research partnership 
program. Both faculty and the industry partner must be very committed, 

and the students must be highly motivated, competitive, inventive, and 

articulate. Success is most likely when the industry problems are aligned 

with faculty expertise and research activities. The intellectual property 

issues inherent in working with industry will also require attention and 

appropriate coordination mechanisms. 
Internships
Steve Anton, Tennessee Technological University, described his expe
-rience with Los Alamos National Laboratory™s Dynamics Summer School. 

The 9-week intensive summer program assigns a staff mentor to students 

and allows students to learn more about CPS and carry out research. 

Anton observed that some students enter the school relatively unfamiliar 

with CPS, and many are unfamiliar with key topics such as sensing, data 

acquisition, and signal processing. The students participate in week-long 

tutorials on sensors, controls, signal processing, and embedded systems. 

Students also participate in laboratory research, gaining familiarity with 

research practices and laboratory equipment, and develop teamwork and 

technical writing skills. Because it is designed to be multidisciplinary, 

the program works well to break down boundaries among mechanical, 

electrical, and computer engineers and scientists. An additional bene˜t to 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS
 15students™ future careers in CPS is that they develop contacts in the CPS 
technical community. 
Massive Open Online Courses
Magnus Egerstedt, Georgia Institute of Technology, described his 
experiences developing and teaching a CPS-related massive open online 

course (MOOC). Egerstedt had taught an embedded and hybrid control 

systems course at the senior undergraduate level to students from elec
-trical, computer, mechanical, and aerospace engineering and computer 

science and sought to provide a more solid grounding in theory as well 

as additional opportunities to apply that theory in practice. A stronger 

theoretical foundation would allow students who otherwise tended to 

approach dif˜cult problems by patching the code to use more formal and 

systematic approaches. ﬁFlipping the classroomﬂ by using a MOOC to 

cover the theory component would maximize the classroom time avail
-able to apply the theory to robotics laboratories. 
Topics for the MOOC included an introduction to controls, mobile 
robots, linear systems, control design, hybrid systems, navigation prob
-lems, and, ˜nally, connecting these elements. Initial enrollment in the 

2013 course was around 40,000; about 7,000 remained active at the end of 

the session.
2 Students passing 65 percent of quizzes received a certi˜cate 
of completion, and those passing 90 percent received a certi˜cate of dis
-tinction. Egerstedt was also surprised that several of those enrolled were 

practicing engineers who wanted to revisit the topic. 
On the practice side, Egerstedt was unhappy with the available 
choices for educational robots, so his team developed its own, the Quick
-Bot. This robot has a differential drive, four infrared inputs, WiFi, and 

optical encoders and uses BeagleBone Black and Arduino computers. 

The cost is approximately $150 to $300. Egerstedt worked with hardware 

companies and online electronics providers to ensure that parts were 

available. Lessons were provided to help students build their own robots. 
Egerstedt noted several challenges. The project was incredibly dif
-˜cult, requiring three times the work of a regular class. Dividing what 

would normally be 90-minute lectures into very short sublectures typical 

of MOOCs is hard, and writing multiple-choice questions on a complex 

topic like control theory is incredibly dif˜cult. Egerstedt also noted that 
2 
Edward Lee, University of California, Berkeley, also spoke brie˚y of teaching a CPS 
MOOC based on his embedded systems course. Offered during the summer of 2014, the 
course provided virtual laboratory software. The course was 6 weeks long and included 

49 lectures (approximately 11 hours of video) and 6 weekly laboratory assignments. Peak 

enrollment was 8,767, with 2,213 submitting at least one assignment. Approximately 1,543 

scored above a 0, and only 342 ﬁpassed.ﬂ
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
the overall design for a CPS course is challenging. For example, what are 
the prerequisites, what are appropriate assignments and laboratories, and 

how multidisciplinary should the lessons be? 
Egerstedt concluded by expressing excitement about CPS as a new 
˜eld and the pedagogical potential of ˚ipped classrooms using MOOCs. 

There is a serious appetite for CPS content, and Egerstedt found that other 

schools were using his MOOC to ˚ip their own classrooms. Egerstedt also 

suggested that MOOCs could be used to help students lacking prerequi
-site material or to supplement faculty capabilities.
K-12 Education
Harry Cheng discussed his work in incorporating CPS into K-12 
education at the University of California, Davis, Center for Integrated 

Computing and Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics 

(C-STEM). C-STEM was created to close the achievement gap by broaden
-
ing participation of traditionally underrepresented students in computing 

and STEM-related careers. C-STEM incorporates computing and robotics, 

two areas that touch on CPS core knowledge, into the K-12 curriculum by 

˜nding ways to use them to teach mathematics and other core subjects. 

The C-STEM curriculum, outlined in Figure 1.4, is accepted as part of the 

subject matter admission requirements of the University of California 
FIGURE 1.4
 C-STEM Curriculum. SOURCE: Harry H. Cheng, UC Davis Center 
for Integrated Computing and STEM Education (C-STEM), University of Califor
-nia, Davis.
Ele
mentarySchool CurriculumHighSchoolCurriculumExploringMathwithRoboticsandComputingAlgebra 1withComputing(math)Algebra 1withComputingandRobotics(math)IntegratedMath1withComputing(math)IntegratedMath1withComputingandRobotics(math)IntroductiontoComputerProgramming withC(elective)Computing withRobotics(elective)Introdomputer Programming for
EngineeringApplications(aUniversityofCalifornia,Davis, engineeringcourse)MiddleSchoolCurriculumMath7 withComputingMath8 withComputingComputerProgramming withChRobotics andVideoProduction(a C/C++ interpreter)Comp
Principles and Design of Cyber-Physical


Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY OF PRESENTATIONS AND WORKSHOP DISCUSSIONS
 17system, allowing California schools to adopt the curriculum. In addition 
to developing the curriculum, C-STEM supports K-12 teacher develop
-
ment via a summer institute, academic year workshops, onsite train-
ing, and periodic conferences. Furthermore, C-STEM supports numerous 

robotic competitions that develop student skills and foster interest in the 

curriculum.
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
2Preliminary Observations
The committee has developed a preliminary set of observations about 
cyber-physical systems (CPS) education based on the presentations 

and brie˜ng summarized in Chapter 1 as well as from its own 
expertise and deliberations thus far. The committee will continue its infor
-mation gathering and deliberations and will issue its ˜nal report provid
-ing its ˜ndings and recommendations later in 2015.
˜˚
CPS skills and experience are in demand. 
The anecdotal reports from 
industry representatives point to two areas of demand. First, as CPS 

becomes an increasingly important aspect of products and services, some 

companies are looking speci˜cally for people with an educational concen
-
tration in CPSŠwho some dubbed the ﬁCPS engineer.ﬂ Second, CPS skills 

are becoming increasingly important across a wide range of engineering 

specialties. Although it is dif˜cult to quantify the demand, more than 

one presenter observed that his ˜rm was hampered in developing new 

products because it was not able to secure suf˜cient CPS talent. Others 

noted dif˜culties in hiring people with the CPS skills they were looking 

for; one response has been for some organizations to focus on using on-

the-job training to develop additional CPS skills internally. 
˜˚
A lack of familiarity with the term ﬁcyber-physical systemsﬂ itself may 
impede student interest in the ˜eld. 
Although cyber-physical systems have 

been widely used and designed for some time now, perspective students 

may not perceive CPS as an attractive area of study and work in part 

because they do not recognize the label. By contrast, students are often 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS
 19eager to enroll in courses with ﬁroboticsﬂ or the Internet of things in their 
title. Both of these overlap with CPS, although they may not cover all of 

the foundations needed for CPS. Also, large information technology ˜rms 

like Facebook and Google have captured the imagination of students in 

a way that many CPS-intensive ˜rms have not, even though the latter 

provide signi˜cant opportunities to innovate and have considerable real-

world impact. 
˜˚
ﬁCPS engineeringﬂ
1 may be emerging as a distinct ˜eld of engineering.
 CPS draws knowledge and approaches from multiple areas of engineer
-ing and may indeed have signi˜cant overlap with other areas of engineer
-ing; however, CPS has begun to take on a distinctive character. 
Given that CPS is multidisciplinary and draws from many areas, it 
indeed has signi˜cant overlap with those areas. However, CPS is dis
-tinctive due to several qualities. For example, embedded systems often 

concentrate on low-cost, simple devices or large and complex systems 

embedded in closed or very controlled environments. Today, most new 

embedded systems are in environments that are open via connections 

(giving us the ﬁcyberﬂ in CPS) to the wireless world and the Internet. 

Systems engineering also contributes heavily to CPS. However, systems 

engineering typically concentrates on the organization, management, and 

integration required for large systems but does not deeply address the 

detailed technological needs that arise in combining the physical with the 

cyber. Several examples of CPS, such as autonomous vehicles, could be 

considered ﬁrobotics.ﬂ However, classical robots do not necessarily draw 

on the CPS principles needed for autonomous vehicles: real-time, safety-

critical, large-scale, wireless communication environments and operation 

in unconstrained environments.
˜˚
There is growing agreement on the core elements of CPS, but a diverse 
set of approaches to fashioning CPS programs is likely and appropriate.
 It seems 
possible to outline a set of core concepts, principles, and themes, and the 

committee will be endeavoring to use this to lay out a model undergradu
-
ate curriculum in CPS for its ˜nal report. That said, CPS is new and its 

applications are continuing to emerge and evolve, suggesting that an even 

higher degree of variation among approaches will be found than already 

exists across engineering and computer science programs at different 

institutions. Multiple pathways toward CPS-focused programs are also 

likely. Programs have already grown organically from computer science 

and electrical engineering programs; these programs will continue to 
1 
The committee uses the terms ﬁCPS engineeringﬂ and ﬁCPS engineerﬂ to mean a set of 
skills and knowledge needed to design and build a CPS, and a person with those skills; the 
terms are not limited to a set of credentials or to someone who has a degree or certi˜cation 

in CPS.
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
grow organically and follow somewhat distinct trajectories. At the same 
time, engineering programs in areas such as such civil, mechanical, and 

aerospace have been placing increasing emphasis on CPSŠa trend that 

seems likely to continue and spread.
˜˚
The need for CPS skills is becoming pervasive across engineering and 
computer science. 
CPS are deployed in a variety of domains, including 

civil, mechanical, and aerospace. CPS engineers will not replace the need 

for engineering that focuses on deep understanding of topics speci˜c to 

these ˜elds, but people with such skills will increasingly be central to 

engineering teams. The other engineers and computer scientists on those 

teams will increasingly need at least some CPS knowledge and skills. 
˜˚
It will likely not be suf˜cient to simply bundle existing courses to create 
a CPS program. 
Although many of the topics in CPS can also be found in 

current engineering and computer science courses, the emphasis on the 

interaction of the cyber and the physical is unique to CPS. For example, 

control theory classes in electrical engineering typically focus on electro
-magnetic principles such as those for circuits. A CPS control theory course 

would need to better incorporate topics related to networks, human-in-

the-loop models, security, software, and real-time and hybrid control. 

Similarly, a computer science department™s software design course tends 

to employ non-physical world applications; a CPS course would need to 

emphasize physical constraints. 
˜˚
CPS education programs need to include a hands-on component. 
These 
opportunities can be provided to students via an interdisciplinary cap
-stone course, extensive course-speci˜c laboratories, an engineering 

elective course focused on a single project, or internships and industry-

academic partnerships. 
˜˚
Other paths to CPS knowledge will be important. 
Although this study 
will focus on 4-year undergraduate curricula, other paths for students 

and the workforce to gain CPS knowledge are also important. These paths 

include minors or certi˜cates and graduate programs within other dis
-ciplines, opportunities for community and vocational schools and post-

graduate professional studies, the use of online education or massive 

open online courses, and the role of K-12 education in preparing students 

for a range of careers involving CPS. 
The committee also identi˜ed several challenges in creating and sup
-porting cyber-physical systems programs at universities. The committee 

will explore possible solutions in its ˜nal report.
˜˚
Working across disciplinary and department boundaries can create sig
-ni˜cant challenges.
 CPS exists at the intersection of multiple disciplines. 
This has signi˜cant impact on how a curriculum will be developed and 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS
 21taught. Organically developed CPS activities have generally grown out 
of electrical engineering or computer science departments; however, to 

develop the best students, a degree program would need to incorporate 

both of these departments, plus inclusion of domain-speci˜c departments 

such as aerospace or civil engineering. 
˜˚
A signi˜cant challenge will be identifying, recruiting, and educating 
appropriate faculty members to teach new and different courses.
 Many uni
-versities currently have a limited handful of faculty who can teach CPS 

courses. If schools are to develop and offer a full CPS curriculum, addi
-tional faculty members will be needed. Additionally, the interdisciplinary 

nature of CPS can create challenges for faculty in securing research fund
-ing and obtaining tenure. Alternative paths, such as hiring non-tenure-

track professors from industry, may need to be explored.
˜˚
Textbooks, curricular materials, and laboratory facilities will need to 
be developed. 
Developing these critical resources requires both time and 

˜nancial support. 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25
ABiographies of Committee 
Members and Staff
JOHN A. (JACK) STANKOVIC, 
Co-Chair
, is currently the BP America 
Professor in the Computer Science Department at the University of Vir
-ginia (UVA). He came to UVA
 as BP America Professor and chair of the 
Department of Computer Science
 in 1997. Professor Stankovic is a fellow 
of the
 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the 
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and he served on the Com-puting Research Association
 board of directors for 9 years. He currently 
serves on the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) Computer Science 

Telecommunications Board (CSTB). He received the IEEE Award for Out
-standing Technical Contributions and Leadership in Real-Time Systems. 

He also received the IEEE TC on Distributed Processing Annual Distin
-guished Achievement Award in 2006 as the inaugural winner. Professor 

Stankovic received an Outstanding Scholar Award from the University of 

Massachusetts. He also received a Distinguished Faculty Award from the 

School of Engineering at UVA. He was co-founder and co-editor-in-chief 

of the 
International Journal on Real-Time Systems
, editor-in-chief of 
IEEE 
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Computing
, associate editor for ACM 

Transactions on Wireless Sensor Networks
, associate editor for 
ACM Transac
-tions on Embedded Systems, and book series editor for 
Real-Time Systems
. He 

has won 11 best paper awards and has an h-index of 103. Dr. Stankovic 

received his Ph.D. from
 Brown University
 and then served on the faculty 
of the University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
JAMES (JIM) STURGES, 
Co-Chair
, is an independent consultant specializ
-ing in program management and systems engineering for very large, com
-plex aerospace and defense systems. He retired in 2009 from Lockheed 

Martin Corporation, where he had been director, engineering processes, 

and director, mission assurance. Prior to that he was vice president, engi
-neering and total quality, at Loral Air Traf˜c Control/Lockheed Martin 

Air Traf˜c Management, and C3I Strategic Business area director for Loral 

Tactical Defense Systems in Arizona. He is an associate fellow and past 

member of the Standards Executive Council and chair of the Systems 

Engineering Technical Committee of the American Institute of Aeronau
-tics and Astronautics (AIAA) and was twice chair of the corporate advi
-sory board for the International Council on Systems Engineering. Early in 

his career, he was a naval aviator, instrument instructor, and check pilot 

and anti-submarine warfare of˜cer for the U.S. Navy. He has a B.A. from 

the University of North Carolina and an M.S. and aeronautical engineer
-ing degree from the Naval Postgraduate School at Monterey.
ALEXANDRE BAYEN is currently an associate chancellor professor at 
the University of California, Berkeley. He has been the director of the 

Institute for Transportation Studies (ITS) since 2014. He was a visiting 

researcher at NASA Ames Research Center from 2000 to 2003. Between 

January 2004 and December 2004, he worked as the research director of 

the Autonomous Navigation Laboratory at the Laboratoire de Recherches 

Balistiques et Aerodynamiques (Ministere de la Defense, Vernon, France), 

where he holds the rank of major. Dr. Bayen has authored two books and 

more than 150 articles in peer-reviewed journals and conferences. He 

is the recipient of the Ballhaus Award from Stanford University (2004) 

and the CAREER award from the National Science Foundation (2009), 

and he is a NASA Top 10 Innovator on Water Sustainability (2010). His 

projects Mobile Century and Mobile Millennium received the 2008 Best 

of ITS Award for Best Innovative Practice at the ITS World Congress and 

a TRANNY Award from the California Transportation Foundation (2009). 

Mobile Millennium has been featured more than 200 times in the media, 

including TV and radio (CBS, NBC, ABC, CNET, NPR, KGO, the BBC) 

as well as in the popular press (
Wall Street Journal
, 
Washington Post
, 
LA 
Times
). Dr. Bayen is the recipient of the Presidential Early Career Award 
for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE) from the White House (2010) and 

the recipient of the Okawa Research Grant Award, the Ruberti Prize from 

IEEE, and the Huber Prize from ASCE. He received an engineering degree 

in applied mathematics from the Ecole Polytechnique, France; an M.S. 

degree in aeronautics and astronautics from Stanford University, and a 

Ph.D. in aeronautics and astronautics from Stanford University.
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 27CHARLES R. FARRAR is an adjunct professor in the Structural Engi
-neering Department at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD). 
From 1989 to 1996, he served as an adjunct professor at the University 

of New Mexico™s Department of Mechanical/Civil Engineering. He also 

serves as the Engineering Institute Leader at Los Alamos National Labo
-ratory (LANL) and is the 2010 Distinguished Bromilow Lecturer. He 

is currently working jointly with the engineering faculty at UCSD to 

develop the Los Alamos/UCSD Engineering Institute, with a research 

focus on multidisciplinary projects that integrate advanced predictive 

modeling, novel sensing systems, and new approaches to information 

technology. He has 27 years™ experience at LANL. Dr. Farrar™s research 

interests focus on developing integrated hardware and software solutions 

to structural health monitoring problems. The results of this research 

have been documented in more than 300 publications as well as numer
-ous keynote lectures at international conferences. Additional professional 

activities include current appointments to associate editor positions for 

the International Journal of Structural Health Monitoring and Earthquake 
Engineering and Structural Dynamics
 and the development of a short course 
entitled ﬁStructural Health Monitoring: A Statistical Pattern Recognition 

Approach,ﬂ which has been offered more than 17 times to industry and 

government agencies in Asia, Australia, Europe, and the United States. 

In 2007 he was elected a fellow of the American Society of Mechanical 

Engineers. Dr. Farrar received a Ph.D. in civil engineering from the Uni
-versity of New Mexico.
MARYE ANNE FOX is the former chancellor of UCSD. Dr. Fox is a member 
of the National Academy of Sciences and has received honorary degrees 

from 12 institutions in the United States and abroad. In October 2010, 

President Barack Obama awarded her the National Medal of Science, the 

highest honor bestowed by the U.S. government on scientists, engineers, 

and inventors. Previously, Dr. Fox was chancellor at North Carolina State 

University, and she spent 22 years at the University of Texas, where she 

advanced to vice president for research and held the Waggoner Regents 

Chair in chemistry. She earned a bachelor™s degree in science from Notre 

Dame College, a master™s degree in science from Cleveland State Univer
-sity, and a Ph.D. in chemistry from Dartmouth College.
SANTIAGO GRIJALVA
 is an associate professor of electrical and com
-puter engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He joined the 
faculty in 2009. He is the director of the Advanced Computational Elec
-tricity Systems (ACES) Laboratory, where he conducts research on real-

time power system control, informatics, and economics and renewable 

energy integration in power. In spring 2012, Dr. Grijalva was appointed 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
as the Strategic Energy Institute (SEI) associate director for electricity 
systems, responsible for coordinating large efforts on electricity research 

and policy at Georgia Tech. He was a postdoctoral fellow in Power and 

Energy Systems at the University of Illinois from 2003 to 2004. From 1995 

to 1997, he was with the Ecuadorian National Center for Energy Control 

as engineer and manager of the Real-Time EMS Software Department. 

From 2002 to 2009, he was with PowerWorld Corporation as a senior 

software architect and developer of innovative real-time and optimiza
-tion applications used today by utilities, control centers, and universities 

in more than 60 countries. Dr. Grijalva is a leading researcher on ultra-

reliable architectures for critical energy infrastructures. He has pioneered 

work on decentralized and autonomous power system control, renewable 

energy integration in power, and uni˜ed network models and applica
-tions. He is currently the principal investigator (PI) of various future elec
-tricity grid research projects for the Department of Energy, the Advanced 

Research Projects AgencyŠEnergy, the Electric Power Research Institute, 

and the Power Systems Engineering Research Center as well as other 

government organizations, research consortia, and industrial sponsors. 

Dr. Grijalva received an electrical engineer degree from EPN-Ecuador in 

1994, an M.S. certi˜cate in information systems from ESPE-Ecuador, and 

M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of 

Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
HIMANSHU KHURANA is the senior manager for the Integrated 
Security Technologies section of the Knowledge Systems Laboratory at 

Honeywell Automation and Control Systems. The Integrated Security 

Technologies section focuses on research, development, and technology 

transition in cybersecurity, computer vision, surveillance, and biomet
-rics. Dr. Khurana™s research interests lie in the area of distributed system 

security, especially as applied to large-scale distributed systems and criti
-cal infrastructures, and he has published 50 articles in this area. Prior to 

joining Honeywell, he was with the University of Illinois, Urbana-Cham
-paign, and served as the co-PI for the Trustworthy Cyber Infrastructure 

for Power Center (now the TCIPG). He has been involved with several 

Smart Grid initiatives, including the North American Synchrophasor Ini
-tiative; the NIST Cyber Security Working Group; and the DNP3 Technical 

Committee, as well as in developing relevant cybersecurity standards. He 

obtained his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Maryland, 

College Park.
PANGANAMALA R. (PR) KUMAR is a professor of computer science at 
Texas A&M University, where he holds the College of Engineering Chair 

in Computer Engineering. From 1977 to 1984 he was a faculty member in 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 29the Department of Mathematics at the University of Maryland, Baltimore 
County, and from 1985 to 2011 he was a faculty member in the Department 

of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Coordinated Science Lab
-
oratory at the University of Illinois. Dr. Kumar has worked on problems 

in game theory, adaptive control, stochastic systems, simulated annealing, 

neural networks, machine learning, queuing networks, manufacturing 

systems, scheduling, wafer fabrication plants, and information theory. His 

current research interests are in wireless networks, sensor networks, and 

networked embedded control systems. His research is currently focused 

on wireless networks; sensor networks; cyber-physical systems; and the 

convergence of control, communication, and computation. Dr. Kumar is a 

member of the National Academy of Engineering and the Academy of Sci
-
ences of the Developing World. He was awarded an honorary doctorate 

by the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (Eidgenossische Technische 

Hochschule) in Zurich. He received the IEEE Field Award for Control 

Systems, the Donald P. Eckman Award of the American Automatic Con
-trol Council, the Fred W. Ellersick Prize of the IEEE Communications 

Society, and the Outstanding Contribution Award of ACM SIGMOBILE. 

He is a fellow of IEEE. He was a guest chair professor and leader of the 

Guest Chair Professor Group on Wireless Communication and Network
-ing at Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. He is a D.J. Gandhi Distin
-guished Visiting Professor at IIT Bombay. He is an honorary professor at 

IIT Hyderabad. He was awarded the Distinguished Alumnus Award from 

IIT Madras, the Alumni Achievement Award from Washington University 

in St. Louis, and the Daniel C. Drucker Eminent Faculty Award from the 

College of Engineering at the University of Illinois. Dr. Kumar obtained 

his B. Tech. degree in electrical engineering (electronics) from I.I.T. Madras 

and his M.S. and D.Sc. degrees in systems science and mathematics from 

Washington University in St. Louis. 
INSUP LEE is the Cecilia Fitler Moore Professor of Computer and Infor
-mation Science and director of Penn Research in Embedded Computing 
and Integrated Systems Engineering (PRECISE) Center, which he founded 

in 2008, at the University of Pennsylvania. He also holds a secondary 

appointment in the Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering. 

His research interests include cyber-physical systems (CPS), real-time 

systems, embedded and hybrid systems, formal methods and tools, high-

con˜dence medical device systems, run-time veri˜cation, software cer
-ti˜cation, and trust management. The theme of his research activities 

has been to assure and improve the correctness, safety, and timeliness 

of life-critical embedded systems. Dr. Lee and his student received the 

best paper award at IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS) 2003 

for their work on compositional schedulability analysis. His papers also 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
received the best paper award at IEEE RTSS 2012, the best student paper 
at IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Sympo
-sium (RTAS) 2012, and the co-best paper at the Council of European Aero
-
space Societies in 2011. Recently, he has been working in medical CPS and 

security of CPS. He has served on many program committees and chaired 

several international conferences and workshops and has also served on 

various steering and advisory committees of technical societies. He has 

served on the editorial boards of several scienti˜c journals, including 
IEEE 

Transactions on Computers
, 
Formal Methods in System Design
, and 
Real-Time 
Systems Journal
. He is a founding co-editor-in-chief of 
KIISE Journal of 
Computing Science and Engineering
. He was a chair of the IEEE Computer 
Society Technical Committee on Real-Time Systems and an IEEE CS Dis
-tinguished Visitor Speaker. He was a member of the Technical Advisory 

Group of the President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology 

Networking and Information Technology. He received an appreciation 

plaque from the Ministry of Science, IT and Future Planning, South Korea, 

for speaking at the ULTRA Program Forum in 2013. He is an IEEE fellow 

and received the IEEE TC-RTS Outstanding Technical Achievement and 

Leadership Award in 2008. He received a B.S. degree with honors in math
-
ematics from the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and a Ph.D. 

degree in computer science from the University of Wisconsin, Madison. 
WILLIAM MILAM is a technical expert at the Ford Research and Innova
-tion Center, Ford Motor Company. His research addresses modeling and 
implementation of advanced technology automotive engines for improved 

fuel economy and emissions, and improvements in systems engineering 

processes for the design of automotive embedded systems. He is a senior 

member of IEEE and a member of the Society of Automotive Engineers 

(SAE). Mr. Milam serves as a member of the SAE Electronic Design Auto
-mation Standards Committee and the SAE Architecture Analysis and 

Design Language Standards Committee and chairs the SAE Model Based 

Embedded Systems Engineering Task Force.
SANJOY K. MITTER joined the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT) in 1969, where he has been a professor of electrical engineering 

since 1973. His current research interests are communication and control 

in a networked environment, the relationship of statistical and quantum 

physics to information theory and control and autonomy and adaptive
-ness for integrative organization. He taught at Case Western Reserve 

University from 1965 to 1969. He was the director of the MIT Laboratory 

for Information and Decision Systems from 1981 to 1999. He has also been 

a professor of mathematics at the Scuola Normale, Pisa, Italy, from 1986 to 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 311996. He has held visiting positions at Imperial College, London; Univer
-sity of Groningen, Holland; INRIA, France; Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research, India; ETH, Zurich, Switzerland; and several American uni
-versities. Professor Mitter was an Ulam Scholar at Los Alamos National 

Laboratory and a John von Neumann Visiting Professor in Mathematics 

at the Technical University of Munich, Germany. He was awarded the 

AACC Richard E. Bellman Control Heritage Award for 2007. He was the 

McKay Professor at the University of California, Berkeley, in March 2000, 

and held the Russell-Severance-Springer Chair in fall 2003. He is a fellow 

of IEEE and a member of the National Academy of Engineering. He is 

the winner of the 2000 IEEE Control Systems award. He was elected a 

foreign member of Instituto Veneto di Scienze, ed Arti in 2003. Professor 

Mitter
 received his Ph.D. degree from the Imperial College of Science and 
Technology. 
JOSÉ M.F. MOURA is Philip and Marsha Dowd University Professor 
of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University 

(CMU) and, by courtesy, a professor of biomedical engineering. He is a 

member of the National Academy of Engineers, a corresponding member 

of the Portugal Academy of Science, an IEEE fellow, and a fellow of the 

American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). He has 

been a visiting professor at New York University and MIT and a visiting 

scholar at the University of Southern California, and was on the faculty 

of IST (Portugal). Dr. Moura™s research interests are in data science and 

statistical signal and image processing. Current research projects include 

data analytics for unstructured big data, distributed inference in net
-
works, SPIRAL (an intelligent compiler), nondestructive health moni
-
toring systems, bioimaging, signal processing on graphs, and image/

video processing. Dr. Moura received the IEEE Signal Processing Society 

Award for outstanding technical contributions and leadership in signal 

processing and the IEEE Signal Processing Society Technical Achievement 

Award for fundamental contributions to statistical signal processing. He 

is on the board of directors of IEEE and served as IEEE Division IX Direc
-tor. He was the president of the IEEE Signal Processing Society. He was 

editor-in-chief of 
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing
 and acting editor-
in-chief for IEEE Signal Processing Letters
. He was on the editorial board of 

several journals, including 
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks
 and 
IEEE 
Proceedings
. He was on the steering committees of the IEEE International 
Symposium on Bioimaging and the ACM/IEEE International Symposium 

on Information Processing in Sensor Networks. He serves or served on 

several IEEE boards and chaired the Technical Activities Board Transac
-tions Committee. He holds a D.Sc. in electrical engineering and computer 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
science, an M.Sc., and EE degrees, all from MIT, and an EE degree from 
Instituto Superior Técnico (IST, Portugal).
GEORGE J. PAPPAS is the Joseph Moore Professor and chair of the 
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering at the University of 

Pennsylvania. He also holds a secondary appointment in the Departments 

of Computer and Information Sciences, and Mechanical Engineering and 

Applied Mechanics. He is a member of the General Robotics Automation 

Sensing and Perception Laboratory and the PRECISE Center. He has pre
-viously served as the deputy dean for research in the School of Engineer
-ing and Applied Science. His research focuses on control theory and, in 

particular, hybrid systems, embedded systems, and hierarchical and dis
-tributed control systems, with applications to unmanned aerial vehicles, 

distributed robotics, green buildings, and biomolecular networks. He is 

a fellow of IEEE and has received various awards, such as the Antonio 

Ruberti Young Researcher Prize, the George S. Axelby Award, and the 

National Science Foundation Presidential Early Career Award for Scien
-tists and Engineers.
PAULO TABUADA is a professor of electrical engineering and vice chair 
for graduate affairs at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). 

Between January 2002 and July 2003, he was a postdoctoral researcher at 

the University of Pennsylvania. After spending 3 years at the University 

of Notre Dame as an assistant professor, he joined the Electrical Engineer
-ing Department at UCLA, where he established and directs the Cyber-

Physical Systems Laboratory. His research interests include modeling, 

analysis, design, control, and security of CPS. He received his Licencia
-tura degree in aerospace engineering from the Instituto Superior Técnico, 

Lisbon, Portugal, and his Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engi
-neering from the Institute for Systems and Robotics, a private research 

institute associated with Instituto Superior Tecnico. Dr. Tabuada™s contri
-butions to CPS have been recognized by multiple awards, including the 

NSF CAREER award in 2005, the Donald P. Eckman award in 2009, and 

the George S. Axelby award in 2011. In 2009, he co-chaired the Interna
-tional Conference Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control, and in 2012 

he was program co-chair for the Third International Federation for Auto
-matic Control Workshop on Distributed Estimation and Control in Net
-worked Systems. He also served on the editorial board of 
IEEE Embedded 

Systems Letters and IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control
. His latest book, 

on veri˜cation and control of hybrid systems, was published in 2009.
MANUELA M. VELOSO is Herbert A. Simon Professor in the Computer 
Science Department, School of Computer Science, at Carnegie Mellon 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 33University (CMU). She holds courtesy appointments in the Robotics 
Institute, Machine Learning, Electrical and Computer Engineering, and 

Mechanical Engineering Departments. Dr. Veloso conducts research in 

arti˜cial intelligence and robotics. She founded and directs the CORAL 

research laboratory at CMU for the study of multiagent systems where 

agents ﬁcollaborate, observe, reason, act, and learn.ﬂ She is an IEEE fellow, 

AAAS fellow, and Association for the Advancement of Arti˜cial Intelli
-gence (AAAI) fellow. She is the current president of AAAI and past presi
-dent of the RoboCup Federation. She received the 2009 ACM/SIGART 

Autonomous Agents Research Award for her contributions to agents in 

uncertain and dynamic environments, including distributed robot local
-ization and world modeling, strategy selection in multiagent systems in 

the presence of adversaries, and robot learning from demonstration. Dr. 

Veloso and her students have contributed a variety of autonomous robots 

for robot soccer, education, and service. More recently, she introduced 

symbiotic robot autonomy, in which robots are autonomous but aware of 

their perceptual, cognitive, and actuation limitations and can proactively 

ask for help from humans, other robots, and the web. For the past 3 years, 

following robust localization, task planning, and symbiotic autonomy, her 

collaborative service robots, CoBots, have navigated for more than 200 km 

in the multi-˚oor buildings at CMU. Dr. Veloso holds a Ph.D. in computer 

science from CMU and B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical and computer 

engineering from the Instituto Superior Tecnico, Lisbon, Portugal.
Staff
JON EISENBERG is director of the CSTB. He has also been study director 
for a diverse body of work, including a series of studies exploring Internet 

and broadband policy and networking and communications technologies. 

In 1995-1997 he was a AAAS Science, Engineering, and Diplomacy Fel
-low at the U.S. Agency for International Development, where he worked 

on technology transfer and information and telecommunications policy 

issues. Dr. Eisenberg received his Ph.D. in physics from the University 

of Washington and a B.S. in physics with honors from the University of 

Massachusetts, Amherst.
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI is a program of˜cer for the CSTB. She for
-merly served as a program associate with the Frontiers of Engineering 
program at the National Academy of Engineering. Prior to her work 

at the Academies, she served as a senior project assistant in Education 

Technology at the National School Boards Association. Ms. Bacon Talati 

has a B.S. in science, technology, and culture from the Georgia Institute 
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
of Technology and an M.P.P. from George Mason University, with a focus 
on science and technology policy.
SHENAE BRADLEY is a senior program
 assistant at the CSTB. She cur
-rently provides support for the Committee on Sustaining Growth in Com
-puting Performance, the Committee on Wireless Technology Prospects 

and Policy Options, and the Computational Thinking for Everyone: A 

Workshop Series Planning Committee, to name a few. Prior to this, she 

served as an administrative assistant for the Ironworker Management 

Progressive Action Cooperative Trust and managed a number of apart
-ment rental communities for Edgewood Management Corporation in the 

Maryland/D.C./Delaware metropolitan areas.
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35
BPresentations to the Committee
This interim report refers to presentations to the committee at two 
workshops and one brie˜ng.
 ˜˚
Workshop on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems Education: 
De˜ning Needs and Identifying Challenges, April 30, 2014, Washington, 

D.C.
 Š Dick Bulterman, FX Palo Alto Laboratory (FXPAL)
 Š David Corman, National Science Foundation
 Š Ryan Izard, Clemson University
 Š Dan Johnson, Honeywell International, Inc.
 Š Kevin Massey, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
 Š John Mills, SimuQuest, Inc.
 Š Sanjai Rayadurgam, University of Minnesota
 Š  
Alberto Sangiovanna-Vincentelli, University of California, 

Berkeley
 Š Lucio Soibelman, University of Southern California
 Š  
Craig Stephens, Ford Research and Advanced Engineering, 

Ford Motor Company
 Š Joe Salvo, GE Research
 Š Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University
 Š Jon Williams, John Deere
Interim Report on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 INTERIM REPORT ON 21ST CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
˜˚
Workshop on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems Education: 
Developing Solutions, October 2-3, 2014, Washington, D.C.
 Š Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
 Š Douglas Adams, Vanderbilt University
 Š Steve Anton, Tennessee Technological University
 Š Harry Cheng, University of California, Davis
 Š André DeHon, University of Pennsylvania
 Š Magnus Egerstedt, Georgia Institute of Technology
 Š  
Norman Fortenberry, American Society for Engineering 
Education
 Š Christopher Gill, Washington University in St. Louis
 Š Scott Hareland, Medtronic, Inc.
 Š Jonathan How, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 Š Clas Jacobson, United Technologies Corporation
 Š Philip Koopman, Carnegie Mellon University
 Š Edward Lee, University of California, Berkeley
 Š Jerry Lynch, University of Michigan
 Š Dimitri Mavris, Georgia Institute of Technology
 Š Shankar Sastry, University of California, Berkeley
 Š Henning Schulzrinne, Columbia University
˜˚
Brie˜ng to the committee by Daniel Dvorak and David Nichols, Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, June 26, 2014, via teleconference
