DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/2237Information Technology in the Service Society: ATwenty-First Century Lever288 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-04876-7 | DOI 10.17226/2237Committee to Study the Impact of Information Technology on the Performance ofService Activities, National Research CouncilInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.InformationTechnology in the
Service SocietyA Twenty-First Century Lever
Committee to Study the Impact of Information Technology on the
Performance of Service ActivitiesComputer Science and Telecommunications Board
Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications
National Research Council
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C. 1994
iInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of

the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard

for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-

ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distin-
guished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of

science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter

granted to it by Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal

government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Bruce Alberts is president of the National

Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous

in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sci-

ences the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering

also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and

research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Robert M. White is president

of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to
secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy mat-

ters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the

National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal govern-

ment and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr.

Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy's purposes of further-

ing knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general poli-

cies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the

National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to

the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is adminis-

tered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. Robert M.

White are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.
Support for this project was provided by the following organizations: the Alfred P. Sloan Foun-
dation (under Grant No. 90-10-4) and Apple Computer Inc., International Business Machines Corpo-

ration, the AT&T Foundation, Digital Equipment Corporation, and Xerox Corporation, under

unnumbered contracts.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 92-85596
International Standard Book Number 0-309-04876-1
Copyright 1994 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Available from: National Academy Press 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20418

B-132Printed in the United States of America
iiInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee To Study The Impact Of Information Technology
On The Performance Of Service Activities
J. BRIAN QUINN, Dartmouth College, 
ChairMARTIN BAILY, McKinsey & Co., 
Vice ChairJORDAN BARUCH, Jordan Baruch Consulting

TORA BIKSON, RAND Corporation
DAVID CARLSON, Kmart Corporation

DENNIS CHAMOT, AFL-CIO

KENNETH COATES, Ford Motor Credit Company

WILLIAM CURTIS, Carnegie Mellon University

ROBERT ELMORE, Arthur Andersen & Co.

CHARLES GOLD, Ernst & Young

MAX HOPPER, American Airlines

ELLEN KNAPP, Coopers & Lybrand

HENRY LICHSTEIN, Citibank
JEROME MARK, Bureau of Labor Statistics (Retired)
STEPHEN ROACH, Morgan Stanley & Co.

IRWIN SITKIN, Aetna Life and Casualty (Retired)

MICHAEL ZUBKOFF, Dartmouth Medical School
Special Advisors
JOHN OPEL, IBM Corporation (Retired)
MORRIS TANENBAUM, AT&T (Retired)

WALTER WRISTON, Citibank (Retired)
StaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Director
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer

LESLIE M. WADE, Project Assistant
iiiInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computer Science And Telecommunications Board
WILLIAM WULF, University of Virginia, 
ChairRUZENA BAJCSY, University of Pennsylvania

JEFF DOZIER, University of California at Santa Barbara

DAVID J. FARBER, University of Pennsylvania

HENRY FUCHS, University of North Carolina

CHARLES GESCHKE, Adobe Systems Inc.

JAMES GRAY, Digital Equipment Corporation
JOHN L. HENNESSY, Stanford University
DEBORAH A. JOSEPH, University of Wisconsin

RICHARD M. KARP, University of California at Berkeley

KEN KENNEDY, Rice University

BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Digital Equipment Corporation

BARBARA H. LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

ROBERT L. MARTIN, Bell Communications Research

DAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, University of California at Berkeley

ABRAHAM PELED, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center (until August 1993)

WILLIAM PRESS, Harvard University

CHARLES L. SEITZ, California Institute of Technology

EDWARD SHORTLIFFE, Stanford University School of Medicine
CASMIR S. SKRZYPCZAK, NYNEX Corporation
LAWRENCE T. TESLER, Apple Computer Inc.

LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel Corporation

MARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Director

HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer

JAMES MALLORY, Staff Officer

GREG MEDALIE, Staff Officer

RENEE A. HAWKINS, Staff Associate

GLORIA BEMAH, Administrative Assistant

JANET QUARLES, Project Assistant

LESLIE M. WADE, Project Assistant
ivInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Commission On Physical Sciences, Mathematics, And
ApplicationsRICHARD N. ZARE, Stanford University, 
ChairRICHARD S. NICHOLSON, American Association for the Advancement of
Science, Vice ChairSTEPHEN L. ADLER, Institute for Advanced Study

JOHN A. ARMSTRONG, IBM Corporation (retired)

SYLVIA T. CEYER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

AVNER FRIEDMAN, University of Minnesota

SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley

ROBERT J. HERMANN, United Technologies Corporation

HANS MARK, University of Texas at Austin

CLAIRE E. MAX, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

CHRISTOPHER F. McKEE, University of California at Berkeley

JAMES W. MITCHELL, AT&T Bell Laboratories

JEROME SACKS, National Institute of Statistical Sciences

A. RICHARD SEEBASS III, University of Colorado

CHARLES P. SLICHTER, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
ALVIN W. TRIVELPIECE, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
NORMAN METZGER, Executive Director
vInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceIn the spring of 1991, The Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council (NRC) convened the
Committee to Study the Impact of Information Technology on the Performance
of Service Activities. Asked initially to assess the impact of information

technology (IT) on productivity in the service sector, the committee met five

times over a 16-month period, deliberating over concepts and the analyses of

subgroups convened to assess specific issues.
In addition to using the standard macroeconomic data collected and
developed by government agencies, the committee drew on observations from
managers and executives in industry (a group including some of the committee's

own members, as well as numerous others). These observations were obtained

through interviews that were used to develop and check insights, not to generate

quantitative data. Appendixes 
A through 
D provide methodological and
supporting details about the committee's sources of information and its

approach to using this information. 
Appendix E
 lists the interviewed executives,
whose observations helped the committee to understand the processes by which

IT projects are planned, implemented, and evaluated.
At the macroeconomic level, the committee was concerned about the
constraining effects of looking at services from the traditional perspectives of

goods-producing industries (
Chapter 1
). At present, most of the terminology,
methodology, and data for analyzing productivity (and performance) derive

from earlier studies in the goods-producing industries, but to the
PREFACEviiInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.committee, most of these seemed inadequate for understanding trends in the
service sector. For example, whereas productivity in goods-producing activities

is measured in terms that refer to relatively concrete units of output, dollar

sales, or profits, performance in services may relate best to more subjective

qualities such as timing, quality, comfort, or convenience. Measurement

difficulties are a theme that runs through the entire report.
In refining its approach to reflect its initial findings, the committee chose
to investigate the full range of impacts of the use of IT on performance in the

service sector. Thus, the committee examined the nature and measurement of

performance in services at progressively less aggregated levels of analysis: the

macroeconomic level (
Chapter 1
), the industry level (
Chapter 2
), the enterprise
level (
Chapter 3
), and the activity level (
Chapter 4
). Chapters 
1 through 
4culminate in 
Chapter 5
, which discusses implications for managers in
organizations wishing to improve their management of information technology,

and Chapter 6, which presents issues and recommendations for public policy.
To put this report in perspective, some observations on the committee's
operation and scope of concern are appropriate. First, this report was shaped by

interactions within a multidisciplinary committee that included business

executives, economists, behavioral scientists, management theorists, and

technologists. Second, the committee considered the context of international

competitiveness in conducting its analysis, but detailed investigation of
international conditions was beyond its scope. Third, although smaller
companies were represented in the data that supports industry- and

macroeconomic-level analyses, the committee's resources did not permit a

systematic examination of the distinguishing characteristics of smaller

enterprises.Many parties outside the committee contributed to this report. First and
foremost were the executives of major service companies who participated in

the committee's extensive series of interviews. The time, thoughtfulness, and

candor of these executives were invaluable to the committee in understanding a

variety of complex and otherwise hidden experiences. The anonymous

reviewers convened by the NRC also played a key role; their probing comments

on the initial draft resulted in a much stronger final report. The contributions of
Patricia Higgins (Dartmouth College) in providing research, moral, and logistic
support throughout the project were essential to its successful completion.

Penny Paquette and Scott Anfinson of Dartmouth College, Debbie Perrault of

Kmart, and Ashley Maddox (intern at Arthur Andersen) also contributed to this

report.The committee chair, James Brian Quinn, integrated the contributions from
those inside and outside the committee. He also demonstrated a significant

personal involvement in shaping the ideas, the concepts, and even the detailed

wording of this report. As importantly, his involvement demonstrated
PREFACEviiiInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.a central finding of the studyŠthat good work and high performance demand
strong and enlightened management and leadership.
CSTB is grateful for the support of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, Apple
Computer Inc., International Business Machines Corporation, the AT&T

Foundation, Digital Equipment Corporation, and Xerox Corporation, which

made this project possible. In accordance with NRC policy, the majority of the

funding for this study did not come from private industry.
William Wulf
Chair
Computer Science And Telecommunications Board
PREFACEixInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW
 11 INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECH-
NOLOGY AT THE MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
 24  This StudyŠApproach, Scope, and Terms
 29  Current Data and Measures of Productivity
 30  National Income and Product Accounts Prepared by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis
 31  Industry-specific Measures of Productivity Developed by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics
 40  Alternate Measures of Productivity and Performance
 44  Observations and Conclusions 45  Many Factors Influence Productivity: IT Affects Many
Aspects of Performance
 45  Organization and Scope of This Report
 47  Notes and References
 49  Bibliography for Chapter 1
 512 IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
INDUSTRY LEVEL
 52  Air Transport 57  Telecommunications 62  Retail and Wholesale Trade
 69  Health Care 75CONTENTSxiInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Banking 80  Insurance 86  Observations and Conclusions 91  Notes and References
 933 IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
ENTERPRISE LEVEL
 97  Why Firms Invest in IT
 98  How Companies Use and Invest in IT
 100  Types of Applications
 100  Decision Making About Investing in IT and the Rigor of
Program Evaluation 118  Cross-cutting Observations Regarding All Uses of Informa-
tion Technology 122  Controlling the Costs of IT
 122  Enhancing Technological Sophistication and Developing
Standards 124  Problems in Assessing Enterprise Performance
 125  Summary and Conclusions 132  Notes and References
 1334 IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
ACTIVITY LEVEL
 136  Introduction 136  What Is an Activity?
 139  Some Observations About Service Activities
 141  Service Activities Are Everywhere 141  Service Activities Are Increasingly Important
 141  Service Activities Are Generic and Elemental
 142  Roles for Information Technology in the Evolution of Activities
 143  New Tools and Tasks
 144  New Linkages and Transformations in Firms
 148  Outsourcing and Industry Transformation 153  Consequences for Employees
 155  Conclusions 160  Notes and References
 1635 IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY 165  Common Problem Areas in the Management of Information
Technology 168  Lack of Competition
 168  Inadequate Planning and Follow-up
 169CONTENTSxiiInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Resistance and Inefficiencies in Work Practices
 170  Excessive Project Scope
 171  Technology-driven Investments in IT
 172  Difficulties in Software Development
 172  Critical Issues in the Management of Information Technology
 173  Information and IT Strategy Seeking Competitive Advantage
 174  Cross-Functional Reengineering and Reorganization
 175  Continuous User and Customer Involvement
 181  Customer-driven Measures of Quality
 182  Compressing Project Scope and Payback Time
 185  Postproject Audits 186  Benchmarking Against Specialized Outside Providers
 187  Customer and Knowledge-driven Performance Evaluation
and Reward Systems 190  Summary and Conclusions 191  Notes and References
 1926 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICA-
TIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY
 193  Implications for Macroeconomic and Fiscal Policy
 194  Background on Employment Issues Raised by Information
Technology in Services 195  The Need for Policy Intervention to Ease Employment Transi-
tions 199  The Need for Additional Research to Guide Policy Making
 201  Improving Federal Macroeconomic Data Gathering and
Analysis 203  Improving Data and Accounting Principles Related to
Investments in Information Technology
 205  Increasing Awareness of and Investments in Research
Related to Information Technology in Services and Ser-

vice Quality Measurements 206  Other Policy Issues Identified by This Study
 207  Notes and References
 209  APPENDIXES  A Selected Research on Economic and Strategic Impacts of
Information Technology 217B Methods for Deriving Bureau of Economic Analysis Measures
of Output
 228C Procedures for Deriving Bureau of Labor Statistics Measures
of Productivity for Service Industries
 234D How the Committee Conducted Its Study
 247E List of Executives Interviewed
 266CONTENTSxiiiInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                   xivInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY in the
SERVICE SOCIETYxvInformation Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary and Overview
The use of information technology (IT) has revolutionized the structure of
management and the nature of competition in a variety of industries.
1 IT is
especially important in the service sector, which now accounts for about 74
percent of the value added in the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) and about

76 percent of national employment (
Table S.1
) and enjoys a healthy $52 billion
trade surplus. Estimates indicate that about 85 percent of all measured

investments in IT hardware are in services. Contrary to the widespread

misconception of services as predominantly simple, labor-intensive activities,

the service industries include many large, technology-intensive and technically

sophisticated firms in transportation, financial services, banking, insurance,

retail and wholesale trade, telecommunications, health care, and professional

and personal services. As IT becomes less expensive, more portable, better

integrated and interconnected, and embedded in a wider variety of devices, new

applications in these fields and whole new industries
Šsuch as interactive
multimedia systems for business, home entertainment, and communications
purposesŠare likely to evolve and to have profound effects on industry
structures, employment, and economic growth.
Moreover, the U.S. economy revolves increasingly around various
important white-collar service activities (e.g., research, design, financing,

education, accounting, marketing, logistics planning, communications, and
information management) rather than blue-collar shop floor production. These
activities are central to the individual service industries
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW1
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and are critical in producing value within manufacturing and other goods-
producing companies. The effectiveness with which IT is deployed in services

thus strongly influences U.S. standards of living and competitiveness in world

trade.TABLE S.1 The Scale of Services and Investments in IT in 1991
IndustryValue Added
(billions of

1991 dollars)
Employment
(millions of FTE

jobs)Investment in IT

(billions of 1991
dollars)Nation4,587.5103.3

Agriculture, Forestry,
Fisheries90.91.6
Mining36.70.70.9
Construction210.14.50.5
Manufacturing841.018.025.3
Total goods sector1,178.724.8

Transportation140.83.33.8

Communicationsa95.31.221.1
Utilitiesb99.00.98.0
Wholesale Trade266.05.917.0
Retail Trade403.316.217.9
FIREc685.06.538.7
Other services
d1,002.426.120.3
Government699.418.6
Total service sector3,391.278.7NOTE: All figures presented are for calendar year 1991.
a Includes telephone, telegraph, and broadcasting.
b Includes electric, gas, and sanitary services.
c Includes financial services, insurance, and real estate.
d Includes health care and delivery, business services, legal services, hotels, and recreation.
SOURCES: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1992. 
Survey of Current
Business, July. Data on value added are from Table 6.1C (National Income Without Capital
Consumption Adjustment), p. 82. The relationship between national income without capital

consumption adjustment and gross domestic product (or gross product originating by industry) is

specified in Table 1.9, p. 52, and is essentially gross domestic product without capital consumption
or property and sales tax. Data on employment are from Table 6.5C, p. 84.

Data on investment in IT include hardware costs only and are from Stephen Roach, Morgan Stanley
& Co.THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PARADOX
The magnitude of the investment in IT in the past decade (as measured
roughly by investment in hardware; 
Figure S.1
) has prompted questions about
payoff for both the nation and individual enterprises. Because IT is
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW2
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.often used to automate processes (that is, to perform tasks that might otherwise
require substantial human intervention), and because automation is popularly

associated with efficiency and cost reduction, questions about payoff have

usually centered on productivity. Productivity is a concept that relates the level

of outputs to the level of inputs used in their production. In particular, some

economic studies have suggested that the large investment in IT by the service
sector has not been associated with substantial gains in productivity as
measured by national macroeconomic statistics
Šthe so-called IT paradox.
While some studies indicate that U.S. productivity levels themselves compare

quite favorably with those of international competitors in several important

service industries, others suggest little correlation between investments in IT

and productivity, profitability, or return on investment at the industry or

enterprise level.
FIGURE S.1 Growing investment in information technology (IT) by the
service sector. The only systematic data available on IT expenditures account
for hardware components but exclude software and services. Thus this figure
shows expenditures only for office, computing, and accounting equipment,
communications equipment, instruments, and photocopy and related
equipment; it does not include expenditures for software, electronic

information services, data processing and network services, computer
professional services, custom programming, systems integration, consulting, or
training services. SOURCE: Stephen Roach, Morgan Stanley & Co.
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW3
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The committee concluded, however, that these studies by themselves
provide an overly narrow picture of what is happening in services.

Macroeconomic data and traditional measures of productivity do not capture

many of the crucial performance elements that are important to customers and

are critical to service industry executives when they invest in IT. For most

service companies, the use of IT now appears more essential than optional,
because IT is often an integral part of the infrastructures on which such
organizations depend. Obvious elements of such information infrastructures are

the telephone and transaction-processing systems without which most

businesses could not function, the electronic navigation and control systems

without which airlines could not operate, and the interconnected networks of

computers that are increasingly necessary to compete at all in financial services,

wholesale and retail distribution, transportation, entertainment, and health care.

In addition, highly sophisticated systems can provide some innovators with

important strategic leadership positions.
The committee believes that understanding the impact of IT on the overall
performance of service activities, not simply determining how the use of IT

affects productivity in services, is the real challenge. And in contrast to what

one would conclude based on the results of studies mentioned earlier, many

observers of the service industries (including several members of the

committee) and many service industry executives (including the majority of
those interviewed in the course of this study) believe that IT has had and will
continue to have a real and significantly positive impact on overall service

sector performance.ANALYZING THE IMPACTS OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGYTo understand more fully how IT has changed the service sector and what
the societal impacts of that transformation have been, the committee examined

these issues at four different levels of analysis and considered both quantitative

and qualitative observations (primarily collected during an extensive series of

interviews with industry executives).Macroeconomic Analysis
From the standpoint of readily available government statistics on the U.S.
economy, during the 1980s the service sector showed limited gains in

productivity despite an extraordinary burst of spending on IT. The service

sector spent over $750 billion on IT hardware alone in that decade (
Figure S.1
)Šenough to result in the virtual doubling of the IT endowment of the average
white-collar worker. At the same time, government economic statistics point to

only a 0.7 percent average growth in productivity in the
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW4
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.service sector during this period
Ša distinct slowdown compared to that of
previous years and far short of the average gains in the manufacturing sector

during the same period.
However, as mentioned earlier, there are various reasons why the readily
available government statistics may not accurately reflect the full impact of IT

on performance in the service sector. It is well known, for example, that the

existing data on productivity do not capture important elements of service

quality, e.g., how well a hospital, airline, restaurant, hotel, or bank has satisfied

its customers. In addition, statistics on industry productivity are available for
only a limited set of service industries that accounts for only 42 percent of all
service workers. For some major service industries
Šnotably banking and other
financial services, education, health care, and government
Šoutput is imputed
solely on the basis of input; thus, by definition, output divided by input is a

constant for these industries. This imputation affects measurement of output in

about 25 to 30 percent of the service sector. Data collected at the industry level

also tend to understate or ignore the influence of whole new service markets,

even though a primary use of IT is to enable new services.
Another factor that may distort the macroeconomic picture of IT's impact
on performance in service industries (particularly telecommunications,

transportation, and finance) is the fact that such impacts may be reflected more

in measurements of the productivity of customers of these service industries

(often manufacturing) than in those of the service industries themselves.

Competitive pressures often constrain service pricing, with the result that

benefits enjoyed by customers may not appear in the revenue measures of the
service-providing industry, while the costs of providing such benefits (e.g., the
costs of IT) always will appear. For example, margins and prices in the

wholesale trade, finance, and transportation industries have dropped in real

terms, although companies now provide a much more complex array of services

to customers.Two other factors should be recognized when interpreting macroeconomic
data on productivity and the use of IT. First, the effects on productivity of

investing in and using IT cannot be isolated from other things that significantly

influence productivity, such as the quality of the work force and management,

training efforts, and most importantly, investment in other (non-IT)

technologies necessary to achieve a desired result. Second, although the same is

true for any other type of investment, macroeconomic data cannot account for
the alternative costs and potential risks that companies and industries might
have encountered if they had not invested in IT.
However, the central limitation of macroeconomic analysis is the fact that
the usual measure of 
productivityŠindustry or sector output (usually as
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW5
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.assessed by some dollar measure such as deflated revenue or price) divided by
input (often as assessed by hours of work or number of employees)
Šignoresimportant dimensions of 
performance in service industries (and goods-
producing ones as well) that are critical to customers and to the managers of

individual businesses making decisions about investments in IT. High among

these dimensions of performance is the availability of new service functions
that would be impossible without IT
Šsuch as the rapid deployment of hospital
emergency services or 24-hour-per-day securities trading. Of perhaps greater

importance are the handling of increased complexity and the provision of the

greater quality, convenience, reliability, timeliness, safety, flexibility, and

variety that use of IT makes possible in services. As firms begin to compete

along these dimensions, the very nature of a service often changes in ways that

make comparisons of service output
Šand hence productivity measures
Šincreasingly problematic.
Because of the above limitations, generalizing from macroeconomic data
about the impact of IT on 
overall service sector performance is likely to be
misleading. Significant improvements have been made in macroeconomic data

and analysis techniques relative to measuring IT's impacts on performance in

the service sector. However, major challenges remain. 
Chapter 1
 is devoted to
exploring these issues.
Industry level Analysis
Nearly all service industries make substantial use of IT. However, patterns
of IT's use and impact vary widely across industries, in part because of

differences in and limitations posed by industry structures, degrees of

regulation, the timing of IT's introduction, and the adaptability of processes and

products to change. In some service industries like transportation,

communications, utilities, and wholesale trade, growth in productivity (in GDP

per labor-hour) from 1948 to 1973 led that of the construction, durable goods,
and nonelectrical machinery manufacturing industries; in other service
industries, it did not (
Table S.2
). Nevertheless, since 1973, measured growth in
productivity in most services appeared to drop despite large investments in IT,

although there were still great variations among industries.
Within the major service industries, increases in productivity (as measured
by GDP per labor-hour) ranged from a very respectable 4.6 percent per year in

communications to an anemic 0.17 percent in the finance, insurance, and real

estate segment from 1973 to 1989 (
Table S.2
). The committee examined the
impact of IT on service performance in six more disaggregated service

industries: air transport, telecommunications, retail and wholesale trade, health

care, banking, and insurance. Within these industries, some showed strong

growth in GDP per labor-hour. Others,
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW6
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.notably insurance and health care, showed negative growth in GDP per labor-
hour from 1981 to 1989 (
Table S.3
). Many service industries are currently
undergoing significant restructuring at least partially enabled by their IT systems.
TABLE S.2 Average Annual Growth in Gross Domestic Product Per Labor-Hour for
Major Sectors of the U.S. Economy, 1948 to 1989
Industry1948-731973-89BusinessGoods producing

Farming4.642.04
Mining4.02-0.82
Construction0.58-1.20
Manufacturing2.872.75
Durable goods excluding nonelectrical machinery2.562.05

Nonelectrical machinery
a2.036.01
Nondurable goods3.402.37
Service producing
Transportation2.310.65

Communication5.224.63
Utilities5.872.46
Trade2.741.18
Wholesale3.141.18
Retail2.401.13

FIREb1.440.17
Other services2.170.32
Government enterprise-0.150.26
General government0.210.34a Nonelectrical machinery hours from Bureau of Labor Statistics.
b Finance, insurance, and real estate.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1991. 
Survey of Current
Business, April, Tables 6.2 and 6.11.
However, available data on industry level productivity do not convey
important aspects of the ways IT has affected these industries and their overall

performance:   In airlines, innovations using IT have been associated with competitive
leadership and with survival as complexity has increased. Airlines

depend on IT within aircraft and airports, in air traffic control systems,

and for sales, marketing, maintenance, and safety systems, as well as

for capacity, load management, and logistics planning. Computerized
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW7
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE S.3 A Comparison of Various U.S. Service Industries in 1991

IndustryRevenues
(billions
of
current
dollars)Employment
(millions of

FTE
employees)IT
Capital
Stock
(billions
of
current
dollars)Average
Annual
Rate of
Change
in GPO
per
Labor-
Hour,
1981 to
1989
(% per
year)aCompound
Annual
Rate of

Growth in
Investment
in IT,

1981 to
1989 (%
per year)
Air transport87.50.711.13.114.1

Telecommunications129.7
b0.9114.05.7-5.1
Wholesale trade469.55.960.22.811.0

Retail trade884.5
c16.258.82.39.6
Health care475.0
b7.419.6-1.39.3
Bankingd209.5b2.128.50.127.9
Insurance (carriers

plus agents)226.7b2.217.1-1.430.8a Labor productivity is often measured in terms of gross product originating (GPO) per hour of
labor input. The GPO of an industry is a value added measure of that industry's contribution to

the gross domestic product.
b 1990 figure.c Includes restaurant trade.
d Includes depository institutions only; excludes federal credit agencies, security commodity
brokers, and mortgage bankers.

SOURCES: Unpublished data on revenues are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employment

data are from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1992, 
Survey of
Current Business, July, Table 6.5C (Full-Time-Equivalent Employees by Industry), p. 84. IT capital
stock data are from Stephen Roach, Morgan Stanley & Co.
   reservation systems have changed the entire pattern of competition and
profit making in the airlines industry, although in the 1980s, airline

profits were highly erratic in the shakeout that resulted from the

deregulation of the industry. Competition has forced airlines to pass on

to customers the savings gained through increased efficiency, but new

route structures enabled by the use of IT have also allowed airlines to

pass certain costs (notably inconveniences caused by the ''hub-and-

spoke" system) on to customers.
   Telecommunications companies depend on IT for operations
management, billing and customer service, product differentiation, and

new-product development. These companies further provide the

infrastructures of telephone, cable television, satellite, microwave, and

fiber-optic-cable connections that enable other industries to operate

effectively. They provide the pathways over which a variety of new

concepts and products have
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW8
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.been (and can be) introduced by the financial services, entertainment,
data services, software, direct distribution, education, travel, and health

care industries, among others. Deregulation in the 1980s increased the

variety of services available and decreased their costs for most

customers. Improved communications have allowed companies to

manage materials and services purchased anywhere in the world,
control inventories on a just-in-time basis, gather information, and
manage diversified producing locations in ways that have changed

basic premises about industry boundaries, the organization of

enterprises, and many traditional management techniques. At the same

time, the use of IT has enabled telecommunications companies to shift

to the consumer much of the labor of placing calls, although

consumers themselves often find self-service dialing a convenience.
   Retailers and wholesalers have used IT to collect and analyze sales
data more quickly and effectively, to plan purchasing and marketing

activities better, to communicate more rapidly with their suppliers, and

to offer more differentiated services to customers. To improve the cost,

quality, and timeliness of their offerings, many maintain worldwide
sourcing and logistics systems that use IT. The variety of items carried
and the hours retail stores remained open increased substantially

during the 1980s. However, the industry found it difficult to convert its

investments in IT into financially measurable gains in productivity

because of heavy and rapidly changing competition. The basic

structure of retail competition, sourcing of products, inventory

management, and retailers' power relative to that of manufacturers

shifted during the 1980s. In some cases, wholesaling and retailing

merged. In addition to powerful general merchandise and supermarket

chains, highly specialized "category-killer" chains (e.g., Toys "R" Us

or Foot Locker), warehouse clubs, superstores, and chain boutiques

emerged as new forms of competition. All were highly dependent on
IT and broad geographical sourcing.
   In health care, the use of IT has become increasingly important in
diagnosis and therapy (e.g., medical imaging, radiation therapy, and

patient monitoring). For business operations, IT has generally been less

well used in health care than in other industries, and there may be great

untapped potentials for its use in such operations as well as in new
clinical applications, outpatient care, and monitoring of outcomes.
Measures of economic output in health care are extremely tenuous

because of the presence of many nonmarket forces and problems in

defining quality. Although numerous new and improved cures,

therapies, and diagnostics have been introduced since 1970, there is

wide consensus that measured productivity in health care has been

dropping. Yet few would like to do without the potentially better

diagnosis and treatment that electronic devices permit in health care

today. And the costs of dealing with today's complex reporting

requirements would soar further without electronic systems.
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW9
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The banking industry has used IT to enable increases in the volume of
transactions as well as the development of new products; applications

have ranged from back-office (check and accounts) processing,

mortgage and loan application processing, and electronic funds transfer

to more strategic innovations such as automated teller machines and

new kinds of securities. IT has been used to interlink financial services,
banking, and investment systems worldwide
Šthus decreasing a
nation's capacity to control its currency value or its economy by

conventional policy interventions. IT has also been used to manage

trillions of dollars in daily transactions by the securities markets of the

world, functions that physically could not be handled without IT. Yet

despite the fact that customers have benefited from the greater variety,

convenience, and accuracy of services as the result of expanded use of

IT in the 1980s, measured productivity in banking has grown only

slightly, although this is at least partly because the output of banking is

difficult to measure. Banks now compete with many other (nonbank)

enterprises to provide credit card, investment, and other services.

Systems for personal savings, credit extension, and management of
financial transactions have been substantially improved.
   Insurance companies have relied on IT for back-office claims
processing and account updating and now use IT to enhance links to

agents, to customize policies, to manage risks globally, and to develop

new services (e.g., managed health care systems) nationally. Although

industry level data indicate that the insurance industry did not capture
measurable productivity benefits during the 1980s from its use of IT
(Table S.3
), the industry did introduce a variety of complex new
services much more specifically tailored to individual customers'

needs. The use of IT also radically improved in the cycles of new-

product introduction in the insurance industry, and increased the scale

and accuracy of the services provided.
IT has been associated with growing complexity and customization in each
of these different industries. At the same time, growth in the volume of

transactions, in the number, variety, and linkages among enterprises, and in the

kinds of equipment available has led to demands for greater technical

standardization. Across all industries studied, lags in the development of
standards, software, and management systems
Šrather than hardware limitations
Šhave been the main constraints to progress. Cycle times for the introduction
of products in all major service industries have dropped, and greater control

over the mix and size of inventories (whether of airline seats, financial holdings,

or distributed products) has become essential to success.
The economies of scale offered by back-office automation have led to
waves of mergers and acquisitions and increased concentration in financial

services, health care, and air transport. IT has been used effectively to centralize
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW10
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.these new larger enterprises and also to facilitate later geographical
decentralization into networks of local affiliates and branch offices. 
Chapter 2
discusses the impact of IT at the industry level in greater detail.
Enterprise level Analysis
The enterprise level is where most of the decisions are made about the use
of IT. Executives who actually make such decisions find that measures related

to revenue, profitability, alternative costs, growth potentials, market share, and

return on investment (ROI) are more relevant than the more abstract measures

of "productivity" used at the industry and macroeconomic levels. When

meaningful financial measures are not available, executives use engineering or
quality metrics such as response time, reliability, and customer satisfaction to
estimate IT's impact. For most investments in IT, executives interviewed by the

committee tended to use decision making processes (such as capital budgeting)

similar to those used for investments in any other type of advanced-technology.

But, as for investments in R&D and other new technologies, their decision

making relied on intuitive and nonfinancial measures as well as formal ROI

analyses and financial justifications. The committee found that the companies it

interviewed were not consistent in their use of postproject audits to determine

benefits received from IT investments and projects.
For some uses of IT, results are readily measurable. For others they are
not. Companies interviewed by the committee often reported great difficulties

in predicting strategic effects precisely, measuring certain types of output (such

as increased flexibility), assessing benefits that might be diffuse or delayed

(such as those made possible by desktop communications, spreadsheets, and

word processing), and separating the contributions of IT from those of other
factors.IT has often been used (especially in early applications) to reduce
personnel costs in large paper-intensive departments such as accounting or

purchasing, and in some cases even to eliminate or consolidate certain back-

office operations. Better information-handling capabilities have also helped

decrease other costs such as excessive capital float or inventories, billing or
payment errors, logistics costs, and customer complaints. In addition, IT has
been used to create new or improved services that a firm can offer to the public,

such as the call waiting service made available to residential telephone

customers or the new "synthetic securities" offered by the investment banking

community. Providing more customized insurance policies to customers with

special needs or reducing the time needed for a retail store cashier to tally a

customer's total purchase are examples of improved services.
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW11
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Although such benefits are often captured by available data, the committee
found that managers invest in IT to achieve a variety of impacts that are not

reflected in industry level or macroeconomic measures of productivity. These

include:   Preserving or expanding market share
. While aggregate industry
output is a key issue for national policy-makers, individual companies

care more about their individual firm's performance than about that of

the industry as a whole. Market share is a key measure of competitive
success and a basis for gaining relative marketing or purchasing power
as well as improved economies of scale or scope. To maintain their

market share, all companies in an industry may be forced to install an

IT system even though it does not increase their own or the industry's

output. Thus investments increase, but company or industry volume

and profits may not.
   Avoiding risks or alternative costs
. Executives often invest to avoid
risks, for example, malpractice suits in health care or accidents in the

airline industry. The benefits of avoiding losses by using better
processes or controls are very real to a company, but only the costs of
achieving them show up in company or national accounts. It is difficult

to imagine how most companies in industries such as financial

services, large-scale retailing and wholesaling, airlines, lodging and

restaurant chain operations, health care, or communications could

operate without the benefit of IT. Yet the losses they would incur if

they did not use IT appear nowhere in company or national accounts.
   Creating flexibility for changing business environments
. Changes in
the business environment (e.g., increased regulation, marketing, or
operational complexity) may require unforeseeable changes in the way
a company operates. As many financial services and banking firms

have learned, a flexible IT system may be essential to the very survival

of the company as it attempts to cope with rapidly changing

environments. In other cases, companies invest in IT to provide a

flexible future platform for creating new products that may not yet

have been planned or even conceived.
   Improving the internal environment
. Firms often invest in IT to obtain
and analyze information that will provide a greater degree of
predictability or stability for their operations. Such investments help
companies to avoid undue fluctuations in sales or profitability as well

as catastrophic failures caused by inadequate information. Other firms

invest in IT to improve employee relations. Properly installed, IT can

be used to eliminate burdensome tasks, make jobs more attractive,

shorten the training cycles needed before an employee becomes

productive, and improve worker morale.
   Improving the quality of products and interactions with customers
 .Companies increasingly compete on the quality of their customer
service and have used IT to serve customers more rapidly, accurately,
efficiently,SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW12
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and with more customized service products. Such improvements help
to generate long-term loyalty among customers. IT has been especially

important in helping to improve reliability, ensuring more consistent

levels of performance, minimizing errors, and improving customers'

and employees' perceptions about companies and their products. IT is

also a powerful tool for companies with life-critical operations in
which real-time systems help to improve the safety of employees,
customers, and the public.
An important common finding was that, in the companies surveyed,
decision making processes for IT projects were comparable to those used for

other complex advanced-technology projects. In many instances, decisions

about investments in IT are like decisions about R&D. Payoffs from both R&D

and IT are likely to be uncertain in both scale and timing. Companies readily

admitted that they had made investment errors. Expected value is often not
quantifiable or even estimable, let alone predictable. It is not surprising that the
experience of firms investing in IT varies considerably within an industry and

by type of investment.
When IT is used to reduce costs or to provide a specific new service,
managers are often able to calculate rates of return and payback times with

relative accuracy. However, for many other investments in IT
Šlike the
strategic and infrastructure expenditures noted above
Šit is nearly impossible to
estimate such figures. Strategic uses of IT can change a firm's entire

competitive or risk posture within an industry, affecting many different
elements of customer, cost, and competitive relationships simultaneously
Šnotjust revenues or costs. Programs or systems such as MCI's Friends and Family

program, American Airlines' SABRE computerized reservations system,

Morgan Stanley's TAPS system for integrated trading, and McKesson's

ECONOMOST system for ordering and inventory control affect those firms'

quality of customer service, flexibility, reliability, break-even points, response

times, and market positioning in ways that cannot be measured in precise

financial terms.
When IT is used in this fashion, a firm's most valuable assets may become
the professional know-how, flexible response and capabilities for innovation,

information and management systems, and knowledge about customers and

markets embodied in its IT and supporting systems. These assets also are not

reflected in the firm's accounting statements or in the nation's accounting

system. When successful, such companies can redefine the standard to which

other firms in the industry (and all cross-competing industries) are held by
consumers of their services. A firm's use of IT may affect the entire structure of
the firm's industry, its competitiveness with other industries, and even the

nation's international competitiveness. Competitors may be forced to choose

betweenSUMMARY AND OVERVIEW13
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.making similar investments or being forced out of the business. Entirely new
subindustries can result from particularly fortuitous strategic changes, as

cellular telephone, overnight package delivery, "swaps" and synthetic securities,

and facsimile services demonstrate. But, as the failed experiments of Zap-mail,

videotext, and AMRIS's CONFIRM system also show, favorable outcomes are

far from assured. 
Chapter 3
 deals in depth with these issues.
Finally, IT has become a significant element in the cost structure of many
companies. Even the service sector's $750 billion expenditure on IT in the last

decade understates by a substantial amount the total cost of IT, since it includes

only hardware and excludes essential elements such as software, training and

support, and maintenance and upgrading; the costs of these excluded elements

may well be substantially greater than the costs of the hardware. The costs of a
significant IT infrastructure become more fixed than variable in nature and are
especially burdensome when revenues and margins are squeezed by recessions

or competitive pressures and overcapacity results. In some cases, this problem

leads to sizable financial losses even though the services being provided using

the IT infrastructure may be of higher absolute value to the customer. The

problem of overcapacity applies to entire industries and not just individual

enterprises, since IT systems, especially large, complex ones, must be

purchased in predetermined sizes that are not in direct proportion to demand

and therefore usually provide more capacity than warranted by average levels of

demand.Activity level Analysis
Although it is perhaps easiest to evaluate IT's impact on performance in
services at the enterprise level by considering a firm's profitability, growth in

market share, or survival, many of the impacts of IT can be understood only by

an examination of IT's application in specific activities within enterprises, such

as customer service, product design, image creation, quality and cost control,
and R&D. These activities may be performed within one functional
organization or cut across several functional areas within one enterprise.

Moreover, these activities may not all be performed within a single enterprise,

but may be spread between the enterprise, its suppliers, and its customers.

Because measures of performance at the enterprise level aggregate the effects of

all activities within an enterprise, they may frequently miss critical shifts in

structure or performance occurring at the activity level. Those shifts, however,

may affect the structure and performance of many enterprises and industries.
Examining the use of IT at the activity level allows more penetrating
insight into why and how IT has been associated with major changes in job
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW14
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.content, forms of internal organization, industry structures, and cross-industry
competition. For example, most overhead functions are merely services an

enterprise has chosen to produce internally. If desired, many could easily be

purchased externally. In fact, this is the way many service industries started.

Important tasks in services and manufacturing often resemble each other so

much that the lines separating the two sectors are becoming arbitrary
Šif not
misleadingŠfor policy purposes.
Within companies, an obvious impact of using IT in service activities is in
providing specialized tools that enable more effective performance of particular

activities (e.g., substituting on-line databases for paper records). Firms may also

invest in IT-based systems that lower internal costs and prices but require more

effort by the customer, a concept fundamental to many of the do-it-yourself
"services" provided by businesses (e.g., credit card gas pumps, long-distance
dialing, machine-operated parking facilities, automated teller machines). Since

these firms gain at the expense of the customer, the net performance gains

(taking the customer into account) are clearly less than the gains to the firms

themselves. In other instances, firms have used IT to rework how they perform

service activities such as logistics activities that cut across individual functional

organizations such as purchasing, inventory control, manufacturing, and

distribution.IT is also used to facilitate the separation, reorganization, and
recombination of activities without regard to their location in space or time.

This had led to the widespread development of "network" organizations.

Flexibilities enabled by IT may also result in the flattening of organizations or
the decentralizing of decision making authority, thereby allowing more
autonomy at lower levels and broadening the mix of tasks for which individuals

are responsible. At the same time, managers have used IT to enhance

dimensions of performance that depend on greater centralization (e.g., the

consistency of fast foods or the accuracy of bank reports).
IT-based linkages now allow managers to separate out many traditional
activities (like payroll or accounting) from their core operations, procure them

from outside suppliers, and still integrate them with important activities that

continue to be performed internally. Decisions to use "outsourcing" often rest
on the fact that outside providers of highly specialized service activities
Šwhomay have invested in or developed specialized IT technology and applications
Šcan often perform them more effectively or at less cost than firms that do not

specialize in that activity. IT-based linkages often provide an opportunity to

expand such choices by facilitating the monitoring and integration of service

activities provided off-site with those kept in-house. Not only are large

enterprises reorganizing or shedding entire departments and divisions, but they

are also in some instances selling some of their skills in internal activities to

outsiders, becoming the external service providers for other firms (as Federal

Express has done with its
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW15
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.telephone answering service). Electronic data interchanges now bind many
firms in a web of worldwide purchasing, shipping, billing, and receiving

connections.IT-based linkages have also been used to establish broader and more
complex patterns of interconnections or alliances among different firms (which

themselves may or may not be in the same industry). Entire industries such as

telecommunications and investment banking compete largely as networks of

independent enterprises temporarily linked to accomplish a specific task, for

example, building a new telecommunications system for a country. Such
interconnections are frequently established to improve the performance of tasks
by taking advantage of each enterprise's expertise in performing particular

activity level tasks.As the use of IT alters the nature and location of activities, it also alters the
nature and location of work. Use of IT is one important force facilitating

realignment of work flows, job redesign, organizational restructuring, and work

relocation. As a result, the nature of jobs, skill requirements, and requirements

for training are changing rapidly.
Radically revised organizational structures
Šentailing different lines of
managerial authority and different flows of information
Šhave emerged.
Restructurings affect the tasks of personnel at all organizational levels, but

middle-level technical and administrative managers may face the greatest

challenges in retraining and adjusting to faster, less bureaucratic decision

making structures. These trends have been the focus of much commentary in

business publications. The committee's analysis underscores how using IT has
amplified these trends. 
Chapter 4 expands on these vital issues.
KEY FINDINGS
In the course of its deliberations, the committee examined the impact of IT
on performance in the service sector not only from the standpoint of

understanding the IT paradox, but also in terms of broader implications for

decision making by business executives and government policy-makers.

Detailed below are the committee's overall findings. The broader implications

of these key findings as well as more specific findings as they relate to

management and policy decision making are described in the remainder of this

summary.   Traditional macroeconomic data collected to date do not capture 
many important benefits or costs that accrue to firms from

deploying IT.
 Accordingly, it is not appropriate to use these data as a
basis for judging the impact of service sector investments in IT on the

sector's performance. Even if growth in service sector productivity

were uniformlySUMMARY AND OVERVIEW16
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.poor, which it is not, traditional measures rarely take into account
improvements in quality, convenience, and reliability for customers, or

losses that using IT has helped avoid
Šall important issues to
individual firms. Moreover, as with other important technological

advances (such as electrification and telephones), it may take decades

before aggregated measures fully reflect the results achieved by the use
of IT.
   The use of IT has had a direct and positive operational impact on
the performance of services by many individual firms, but the 

financial impact of the use of IT has not always been as positive.

Although it is often difficult to isolate the effects of IT use from other

factors that may influence operational performance in service activities
(e.g., quality of the work force), individual firms have used IT to
improve efficiency by reducing costs (e.g., through better logistics

scheduling in airlines or more efficient routing in deliveries from

suppliers to retail stores). In nearly all of the service industries,

including those examined by the committee, firms have used IT to

handle tremendous volumes of transactions. IT has been used to

provide timely information that can substantially influence profits

(e.g., investment bankers capture and analyze stock and bond price

movements instantaneously; retail executives track sales from hour to

hour; airlines perform real-time yield management). There are a

variety of reasons why the use of IT has not always had a positive

financial impact on service firms. One reason is that many applications
have used new technologies and other applications of IT have been
experimental, and a basic characteristic of innovation is that

experiments and new technologies sometimes fail. A second reason is

that the range of problems to which IT can be applied continues to

expand so quickly that some companies are forced to invest in new

technologies to obtain new capabilities even before they have captured

the full anticipated benefits of their installed IT infrastructures.
   The use of IT has had important customer-supplier effects.
 For the
customers of service providers, IT has been used to help improve the

quality and variety of services in many industries, especially through

its ability to amass, analyze, and control large quantities of specialized

data. Such improvements include error reduction or increased precision
(e.g., more reliable medical diagnostics and procedures, more accurate
billing on checkout activities); faster or more convenient service (e.g.,

computer-aided repair services, credit card purchases, automated teller

machines); improved security, safety, and reliability (e.g., automated

maintenance protocols, monitoring systems, or on-line audits). On the

other hand, some important costs have been passed on to customers

(e.g., while the hub-and-spoke routing systems and complex yield

management strategies now used by airlines lower airline operating

costs and sometimes the cost of tickets, they also may vastly increase
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW17
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the inconveniences associated with air travel; while certain users find
automated communications systems and direct dialing procedures

more convenient and private and they lower the price per call for

everyone, many users are greatly frustrated by them) and on to

suppliers (e.g., IT systems such as electronic data interchange have led

to closer relationships and working partnerships between companies
and their suppliers but also to greater costs for suppliers in terms of
inventory carrying and coordination). The net effect of these changes is

not always calculable.
   IT has been an important element in promoting many broad
restructuring and strategic changes in service industries.
 IT has
been used to create new industries (e.g., the cellular telephone

business) and has contributed to changes in traditional relationships

between industries (e.g., retailers dictating designs, packaging, and

specifications to manufacturers). Entirely new lines of business have
appeared, such as interest swaps, securitized mortgages, and indexed
mutual funds. The economies of scale offered by back-office

automation have supported some mergers and acquisitions, leading to

reductions in the work force and increased concentration in some

industries such as financial services or airlines. In other cases, the

falling cost of IT has often facilitated the entry of relatively small

businesses into new markets and the development of efficient local

branches, franchises, or affiliates through which larger companies can

service broader geographical areas or remote locations more

effectively. IT has been used to increase cross-competition among

various industries and among individual activities within companies in

different industries. IT has been an enabling force in creating entirely
new forms for economic activity (e.g., worldwide research networks,
global sourcing arrangements, large-scale development and sharing of

new databases, new training and educational capabilities, faster

response innovation systems, and competition through disaggregated

alliances or networks of companies).
   The widespread use of IT in services has a profound effect on
employment patterns.
 The committee's analysis of IT's roles at the
activity and enterprise levels revealed changes in production processes,

products, and lines of business that will produce substantial changes in

employment patterns. When an industry's productivity increases and its

output remains constant, jobs in that industry are of course lost. If that

industry is committed to enhancing productivity through downsizing
alone, those jobs will be lost permanently. However, if past patterns
continue, total output is likely to grow, though jobs may well shift to

different firms and industries or between geographical regions.

Forecasts indicate that the new jobs created and old jobs restructured

will demand a new mix of skills. Emerging new forms of organization

often require a wider range of skills than traditional forms. Future jobs

are predicted to be more knowledge-based than in the past. Forecasting
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW18
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.specific skill needs is complicated by the fact that the job
displacements and skill changes that typically accompany any major

technological change will unfold at the same time that international

competitive pressures, deregulation, and other factors are causing

major changes in the overall economy. Compounding analyses of these

changes is the fact that many service activities can easily be physically
separated from their producing clients. As it has in software, the
creation of domestic demand for other services might well result in

substantial export of certain jobs overseas.
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS
The use of IT can have a significant impact on the performance of service
firms, both strategically and operationally. However, successfully applying IT

and reaping maximum payoffs from IT investments require good management.

The question is not, Is IT useful? but rather, How can IT be successfully applied

to enhance service performance? The committee's interviews with senior

executives revealed several specific areas that affect the likelihood of
successfully managing applications of IT. While not completely new, each
provides an important focal point for concern and attention by managers

investing in and using IT. The committee concludes that for maximum

effectiveness:   There needs to be a comprehensive IT-based strategy designed not only
to support the basic business but to create competitive advantage. Top

management must understand this strategy, be deeply involved in its

generation, and be committed to its implementation if the strategy is to
have company-wide significance and transcend divisional boundaries.
   Business processes should be examined and when appropriate
redesigned before IT is installed, paying special attention to functions

that cross existing organizational boundaries. New management

techniques and performance-reward structures are generally needed to

support cross-functional systems. And internal activities and formal
organizations should be explicitly restructured to make the best use of
these systems.   Customer and user needs (especially those of external customers)
should normally drive the design, installation, and evaluation of IT

systems. Users and customers should be involved whenever possible in

system designs, and customer-driven metrics of quality should be used
whenever possible to assess the impacts of using IT. Customer-driven
performance measurement systems (as opposed to hierarchically

driven systems) should be important elements in evaluating cross-

functional team performance.
   Most IT projects should focus on relatively short-term payoffs and
should have well-defined goals within a long-term strategic

framework. While ''bet-the-company" IT projects have at times

resulted in revolutionary
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW19
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.changes that have benefited their initiators, mega-projects are likely to
be overly complex, over budget, delayed, and mismatched to customer

needs by the time they are implemented.
   The goals and desired outcomes of IT projects should be established
using benchmarks for service performance established by extensive

examination of possible "best-practice" processes as implemented in

other firms, including specialized external service providers.

Restricting searches for best-practice processes to peer firms may limit

management perspectives severely.
As reported by executives interviewed by the committee, most of the
problems in achieving payoffs from investment in IT came not from the

investment decisions themselves but from inadequate planning and

implementation of IT applications by management. Inadequate retraining and

failure to continuously upgrade worker skills were a major problem. Another
was a failure to follow-up installations of IT with appropriate organizational
structures, performance measurement systems, and reward and incentive plans.

Details of the management implications of the committee's findings are found in

Chapter 5.POLICY CONCERNS
While the committee believed that it was beyond its scope and expertise to
develop major policy or action recommendations, four primary areas of concern

to policy-makers were identified: enhancing the diffusion of IT throughout the

service sector, dealing with the impacts of IT on employment patterns,

obtaining better data as well as a better understanding of organizational and
structural changes occurring in the economy as a result of IT, and reassessing
the impact of these changes on the effectiveness of traditional policy measures.

Detailed recommendations on how to address these areas of concern are

explored in 
Chapter 6
.Diffusing the Benefits of IT in Services
In general, market mechanisms have worked well in developing IT for
services. Many individual companies have reaped substantial economic benefits

from using IT, notwithstanding the fact that these benefits are frequently not

reflected in traditional economic data and that certain attempts to use IT have

been undeniable failures. There are two key areas where policy stimuli might
affect future economic benefits from investments in IT.
The first is IT's potential inclusion in
Šor exclusion from
Šinvestmentincentives. To the extent that public policies are used to stimulate further

investment (whether in new capital spending or in R&D), such policies
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW20
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.should treat investment in IT in services as they would any other capital or
R&D investment. Preference should not be accorded to other types of capital

investment or process experimentation
Šsuch as those for manufacturing or
fixed equipment
Šover IT applications. Since service activities are integral to
both service and manufacturing industries, IT applications that lower service

costs or improve service performance are likely to have a significant positive
impact on competitiveness in both sectors
Šdespite the low measured
productivity increases seen to date. Moreover, given their importance, the

nonhardware aspects of IT such as software and training should be included

along with hardware in any definition of IT for investment and/or tax purposes.
The second relates to continued support for the development of
information infrastructures, whether through public investment in certain

critical areas (such as advanced R&D) or through changes in laws and

regulations. The experiences of many large service enterprises illustrate the

value of broad access to interactive computing systems connected by
telecommunications and data communications systems or integrated voice and
data communications between different facilities, localities, and countries.

Large U.S. firms have often been world leaders in the development and use of

information infrastructures, especially for their own multinational networks.

Increasingly, however, the emergence of relatively inexpensive desktop IT can

bring sophisticated information processing capabilities into the reach of the

private home, as well as small and medium-size enterprises. Such enterprises

(and home users) will require affordable access to public information

infrastructures if they are to develop to their fullest extent. In some

geographical areas, selectively stimulating the growth of information

infrastructures, particularly for small businesses and for homes, could enhance

interactions among all enterprises, promote expansion in both the number and
types of jobs in the service sector, and lead to the creation of entirely new
service industries. Enabling homes to have broad access to IT may also

stimulate markets for many affordable products (e.g., multimedia devices or

services).Coping with the Impact of IT on Employment Patterns
Large-scale changes in employment patterns have already occurred, and
further changes seem inevitable. The real issue is how best to facilitate the

continuing shift in job mix. Extensive retraining, education, and job creation are

essential tools for such facilitation. In a humane society, steps should also be

taken to minimize the disruption and hardship of displaced individuals. As in
the past, the volume of training and education needed is likely to exceed the
capabilities of private industry. In addition, the rapid evolution of IT and other

new technologies suggests that the need for retraining
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW21
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.during a person's lifetime will be periodic. All this supports the broad-based call
for strengthening the literacy and numeracy provided by public K-12 education.

Past studies indicate that education in general skills is likely to prove more

beneficial in times of uncertainty and rapid change than education in

specifically targeted and narrowly focused skills.
Obtaining Improved Data and Conducting Research on
Structural Changes
The rapid growth of services and changes in the nature of service activities
in the last two decades underscore the need for a better understanding of

changing conditions. The analyses on which such understanding has

traditionally rested have relied on statistical data collected by the Bureau of

Labor Statistics and the Bureau of Economic Analysis. However, these data

suffer from significant deficiencies. Efforts such as the Boskin Initiative to

increase the disaggregation of federal data and statistics and to improve the

scope of coverage (in terms of both price and quality measurements and the

industries measured) were begun, and these efforts should continue.
Better statistical data is not the only need. Specific research and continuous
monitoring are also needed to better understand (1) the nature of structural

changes occurring within enterprises and industries, (2) those issues that are

peculiar to small businesses, and (3) the large-scale impacts of IT on

employment patterns at the activity and enterprise levels. Ironically, the United

States funds research that addresses organizational and institutional changes

overseas (e.g., change as the result of political or economic shifts in other

nations), but funding for this kind of research tends to be difficult to find

domestically.Reassessing the Effectiveness of Traditional Policy Measures
Further research is also needed on the way information technologies affect
the impact of traditional policy instruments. Some unintended results are

possible, and their likelihood should be assessed. For example, because of

integrated financial markets, interest rates lowered for policy reasons in the

United States may merely (1) enable domestic or foreign companies to invest at

lower costs overseas or (2) change the exchange rates for U.S. currency.

Because of outsourcing abroad, increases in government purchases or

government stimulation of consumer demand may simply increase imports and

create jobs overseas. Enhanced data and communications networks generally
have international connections that increase access by foreign competitors to
U.S. markets as well as U.S. access to foreign resources, potentially increasing

the pressure on and lowering returns for U.S. innovators
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW22
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and suppliers. The internationalization of financial markets spurred by
worldwide IT networks makes it increasingly difficult to control a domestic

economy using the standard macroeconomic levers and brings into question the

entire concept of national sovereignty. Such subjects are worthy candidates for

investigation.Additional conclusions and suggestions of the committee may be found in
the body of the report.
NOTE1. Throughout this report, unless otherwise specified, the term 
information technology
 includes
computer and communications hardware, as well as the software and associated services required to

effectively use that hardware.
SUMMARY AND OVERVIEW23
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Introduction and Impact of Information
Technology at the Macroeconomic Level
Information technology has changed the way that most companies do
business. It is hard to imagine returning to an era in which payroll accounting,
check processing, airline reservations, or stock exchange trades were handled
without computer technology. In a typical business day now, over 200 million

shares are traded on the New York Stock Exchange alone; in 1989, U.S.

commercial banks processed almost 58 billion payment transactions.
1Transaction volumes of this magnitude would have been impossible to handle

with the technology of 50 years ago. Innovations in electronics made over the

past 40 years have been incorporated into new computers, office automation

equipment, communications equipment, and their associated software systems.

Information technology has revolutionized services both in service sector

industries and in the service activities that are an increasingly integral part of

goods-producing industries.For purposes of this report, the service industries consist primarily of
transportation, communications, wholesale and retail trade, financial services,
insurance, real estate, utilities, and personal and professional services; unless

otherwise specified, information technology (IT) includes computer and

communications hardware, as well as the software and associated services

required to exploit that hardware.
Despite the obvious and dramatic changes in the economy brought about
by use of IT, a strange paradox emerges from analysis of aggregate U.S.
economic data. According to standard methods of calculation, productivity in

the business sector has grown slowly since the widespread introduction
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
24Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of IT. However, the slow growth of measured U.S. productivity has not been
occurring uniformly throughout the economy. Measured productivity in the

manufacturing sector, after slowing in the 1970s, has been growing at a rate of

about 3 percent a year, as gauged by the average annual rate of increase in

measured output per labor-hour over the past 10 years. The farming sector has

also achieved solid growth in productivity. Much of the rest of the economy,
however, has lagged behind
Šespecially construction and elements of the
service sector. The result is that business as a whole has achieved only about a

1-percent-a-year improvement in output per hour in recent years. Particularly

puzzling is the weak measured performance of the service sector, which has

accounted for the bulk of the nation's expenditures in IT.
The dilemma is this: although data show that over $750 billion has been
invested in IT hardware alone in the 1980s (
Figure 1.1), and although
FIGURE 1.1 Growing investment in information technology (IT) by the
service sector. The only systematic data available on IT expenditures account
for hardware components but exclude software and services. Thus this figure
shows expenditures only for office, computing, and accounting equipment,
communications equipment, instruments, and photocopy and related
equipment; it does not include expenditures for software, electronic
information services, data processing and network services, computer

professional services, custom programming, systems integration, consulting, or
training services. SOURCE: Stephen Roach, Morgan Stanley & Co.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
25Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1.1 ONE ASSESSMENT OF THE INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY PARADOX
Stephen Roach's assessment of the information technology (IT)
paradox hinges on what he believes are the unique characteristics of the

service sector's competitive environment. While U.S. manufacturing firms
faced intense competition in the 1980s, service companies were protected
by regulation, he says, and by the lack of foreign competitionŠin effect
shielding them from the harsh realities of market pressures. In response,
he maintains, service companies became complacent and allowed their
costs to become increasingly bloated, leading to a most disappointing
record of productivity growth that is consistent with the macroeconomic

evidence presented in 
Chapter 1
.Roach points out that the service sector's lagging efficiencies are
particularly disturbing because it is the segment of the economy that has
invested most heavily in IT. Indeed, over the past 10 years, the service
sector spent $862 billion on IT hardware aloneŠaccounting for about 85
percent of the nation's total IT expenditures. This surge of spending has
been enough to equip the average white-collar worker in the service
sector with about $10,000 worth of IT hardware in 1991Šessentially

double the endowment that existed in 1980. Such extraordinary
commitments to IT have not yielded measurable benefits for productivity.
Roach maintains, because service companies have had little incentive to
strive for efficiencies, given the unique protection they enjoyed from
competitive realities.
As a result of this rapid spending on IT, Roach argues, the service
sector has experienced an ominous transformation of its cost structure.
Service companies used to be largely variable-cost producers, with the
salaries of white-collar workers constituting the bulk of overall expenses.
When business conditions toughened, white-collar job attrition was an
effective means of cost control. Now, however, courtesy of the massive
infrastructure of installed IT, service companies have a new layer of fixed

costsŠin effect transforming them from variable-to increasingly fixed
costs producers. The commitment to IT has, therefore, crimped the ability
of service managers to adapt to changing business conditions.
Roach also stresses that this lack of flexibility has come at a most
inopportune moment for servicesŠa point in time when competitive
pressures have intensified dramatically. Regulation has been replaced by
deregulation. Moreover, the pressures of foreign competition have been
increasingly evident in the form of a dramatic increase in foreign direct

investment in the U.S. service sectorŠinflows of capital that have
deepened the pockets of many players battling for market share in the
world's richest and deepest service market.
In response to this intensified competition, a new wave of
restructuring has been unleashed in the vast service sectorŠhighlighted
in the
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
26Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.last 2 years by nearly a dozen mega-bank mergers, the failures of a
number of major airlines, and dramatic downsizing in retailing,

telecommunications, accounting, advertising, and the legal profession. In
each of these industries, white-collar jobs are now being permanently
eliminated. Roach maintains that this development would not be occurring
if IT were delivering what it was intended to deliver
Šincreased output
through meaningful improvements in white-collar productivity. Thus, he
views the reality of service sector restructuring as an independent
confirmation of the IT paradox
Ša growing recognition by managers that
there is, in fact, considerable validity to the disturbing results conveyed
through the macroeconomic data on measured productivity. At the same
time, he also views restructuring as a powerful catalyst that is now forcing
managers to rethink applications of IT
Šsetting in motion a process that
could well culminate in the long-awaited macroeconomic payback from

the use of IT.
SOURCE: Stephen Roach, Morgan Stanley & Co.
experienced executives and observers of business note that IT has
contributed to important positive changes in the way that business is conducted,

standard measures of productivity at the macroeconomic level still reveal few

benefits of such changes over the past two decades.
2 What are some possible
explanations?3   One possibility is that there has been wasteful or inefficient use of
information technology in the service sector. Although it provides a

powerful tool, IT can be used well or badly. The view that

mismanagement has kept the new technology from providing much

impetus toward improving productivity has been expressed in the past

by Stephen Roach, a member of the committee (
Box 1.1
).4   An alternative view is that the use of IT has in fact raised productivity
significantly and that other problems have caused the slowdown in

productivity growth. IT is only one of several factors that affect

productivity. Thus the slow growth of measured productivity in

services may be the result of such problems as poor performance in

U.S. schools, weaknesses in technology development in areas other

than IT, changed energy prices, generally inadequate investment in

capital equipment or structures, including infrastructure, and/or a shift

in employment to sectors that present limited opportunities for
increasing productivity. Or perhaps a slowing of growth in measured
productivity was inevitable as the economies of industrialized

countries matured and the relatively easily obtained gains in productivity
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
27Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.were realized. In fact, most other industrialized countries have also
slowed in measured growth at about the same time as the U.S. economy.
5   A third perspective on this issue is that IT may have been used to
transform business activities but that these changes are being missed

by current methods of measuring productivity.
6 In this view, the use of
IT is bringing about real increases in productivity that are not captured

in the data. Thus the slowdown in productivity growth may be partly or

wholly the result of errors in measurement.
   A fourth view argues that IT-based systems have the potential to raise
the productivity of the economy significantly, but that this result will

take time. Economic historians have pointed out that major changes in

technology, such as the introduction of steam power or electrification,

have affected productivity only after many years.
7 Thus, the payoff
from investments in IT hardware may have been delayed because

software development and systems reengineering have lagged behind
and because it takes many years to train people to use new technology
productively. This optimistic view of the potential for future growth in

productivity suggests that payoffs can be expected in the years ahead

as U.S. service industries learn to use IT more effectively.
   A fifth view underscores the importance of examining the impact of IT
at much lower levels of aggregation than is possible using

macroeconomic data. A 1993 study by Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin

Hitt8 found that information technology "has made a substantial and
significant contribution to the output of firms," with a return on

investment for IT that is significantly greater than that of other capital

investments.These various alternative approaches to explaining the IT paradox are not
mutually exclusive. It could well be that some mistakes were made in early

adoptions of IT, leading to wasteful investment, but that as software

development, worker retraining, and management understanding progress,

investments will payoff in measurable forms. For example, IT may be applied

initially to increase information about markets, whereas productivity may
increase only later as the information is used to improve operations.
In considering these alternatives it may be useful to keep in mind the
difference between the average and the marginal contribution of using IT. The

average contribution of using IT can be determined, in principle if not in

practice, by asking how much lower productivity in the economy might be if

there had been no electronics revolution to bring down computing costs: what
would the level of productivity be if companies did not have access to IT at all?
Determining the marginal contribution of using IT requires asking a different

question: Given the existing stock of IT capital, what increment to productivity

is gained by adding another dollar of investment in additional IT? It is possible

in principle that using IT has contributed
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
28Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.greatly to productivity on average, but that over investment at the margin has
led to a low return on the last dollar. Often without explicitly stating so, some

discussions of the productivity paradox focus on the average contribution of

using IT, whereas others actually address the question of over investment at the

margin.THIS STUDY-APPROACH, SCOPE, AND TERMS
Motivated by questions concerning how the use of information technology
contributes to productivity in U.S. service industries and whether the potential

benefits of information technology are being full realized, the committee

initially sought to assess the impact of IT on productivity in the service sector.

However, the committee soon determined that this was the wrong issue.
Although it attempted to investigate key factors in each of the five
approaches to explaining the productivity paradox, the committee found no way

to determine with precision the relative significance of the various alternatives

as they pertain to use of IT. There was general agreement that existing methods

for measuring productivity at the aggregate level do not entirely capture the

changes taking place in the U.S. economy as a result of using IT and that

focusing on the apparent productivity paradox gives an overly narrow picture of

what is happening in services. Indeed some committee members argued that the
whole concept of productivity, as it is currently measured, may be outmoded
and that other measures of performance provide a better indication of the

contribution of IT. There was a consensus that the use of IT has changed the

way that businesses operate, and that the locus of innovation and of the

production of value has shifted away from traditional manufacturing activities

and toward service industries and service activities.
Based on its assessment of current knowledge, the committee concluded
that productivity is an important but not a sufficient measure of benefit. As

measured, productivity does not capture other important elements of

performance such as the quality, flexibility, convenience, variety,

responsiveness, reliability, and new opportunities that the use of IT in services

can permit. In addition, data on assessments of service sector productivity often

do not reflect the substantial benefits customers or suppliers have received from

service sector investments in IT. If captured at all, these benefits have shown up

in measures of the customer- or supplier-industries' productivity.
Finally, the use of IT in services has often transformed the structures of
both manufacturing and service industries, created cross-competition among

different industry segments, allowed development of global supplier and

customer networks, created whole new industries, and changed the very way in

which commerce and management are performed.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
29Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In addition, IT is a relatively new technology, and hence long delays can
be expected before its effective deployment. Many of the service industries into

which it has been deployed have not traditionally managed major technological

changes. Even in industries inured to such changes, introduction of a new

technology typically takes significant time and is accompanied by mistakes in

implementation and evaluation and by lags in profitability increases.
In the course of its deliberations, the committee recognized that
understanding and improving the impact of IT on the overall 
performance of
services activities, not simply determining the 
productivity of IT in services, is
the real challenge. Moreover, the committee came to believe that the primary

impediments to the full exploitation of IT to improve service sector business

practices and performance were not as much issues of inadequate technology as
they were issues of management. For this reason, the report focuses primarily
on the roles of management in the exploitation of IT, although the remarkable

dynamism that characterizes the evolution of information technology itself has

not gone unnoticed.
To better understand these complex issues, the committee chose to
investigate the full range of impacts of IT use on performance in the service

industries, including measured productivity as only one element in overall

performance. To do so, the committee analyzed the impacts of IT use at four

levels: the macroeconomic level, the industry level, the enterprise level, and the
activity level within the enterprise. The purpose of these inquiries was not so
much to critique past studies or results as to offer practical insights to

executives and policy-makers concerning the utility of available data and the

application of practices that might improve IT's impact on the performance of

service activities in the future.
CURRENT DATA AND MEASURES OF PRODUCTIVITY
Based on existing data, it is impossible to determine exactly what payoff
the U.S. economy has achieved from use of IT. To understand this point one

must look at the ways in which productivity is currently measured, particularly

in the service industries. There are both strengths and weaknesses in the current
statistical base. The recently updated productivity series developed by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics for selected industries shows strong growth in many

service industries. The aggregate data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis

also offer useful insights about the productivity of the service sector. But both

series may ignore or understate some key factors that contribute to productivity

in several service industries. Alternative measures of performance may be

useful to supplement measures of productivity
Šor to substitute altogether for
themŠas indicators of economic performance.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
30Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.National Income and Product Accounts Prepared by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis
The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the U.S. Department of
Commerce has responsibility for preparing the National Income and Product

Accounts (NIPA). The data in these accounts are comprehensive, covering

economic activity throughout the U.S. economy. When the framework of the

accounts was developed after World War II, the concern of public policy was to

avoid a return to the disastrous period of the Great Depression. The data that are

prepared are used when monetary and fiscal policy are adjusted in order to

influence the level of demand in the overall economy. The need to be
comprehensive and the focus on policies affecting demand influence in many
ways the nature of the data collected. Thus, at times, the data are limited in their

usefulness for studying aggregate supply
Šproductivity and long-term growth.
Traditionally, the gross national product (GNP) has been the principal
aggregate measure of all of the goods and services produced in the economy.

How this figure is constructed is a factor in its limitations and general validity

for assessing productivity. The basic data that go into GNP describe the sales of

goods and services for consumption, the sales of goods (including construction)

for investment, and government purchases of goods and services (including the

services government itself produces). Included in GNP are final sales, that is,

sales to consumers or to government or the sales of durable goods to businesses.

Sales of components or raw materials that are then processed further are
considered sales of ''intermediate" goods and are not included directly in GNP.
Additions to inventory are counted as part of investment and are added to final

sales in computing GNP (or subtracted in the case of any depletion of

inventories).The GNP includes the income that is earned by U.S.-owned assets located
overseas minus the earnings of foreign-owned assets located in the United

States. When this net income is subtracted out, the resulting aggregate is called

the gross domestic product (GDP). In its recent revisions of the NIPA, BEA has

highlighted GDP rather than GNP. GDP gives the best aggregate indicator of

economic activity within U.S. borders.
The BEA collects information on final sales and inventories to estimate
GDP in current dollars, that is, with everything priced at its actual sales price. It

then uses price information collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and, for

some components, by BEA itself to construct an aggregate price deflator for

GDP. This deflator is used to transform GDP in current dollars into GDP in

constant dollars, also known as real GDP. Real GDP reflects the total of goods

and services produced in the economy priced in base-year prices, currently 1987

prices. Putting everything in common prices is designed to remove the effect of
inflation on GDP and leave only
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
31Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.an index of the increase in the physical quantities of goods and services
produced in the economy, often called the gross domestic product originating in

the U.S. economy (GPO).
Once total GDP has been calculated, the activities of the government
sector,9 owner-occupied housing, and the nonprofit sector are often subtracted
out, and the resulting measure of output is then described as the GDP

originating in the private business sector of the economy (i.e., the GPO of the

business sector).
Business GDP can be subdivided further into the GDP produced in each
sector or industry in the economy (GPO by industry), based largely on the wage

and capital income generated by the industry. Obtained in this way, the output

of an industry reflects the 
value added
 produced within the industry, that is, the
real value of the sales of the industry (adjusted for any change in inventory)

minus the value of materials and services purchased from other industries.
10Estimating the contribution to total GDP made by each constituent industry
often involves some educated guesswork, because many companies have plants
in several different industries, and so their income has to be divided up to

account for their various activities.
Another difficulty encountered in determining the real (constant-dollar)
output of each industry comes in developing suitable industry price deflators.

The dollar value of income generated in each industry is divided by an industry

price deflator in order to compute real output of the industry in 1987 dollars.

This approach is analogous to the procedure used to compute aggregate real

GDP in 1987 dollars, but some of the industry price deflators are more difficult
to construct than the aggregate price deflator. The prices associated with both
the outputs and the inputs of some industries are intrinsically hard to measure,

or data are simply not collected that allow accurate measurement.
11Although it develops data on business GDP and GDP by industry, the BEA
does not publish data on productivity. Instead, the responsibility for measuring

productivity in the U.S. economy rests with the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Productivity from the NIPA Data: What do the Numbers Show?
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) makes some adjustments to the
NIPA data on output associated with business GDP and GDP by industry and

combines those data with data on labor input by industry to give average labor

productivity (
Box 1.2), computed as real GDP per employee-hour. (
Box 1.2discusses different concepts of productivity, such as labor, capital, and

multifactor productivity.) BLS publishes data on productivity only for the
business sector as a whole, for nonfarm business, and for manufacturing.
However, BLS will release on request the productivity data for individual

industries, and the resulting productivity information is often widely quoted.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
32Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Table 1.1
 shows the rates of growth of average labor productivity for the
business sector as a whole and for the major industry sectors as prepared by

BLS using the BEA data.
12 The figures for the productivity of the business
sector show the pattern that has become familiar. Productivity grew at a rate of

a little less than 3 percent a year in the business sector as a whole from 1948 to

1973 and then fell to 0.63 percent a year from 1973 to 1979 before making a
partial recovery from 1979 to 1989.
The business sector is divided into goods- and service-producing
industries, and shows solid growth in both parts of the economy over the period
TABLE 1.1 Average Annual Growth in Gross Domestic Product per Labor-Hour for
Major Sectors of the U.S. Economy, 1948 to 1989
Average Annual Rate of Growth (% per year)
Differencein Rate ofGrowth,1948-73 and

1973-89Sector1948-731973-791979-891973-89Business2.880.631.351.08-1.80
Goods producing3.210.712.311.71-1.50

Farming4.640.113.222.04-2.60

Mining4.02-5.562.13-0.82-4.84
Construction0.58-2.02-0.71-1.20-1.78
Manufacturing2.871.803.332.75-0.12
Durable goods
excluding
nonelectricalmachinery2.561.552.352.05-0.51
Nonelectricalmachinerya2.031.069.106.013.98
Nondurable goods3.402.372.372.37-1.03
Service producing2.490.580.840.74-1.75
Transportation2.310.150.950.65-1.66
Communication5.224.274.844.63-0.59
Utilities5.872.662.352.46-3.41

Trade2.74-0.352.101.18-1.56
Wholesale3.14-1.212.651.18-1.96
Retail2.400.141.721.13-1.27

FIREb1.440.360.050.17-1.27
Services2.170.840.010.32-1.85
Governmententerprise-0.150.620.040.260.41
Generalgovernment0.210.030.530.340.13a Nonelectrical machinery hours from Bureau of Labor Statistics.
b Finance, insurance, and real estate.
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1991. 
Survey of Current
Business, April, Tables 6.2 and 6.11.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
33Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1.2 MEASURING CAPITAL AND MULTIFACTOR
PRODUCTIVITYMeasures of productivity relate physical output to physical input. As
such, they encompass a family of measures ranging from measures of

single-factor-input productivity, such as output per unit of labor input or
output per unit of capital input, to measures of multifactor productivity,
such as output per unit of labor and capital combined. In the form of
indexes these measures present the change in output associated with the
corresponding change in input. In other words, the indexes show the
change in resources (labor, capital, materials, or all combined) used to
produce the output of the activity being measured. They do not measure

how much of the change in output came from any of the individual input
factors, but rather how the many factors affecting the production process
resulted in changes in resource use.
The most extensively developed and widely used measure of
productivity is the one relating output to labor input
Šlabor productivity. It
is a tool relevant for analyzing labor costs, real income, and employment
and, as a practical matter, is most easily measured. However, an increase

or decrease in output per employee-hour does not imply that labor is
solely or necessarily even primarily responsible for improved or worsened
productivity. Movements in output per hour reflect technological
innovations, changes in capital input, scale of production, education,
management, and many other factors as well as the skills and efforts of

the work force.
Average labor productivity is the ratio of output to labor input. Labor
input is chosen as the most important factor of production
Šthecompensation of labor is about two-thirds of total value added. But labor
productivity can change for reasons that have nothing to do with the work
force. Various factors can cause labor productivity to change over time.
For example, there have been substantial increases in the amount of
capital used per worker. Technology itself and the organization of work

may change. These considerations do not invalidate the concept of labor
productivity; they simply mean that it is important to interpret it correctly.
Also, it may be necessary to choose among a family of measures relating
output to labor, capital, and other inputs, some of which adjust for quality,
and some of which do not.
Many economists prefer a concept called multifactor productivity or
total-factor productivity. When the value added measure of output is used,

growth in multifactor productivity is computed as the growth rate of output
minus a weighted average of the growth rates of labor and capital inputs.
The weights are then shares of labor and capital costs in total cost.
Increases in multifactor productivity reflect increases in the efficiency with
which labor and capital are used to produce output.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
34Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.When considering multifactor productivity, it is important to find a
good measure of the capital input to production, but such measures are

hard to find. So, in practice the main capital input measures reflect only
physical capital
Šstructures and equipment. The stock of physical capital
in use is estimated from the history of investment over time and from
estimates of the extent of scrapping and depreciation. Land use is also
included in many capital measures.
These basic measures of productivity have been extended in several
ways. A weighted or adjusted labor input can be used to reflect the
changing level of human capital in the work force as a result of changes in

age, experience, and years of schooling. For individual industries and
sectors of the economy, there are measures of multifactor productivity that
use the gross output of the industry rather than its value added. Materials,
energy, and purchased services are then considered inputs into
production, like capital and labor.
Human capital is one form of nonphysical or intangible capital, and
there is some concern that other forms of nonphysical capital have
become increasingly important but are not counted. Manufacturing
industries spend heavily on R&D, and many industries in the
manufacturing sector and in services spend heavily in developing

software and computer systems. Members of the committee familiar with
computer systems development estimate that these costs are two to three
times or more the cost of computer hardware. These additional costs
include software, hardware, and software to connect to other computers
or to network PCs, support staff, and R&D support for new systems. It has
been argued, for example, that to some airlines the value of their
reservations systems is greater than the value of their airplanes.
Taking account of the full range of different types of capital does not
help explain slow growth in productivity, however. In fact it could make the
slowdown seem worse
Šerrors that lead to an understatement of output
lead to an understatement of productivity, but errors that lead to an
understatement of inputs lead to an overstatement of productivity. If there
has been an acceleration of investment in nonphysical capital over the
last several years, as seems likely, then multifactor productivity may show

a larger slowdown than labor productivity. If we are getting so much
smarter, why are we not getting richer?
Taking account of nonphysical capital could change perceptions of
the slow rate of investment in the U.S. economy overall, however.

Discussions of U.S. competitiveness often focus on the low rate of
investment in the U.S. economy in plants and equipment in the United
States relative to other countries. But perhaps the structure of the U.S.
economy is simply making that kind of investment less important.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
35Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.from 1948 to 1973, when productivity in the goods-producing sector grew
at a rate of 3.2 percent a year and in the service-producing industries at 2.5

percent a year. Contrary to common perception, substantial growth in the

productivity of the service industries was evident prior to 1973, even taking into

account the various flaws in the data. Notable over this period is the strong

growth of productivity in transportation, communications, utilities, trade, and
the narrowly defined services sector.
13As 
Table 1.1
 indicates, productivity growth in both the goods- and service-
producing sectors collapsed after 1973. Productivity had actually begun to

decline prior to 1973 in both the mining and the construction sectors, and this

decline continued in the 1970s. Manufacturing and farming managed to sustain

positive growth in productivity over this period, but at a much slower pace.
Within the service-producing industries, there was substantially slower growth
after 1973; only the communications industry sustained its pre-1973

performance.Since 1979, the gap has widened between the productivity growth rates of
the goods- and the service-producing sectors. The goods-producing sector has

made a substantial recovery in growth, especially in manufacturing; only

construction has shown continued weakness. The service-producing sector has

also experienced some recovery, especially in trade, but its overall recovery has

been much less than that in the goods-production sector overall and certainly
very much less than the recovery in manufacturing.
One of the distinctive patterns shown in 
Table 1.1
 is that productivity has
grown extremely rapidly in the nonelectrical machinery industry, which is part

of manufacturing. The computer industry is the main source of growth in this

subsector, and the very rapid decline in computer prices has been captured by

the price deflator for this industry and is powering its growth. The extraordinary
performance of the computer industry is making a major contribution to the
measured recovery of manufacturing's growth in productivity. In fact, the

post-1973 recovery of the whole goods-producing sector owes a great deal to

productivity in the production of computers. Among the manufacturing

industries, several still had weak growth in the 1980s. The improvement in

growth in the 1980s has not been uniform even within goods-producing

industries.What do the macroeconomic data say about the contribution of IT to
productivity in the service-producing sector since its widespread introduction

beginning in the mid-1970s? The record of productivity in this sector is highly

heterogeneous. Telecommunications, for example, has long been a leader in

growth in U.S. productivity and has benefited greatly from IT. Automatic
switching and other developments have enabled an enormous increase in
telephone service while labor input has been reduced. The telecommunications

industry is one for which a good measure of output can be obtained.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
36Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Outside of communications, however, the macroeconomic data reveal
scant evidence of IT's contribution to productivity. For example, there is a set of

handicraft services (including teaching, health care, automotive repair, legal

services, and police protection) whose costs have benefited very little from IT,

even though in some cases the quality of the product has benefited greatly.

Areas in which a major impact might have been expected, such as finance,
insurance, and real estate (FIRE) and the narrowly defined services sector, have
shown almost no growth in productivity since 1979. Data on the productivity of

these services have reflected persistently slow growth (at least when the figures

on productivity are not adjusted for improved quality of products), and their

relative prices have consequently risen
Ša facet of the productivity paradox
described earlier in this chapter.
The committee has noted that the data on productivity computed by BLS
using output series of the NIPA are published by BLS only at a very aggregated

level; BLS does not publish the data on service sector productivity. Although

these figures can be readily calculated from the Commerce Department's

breakdown of GNP by industry and in fact are widely cited, the BLS itself

believes that the results obtained for the service sector as a whole lack the
quality to merit publication. There are several reasons for the agency's concerns.
Problems with the Data from the NIPA
The three main problems with estimating productivity from the NIPA
output data are (1) the difficulty of assessing each industry's contribution to

total output (discussed above), (2) the problem of accounting correctly for new

products and for changes in quality, and (3) the fact that in some industries

output is actually measured by inputs.
Difficulty in Accounting for New Products and Changes in Quality
 An
important deficiency in the data on productivity based on the NIPA is that the

impacts of new products and services and of changes in the quality of existing

products and services are understated or ignored.
14 This is a recognized problem
with respect to goods-producing industries that introduce new products

constantly. For several years after new products are introduced, their prices are
not used in the calculation of the price deflators. For example, after color TVs
were first introduced, the price index for televisions continued to be based

solely on black and white TVs for some time. Of course the production and sale

of color TVs were counted in the nominal or dollar value of output, so that color

TVs did to some extent add immediately to productivity. But the price index

captured neither the benefit to consumers of being able to watch in color, nor

the rapid decline in price that occurs commonly with most new products in the

first few yearsINTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
37Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.after their introduction. Overall, the impact of color TVs on productivity was
understated.Understatement of the contribution of new service products to productivity
is also a serious problem. For example, measured growth in productivity has

been slow in the insurance industry because the dollar value of insurance output

is deflated by the price index for the activities being insured against. Income

from the provision of medical insurance is deflated by the rapidly rising price

deflator for medical care costs. What is not reflected in the data on productivity

is that the insurance industry has in fact introduced a range of different policy
options, tailoring the policies to customers' particular needs. Computer
technology has provided the means for this individualized service. At the same

time, according to some observers, computer and telecommunications

technology has drastically reduced the length of time needed to process

claims.15 Neither the customization nor the convenience factor is reflected in
the data on measured real output. Many other service industries have also

provided innovative new services. For example, the financial services industry

has introduced a variety of new investment securities, and the

telecommunications industry can offer high-speed data transmission lines and

new consumer services, such as call forwarding or caller identification.

Moreover, the ability to communicate information almost instantaneously

allows knowledge workers to operate in entirely new ways. Companies with
operations in several countries can allow employees in the United States, for
instance, to work cooperatively and concurrently with employees in London or

Tokyo.Changes in the quality of existing goods and services can be just as
important as completely new products or services
Šsometimes more important.
Although changes in quality are sometimes counted, they are often missed in

measures of productivity. In manufacturing, if a newly introduced model of a

product has specific additional features (e.g., an ice maker) that enable the

manufacturer to charge higher prices, then this change in quality is counted as
an increase in output and thus as a contributor to increased productivity. But if a
new model of a refrigerator simply has a better design but takes the same inputs

to manufacture, then this change in quality will generally be missed. Similarly,

in services, a higher-quality (more reliable, more flexible) service that requires

inputs similar to those needed for a lesser service will be ignored in measures of

productivity unless the price can be increased. For example, in the supermarket

industry, reported growth in productivity is low, but change in quality is a major

concern. Table 1.2
 shows a variety of measures of U.S. supermarket
productivity and some selected measures of the quality of service being

provided. Real sales per hour of labor input or per square foot of selling space

have grown little over time, or have even fallen over some years. But there has

been a huge increase in the variety of products offered and in the quality of
other services provided.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
38Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Need for Wider Use of Hedonic Price Indexes
 For some products, the
price deflators are adjusted to capture the effects of changes in quality. For

example, when a new model of computer is introduced that runs at higher speed

or has more memory, these changes are reflected in what is called a hedonic

price index. This price index has been in use for the computer industry for a

number of years and is based on a statistical technique that estimates how much

customers value speed, memory, or other characteristics of computers. The very

rapid measured growth of productivity in the computer industry testifies to the
impact a hedonic index can have. Estimated growth in that industry's
productivity was much slower before the hedonic price index was introduced.

Residential housing and automobiles are other important industries for which

hedonic price indexes are used, although in neither case is the index as powerful

as for the computer industry. The residential housing index adjusts mostly for

the square footage of the houses built.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
39Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Hedonic price indexes are a very good tool for capturing the effects of
changes in quality. They can be used to evaluate the different characteristics of

a good or a service, track how these change over time, and then estimate how

the market values these changing characteristics. Unfortunately, use of these

indexes is very much the exception rather than the rule within the goods-

producing industries, and these indexes are not used at all for price deflators for
the service industries. Many people in the service industries believe that new
products have proliferated to the point that conventional concepts of

productivity are breaking down. It is no longer possible, for example, to talk

about mail services as a homogeneous group, because overnight mail is really a

different product from regular mail. Unless systematic attempts are made to

capture the effects of new or different products being provided in the service

sector, the quality of the data on U.S. productivity will decline.
Use of Data on Input as Measures of Output
 Earlier in this chapter it was
noted that financial services companies have been very innovative in

introducing new services and that the techniques used for measuring

productivity will lead to understatement or omission of the impact of these

innovations. This problem is actually much worse with respect to bans and
other depository institutions, which represent about 30 percent of total
employment in the finance, insurance, and real estate (FIRE) subsector, because

there is no valid price deflator for this group. The deflator used is an index of

compensation paid to employees in the industry, and this deflator has the effect

of assuming that real output in the banking industry group rises one-for-one

with the number of employees.
16 The way in which real output is computed
ensures that almost no change in measured productivity will be observed in the

banking industry group, regardless of what the actual increase in productivity

may have been.
Industry-specific Measures of Productivity Developed by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has developed another set of
productivity measures for services that is not subject to the constraints imposed

by adhering to the framework of the NIPA. These measures are made for a

number of goods-producing industries and also for many industries classified in

the Department of Commerce's Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system

as service industries.
At present, BLS publishes indexes of output per hour, that is, output per
unit of labor input, for selected industries for the major service activities. These

include selected industries classified at SIC code 40 and higher
Štransportation,communications, public utilities, trade, finance, insurance, and real estate, and

business and personal services. Indexes of productivity
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
40Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.are published for 39 service industries, covering about 42 percent of all workers
in the service industries in the private business sector.
The BLS also publishes measures of productivity for the federal
government with separate detail for the common functions provided by federal

agencies, such as record-keeping, library services, building and grounds

maintenance, loans and grants, and so on. In addition, work is currently being

conducted on the development of indexes of productivity for hospitals and

additional wholesale trade activities.
The measures of output used in these BLS series are independently
developed from data on sales, prices, and physical units whenever possible,

combined with labor input weights. In some instances the data on labor input

weights are not available, and approximations such as gross margins have to be

used. The data on labor input cover the hours of all persons employed in a

particular industry, including the self-employed, and are based on the BLS

surveys of establishment employment and hours. The ''hours of employees" are
based on hours-paid data from the surveys of establishment employment and
hours. The hours of the self-employed are derived from the household survey of

employment and hours conducted for the BLS by the Bureau of the Census.
What Do the BLS Data on Selected Industries Show?
Table 1.3
 shows the compound annual percentage change in output per
employee-hour for selected service industries over the period from 1973 to

1990, the longest period for which continuous measures from BLS are

available. Contrary to the general belief that service industries are characterized

by uniformly low growth in productivity, a wide range in the rates of growth is

evident. Over the most recent decade, 1980 to 1990, the rates range from a
decline of 4 percent per year for gas utilities to an increase of 9 percent per year
for railroads. The increase for railroads actually exceeds that for almost all

manufacturing industries, in which significant rates of growth in productivity

have occurred. Even over the longer period from 1973 to 1990, when the range

of rates of growth was narrower, there was still considerable variation across

industries.Gaps in BLS Data and Measures of Productivity
Although BLS publishes at least one measure of productivity for each
major service activity group
Štransportation, communications, and so on
Šthere are major areas within each of these groups for which no measure of

productivity has been developed and published.
One reason for these gaps is that it is difficult to define and develop
meaningful indicators of output and/or input in many service industries. In
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
41Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
42Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.most cases adequate measures have to be derived from data obtained in
surveys conducted for purposes other than measuring productivity. For

measuring productivity, the output indicator should be final to the activity being

examined, quantifiable, and consistent in coverage with, but independent of, the

input indicators; should reflect differences in the quality of the activity being

evaluated; and should represent the major part of the activities of the sector. For
many service activities, the available data do not meet these criteria. The major
gap within communications is radio and television broadcasting; in electricity,

gas, and sanitary services, it is sanitary services. In trade, the gap in coverage is

in the area of wholesale trade; in finance, insurance, and real estate the gap is in

the real estate component. In business and personal services, no measures are

available for health, education, and legal services. Finally, in the area of

government, the major gap is in state and local government.
Conclusions on Productivity Measures Developed from BLS Data
The BLS has made considerable progress in developing indexes of
productivity for selected service industries. The measures of productivity for

some of these industries are very accurate, clearly reflecting changes in output

per unit of labor input. Because the concepts of output are relatively straight-

forward and appropriate data are readily available, the measures for
transportation, communications, and public utilities fall into this category. The
measures for some of the trade industries present some difficulties primarily

because of the heterogeneity of the categories of merchandise line sales and the

limited availability of adequate price deflators. However, these indexes of

productivity are useful indicators of trends over time and are continually being

improved as the number of detailed price indexes increases.
17Many difficulties remain in clarifying some of the basic conceptual
problems of defining the output of certain service industries, and many

inadequacies are present in the data available.
18 In particular, the BLS does not
have the resources to follow the rapidly changing nature of the output in many

services industries, changes that have been enabled by the use of IT in many

cases. BLS's measurement of productivity is good if output over time can be
captured adequately by a simple measure such as passenger-miles. It does not
do so well when other characteristics are important, and in such situations it

suffers from the same kinds of problems that the BEA data suffer from. For

example, in the case of airlines, no account is taken of changes in the frequency

of service, ease of booking or changing reservations, flying time, number of

stops, on-time record, and so on. For many service industries, these aspects of

service quality are crucial.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
43Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF PRODUCTIVITY AND
PERFORMANCEThe slowdown in the growth of measured productivity in services has been
the subject of great concern among policy-makers, but productivity is only one

measure of economic performance. For the business manager, other measures of

performance may provide a better guide to long-term profitability and success.

Productivity and profitability are linked in that, other things being equal, a

company that is able to raise its productivity relative to that of its competitors

will be able to lower its costs and raise its margins or reduce prices to increase

market share.
But other things are not always equal. For example, a company that
provides a unique new product or service may be able to raise its profitability

by more than a company that simply concentrates on raising productivity in its

existing lines of business. Or an industry may find that its market conditions

change. The deregulation of many service industries has forced them to adapt

and, in many cases, to raise productivity. But the increase in competition within

these industries has lowered prices, and margins and profits are hard to come

by. Airlines, railroads, and trucking are all in this position.
For workers, employment may be more important than productivity,
especially in the short run. In fact some people see a trade-off between jobs and

increases in productivity. The U.S. economy has been very successful over the

years in increasing the number of jobs it has generated, and the largest number

of these have been in the service sector. The fear in some quarters is that as

some labor-intensive companies in the service sector seek to boost their

productivity via restructuring, the creation of full-time jobs may slow.
19However, downsizing is not a long-term recipe for sustained growth in
productivity. Once companies have eliminated excess staff, they will need to

look beyond downsizing and restructuring and embark on a path of judicious

expansion that includes increases in the rate of hiring and in capacity. Recent

evidence suggests that this may be starting to happen. Over the period from

October 1992 to May 1993, job growth averaged 165,000 jobs per month, well

in excess of the paltry gains of 18,000 per month that occurred in the first 17

months of the recovery. For example, during 1992 business spending on capital

equipment has risen at an annual rate of 16 percent, with 60 percent of the
increase concentrated in IT hardware.
For some purposes international competitiveness is as important or more
important than productivity. Again, the two are linked, but external

circumstances may change so that the two indicators of performance move

differently from each other. For example, the U.S. auto industry and the U.S.

textile industry have both succeeded reasonably well in raising productivity
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
44Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in recent years. But both industries have come under intense competition from
foreign companies that have done as well or better in increasing productivity

and product quality or have been able to make use of less costly labor. A recent

study indicates that compared to similar industries of other countries, U.S.

service industries have generally higher absolute levels of productivity

(Box 1.3
), although U.S. rates of growth in productivity have lagged those of
many other nations.
20 Furthermore, the United States maintains a healthy $52
billion service trade surplus with foreign nations.
21OBSERVATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
Many Factors Influence Productivity: It Affects Many
Aspects of Performance
As noted at the beginning of this chapter, many factors besides the
application of information technology determine growth in the productivity of

the U.S. service sector. This is not surprising, since output itself is a function of

multiple inputs and technology, the latter affecting how inputs are combined in

production. Productivity is also influenced, for example, by other kinds of

capital investment, such as buildings for retailers or airplanes for airline

companies. The fact that over the past 15 to 20 years slow growth in

productivity has been accompanied by rapid investment in IT has suggested to
some people that the use of IT has actually caused the slowdown in productivity
growth. But the committee determined that it is a mistake to conclude that IT is

the culprit. It surely is in some cases, but in others it has probably made a large

positive contribution. The key point is that the currently available

macroeconomic data cannot precisely measure how investments in IT alone are

influencing productivity in the services. As documented and discussed above in

this chapter, the committee's findings have led it to make the following

observations about current macroeconomic data on service sector productivity

and how investments in and the use of IT have influenced these data:
   The BEA macroeconomic data do not deal adequately with changes in
the quality of the services provided. And IT is often used to improve

the quality of services. The development and use of better measures of

output might show a very different picture of growth in productivity.
   The BEA macroeconomic data do not adequately allow for the effects
of new services, and IT is often used to provide new services. Again,

the development and use of better measures of output that account for

new services could show a radically different picture of growth in

productivity.   Existing data on the capital input to production do not take account of
the knowledge capital (see 
Box 1.2) that is considered by many to be the
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
45Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 1.3 A RECENT STUDY OF SERVICE SECTOR
PRODUCTIVITY IN THE UNITED STATES AND OTHER
COUNTRIESThe Global Institute of McKinsey & Co., assisted by economists
Martin Baily, Francis Bator, and Robert Solow, completed in 1992 a

comparison of the productivity of the airline, banking, general
merchandise retailing, telecommunications, and restaurant industries in
the United States relative to the comparable industries in European
countries and Japan.
For three of the industries
Šairlines, banking, and telecommunications
Šthe study used quantitative output measures of the type used by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics in its analysis of specific industries. For
example, in airlines, different output measures were combined, such as
passenger-miles, number of aircraft maintained, and number of
passengers served. Adjustments were made to allow for such factors as
different route lengths and fleet structures. For the other two industries

value added was the measure of output, with the international
comparisons made using what are called purchasing power parity
exchange rates.
Except in the restaurant industry, where productivity was comparable
in the countries studied, the findings indicated that the U.S. industries had
a lead in productivity, usually in the range of 20 to 40 percent. Several
explanations for this productivity lead were examined. For example, it was
found that U.S. airlines' larger average size gave them some advantage

over European airlines. Differences in the mix of output and in capital
intensity were also significant in some cases. The most important
difference overall, however, was found to be differences in how the work
force is organized and managed. There is greater competitive pressure
and less restrictive regulation in the U.S. industries than in those of other

countries studied.
The McKinsey study is based on an analysis in a single year (1989)
of productivity levels and therefore does not directly contradict the Bureau
of Economic Analysis macroeconomic data that show a slow rate of
growth of productivity in the service sector in the United States. But the

finding that U.S. services have a substantial lead over other countries
could reinforce the concerns about the BEA data that are presented in this
chapter.In general the McKinsey study concluded that differences in
technology were not the most important factor in the productivity
differences that they found, since the technology is available to
enterprises in all of the countries studied if they wish to use it. For
telecommunications and banking, the study did conclude that a failure to

adopt the most advanced information technology had hurt productivity in
other countries. The telecommunications industry in Germany, for
example, had not introduced electronic switching and could not offer
business customers high-speed data transmission. And in the banking
industry, both Germany and
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
46Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the United Kingdom suffered a productivity disadvantage because
fewer automatic teller machines had been deployed. U.S. banks had

invested more heavily in terminals, allowing many activities to be

centralized that were still carried out less productively in branches

overseas, particularly so in the United Kingdom.
  most important part of the capital base of the service industries. The use
of any improved measure of capital input could also drastically change

the estimates of growth in productivity.
   In some service industries, the BEA data exclude, by definition, any
changes in measured productivity because real output is measured by

the number of employees working in the industry. Banking and

financial services are the most important examples.
For the business decision maker, productivity may be an important
consideration but will often not be the most important one. Productivity is

important for business because a company that has weak productivity in its core

business activities, relative to other companies, is tying one hand behind its

back in its competitive struggle. But productivity is rarely sufficient for

business success and should not be the sole or even the primary basis for most

companies' decisions about investment in IT. Providing value to the consumer is

often more important than increasing productivity, and such circumstances will

require that measures of performance be used to track growth in the economy

and to evaluate the part played by IT. Making better business and policy

decisions about investing in IT requires having more information about what IT

is being used for than can be provided by the standard data on productivity. In

Chapters 
2 through 4, the committee discusses how IT has been used to improve
performance at the industry, enterprise, and activity levels of the U.S. service

sector.ORGANIZATION AND SCOPE OF THIS REPORT
In refining its approach in response to its initial findings, the committee
chose to investigate the full range of impacts of the use of IT on performance in

the service sector. Thus the committee examined the nature and measurement of

performance in services at progressively less aggregated levels of analysis: the

industry level (Chapter 2
), the enterprise level (
Chapter 3), and the activity level
(Chapter 4). These chapters are supplemented by appendixes that provide more
methodological detail and supporting data: 
Appendix A describes selectedresearch on economic and strategic impacts
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE

MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
47Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of IT; 
Appendix B
 describes methods used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis
to derive measures of output; 
Appendix C
 describes methods used by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics for deriving measures of productivity; 
Appendix D
describes how the committee conducted its study, including the interview

process used by the committee to inform its deliberations and a summary of its

results.Chapters 
2 through 
4 culminate in 
Chapter 5
, which discusses implications
for managers in organizations wishing to improve their management of

information technology, and 
Chapter 6
, which presents issues and
recommendations for public policy.
To put this report in perspective, some observations on the committee's
operation and scope of concern are appropriate. First, this report was shaped by

interactions within a multidisciplinary committee that included business

executives, economists, behavioral scientists, management theorists, and

technologists. Second, the committee considered the context of international
competitiveness in conducting its analysis, but detailed investigation of
international conditions was beyond its scope. Third, although smaller

companies were represented in the data that support industry- and national-level

analyses, the committee's resources did not permit a systematic examination of

the distinguishing characteristics of smaller enterprises.
In addition to using the standard macroeconomic data collected and
developed by government agencies, the committee drew on observations from

managers and executives in industry (a group including some of the committee's

own members, as well as numerous others). These observations were obtained
through interviews that were used to develop and check insights, not to generate
quantitative data. Appendixes provide methodological and supporting details

about the committee's sources of information and its approach. 
Appendix E
 lists
the interviewed executives, whose observations helped the committee to

understand the processes by which IT projects are planned, implemented, and

evaluated.At the macroeconomic level, the committee was concerned about the
constraining effects of looking at services from the traditional perspectives of

goods-production (
Chapter 1
). At present, most of the terminology,
methodology, and data for analyzing productivity (and performance) derive
from earlier studies in the goods-producing industries, but to the committee,

most of these seemed inadequate for understanding trends in the service sector.

For example, whereas productivity in goods-producing activities is measured in

terms that refer to relatively concrete units of output, dollar sales, or profits,

performance in services may relate to more subjective quantities such as timing,

quality, comfort, or convenience. Measurement difficulties are a theme that runs

through the report.INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
48Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTES AND REFERENCES
1. This figure is for checks cleared, deposits processed, and cash distributed by human tellers. Cash
distributed by automated teller machines is not included. Data reported in 1992 by The Global

Institute of McKinsey and Company (see 
Box 1.3
).2. See, for example, Baily, M., and R. Gordon, 1986, "The Productivity Slowdown: Measurement

Issues and the Explosion of Computer Power," pp. 347-431 in 
Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity
, W. Brainard and G. Perry (eds.), Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.; Roach, Stephen
S., 1988, "Technology and the Services Sector: America's Hidden Competitive Challenge," in

Technology in Services
, Bruce R. Guile and James Brian Quinn (eds.), National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.; Roach, Stephen S., 1991, ''Services Under Siege: The Restructuring Imperative,"

Harvard Business Review
, September-October, pp. 82-91; and Strassmann, P., 1990, 
The Business
Value of Computers
, Information Economics Press, New Canaan, Conn.
3. A paper by Paul Attewell that was brought to the attention of the committee while this report was

in press addresses some of these issues. See Attewell, Paul. 1994. "Information Technology and the

Productivity Paradox," in 
Understanding the Productivity Paradox: Organizational Linkages
,Douglas H. Harris (ed.), National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., in preparation.

4. One variant of this idea suggests that IT has transformed the way business is conducted and is

essential to competitive success, but the changes it has facilitated do not raise the overall output of

the economy. For example, individual companies can use IT to target their marketing campaigns

more effectively, but overall industry sales are not affected and so neither is productivity measured

at the industry level.

5. For a discussion of the slowdown in the United States and other countries, see Baumol, William

J., Sue Anne Batey Blackman, and Edward N. Wolff, 1989, 
Productivity and American Leadership:
The Long View
 , MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.; and Baily, Martin N., and Alok K. Chakrabarti,
1988, Innovation and the Productivity Crisis
, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. However,
note that U.S. productivity growth rates that lag behind those of its international competitors are a

distinct concern for U.S. policy-makers, even though U.S. base productivity levels may still be

higher than those of its competitors.

6. See, for example, Kendrick, J.W., 1987, "Service Sector Productivity," 
Business Economics
,April, pp. 18-24.

7. David, Paul A. 1990. "The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern

Productivity Paradox," 
American Economic Review
, May, pp. 355-361.
8. Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin Hitt. 1993. "Is Information Systems Spending Productive? New

Evidence and New Results," MIT Sloan School of Management, Working Paper 3571-93,

September 24. (To appear in 
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Information
Systems .)
9. The part of the government sector that is subtracted is "general government." This includes the

salaries of government workers in the various federal, state, and local agencies. The output of

"government enterprises," such as the Postal Service and the Tennessee Valley Authority, are

included in the business sector of the economy.

10. The capital goods purchased by an industry are not subtracted from the gross output of the

industry. Value added in an industry reflects the payments to both labor and capital inputs to the

industry.
11. One difficulty is that there is not a direct match between products and industries. Plants in

several industries cast their own steel products, for example. An industry deflator should be based

on the prices of the products that are produced by the plants that are classified within that industry.

12. Also included in 
Table 1.1 is productivity for the government sector, although any productivity
that shows up in the data is purely the result of shifts in the composition of government activities.

By assumption there is no productivity growth within government activities.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
49Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13. The narrowly defined services sector consists of hotels and other lodging places, personal
services, business services, auto repair and similar services, motion pictures, amusement and

recreation services, health care, legal services, education, and social services. By contrast, the term

service sector
 is used throughout this report to denote the entire range of service industries, as noted
on the opening page of this chapter.

14. Though important when productivity is used as an indicator of living standards, adjustments for

changes in product quality can be misleading if the issue at hand is product cost analysis. For

example, if the number of teaching hours per student does not decline, college costs must rise as

quickly as faculty salaries, whether or not the quality of teaching changes.

15. Not everyone agrees that claims processing has speeded up. There have been complaints that

some insurance companies have delayed payments.

16. For example, the GDP originating in the commercial banking industry per full-time employee in

1980 ($37,600 in 1982 dollars) was virtually identical to that in 1988 ($37,900 in 1982 dollars).

This small change was due entirely to a different structure in the commercial banking industry.
17. The use of gross margin weighting as an approximation of labor input weighting is appropriate
as long as labor costs represent a significant portion of gross margins and the elements of margins
do not change over time.
18. The difficulties that remain involve clarifying some basic conceptual problems of defining
output for some service industries and filling gaps in data available. With regard to data, more and
improved data are needed on prices, value of output, capital, and material input. The BLS and other
government statistical agencies have undertaken initiatives to expand the coverage in the service

sector, and the results of these efforts should lead to better and more comprehensive industry

measures. Collection of more measures of service industry prices, expanded data on hours worked

that provide more disaggregation, and continued work on public-sector productivity by BLS are but

a few examples. However, some areas
Še.g., education, entertainment, legal and social services, and
many segments of medical services
Špresent such severe conceptual and data problems that
appropriate solutions may be a long time in coming. Additional resources may have only a limited

effect until the conceptual problems can be dealt with.
In expanding the number of industries for which measures are prepared, the BLS has had to take
these problems, among others, into consideration, and this has limited the number of service
industries for which measures have been developed. Nevertheless, adequate measures of

productivity have been developed for many service industries. The problems of measuring

productivity are different for each of the various service industries, and the approaches followed vary.
19. The recovery of 1993 is widely believed to be relatively weak by historical standards. For
example, unpublished data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, indicate
that jobs in the ninth quarter of this recovery rose by 0.3 percent as compared to their nadir in the
first quarter of 1991. By comparison, the corresponding figure for the eight previous recessions is

6.8 percent. In this recovery, manufacturing firms seem to be relying more on overtime than on new

hiring to meet expanding demand for goods, while service firms seem to be relying more on hiring

part-time workers with few benefits (for one example, see Swoboda, Frank, 1992, "In Omaha, the

Underside of a Jobs Promise," 
Washington Post
, October 25, p. H-1). The result in manufacturing
has been fewer jobs with longer work weeks, and in services more jobs with shorter work weeks

(see Uchitelle, Louis, 1993, "Fewer Jobs Filled As Factories Rely on Overtime Pay," 
New York
Times, May 16, p. 1). Even strong companies are cutting labor costs to maintain or increase profit
margins (see Uchitelle, Louis, 1993, ''Strong Companies Are Joining Trend to Eliminate Jobs," 
NewYork Times, July 26).
20. Recent data suggest that the slowdown in growth of U.S. productivity has been accompanied by
a slowdown in that of the other leading industrial countries, and that the percentage
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
50Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.decline in Japan has been almost exactly as great as that in the United States. Further, all industrial
countries have moved closer to the United States in levels of productivity and GDP per capita,

although they have not caught up with this country in real terms (i.e., in terms of purchasing power

parity exchange rates). With the race narrowing, it is a tautology that the laggards must be running

faster than the leader, thus explaining how the United States can be ahead of everyone else in

productivity level, although its productivity growth rate lags behind those of many of the other

countries.
21. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1992. 
Survey of Current
Business, June, Table 3, "Selected Services Transactions," p. 96.
BIBLIOGRAPHY FOR CHAPTER 1
Brand, Horst, and John Duke. 1982. "Productivity in Commercial Banking: Computers Spur the
Advance," 
Monthly Labor Review
, Vol. 105 (December), pp. 19-27.
Brand, Horst, and Zaul Ahmed. 1986. "Productivity in Beauty and Barber Shops," 
Monthly LaborReview, Vol. 109.
Carnes, Richard B. 1978. "Laundry and Cleaning Services Pressed to Post Productivity Gains."
Monthly Labor Review
, Vol. 101 (February), pp. 38-42.
Carnes, Richard B., and Horst Brand. 1977. "Productivity and New Technology in Eating and
Drinking Places," 
Monthly Labor Review
, Vol. 100 (September), pp. 9-15.
Dean, Edwin, and Kent Kunze. 1990. "Productivity Measurement in Service Industries," 
OutputMeasurement in the Services Sector
, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Mass.Duke, John. 1977. "New-Car Dealers Experience Long-Term Gains in Productivity," 
Monthly LaborReview, Vol. 100 (March), pp. 29-33.
Friedman, Brian. 1984. "Productivity in the Apparel and Accessories Stores Industries," 
MonthlyLabor Review
, Vol. 107 (October), pp. 37-42.
Friedman, Brian, and John L. Carey. 1975. "Productivity in Gasoline Stations, 1958-1973," 
MonthlyLabor Review
, Vol. 98 (February), pp. 32-36.
Kutscher, Ronald, and Jerome A. Mark. 1983. "The Service-Producing Sector: Some Common
Perceptions Reviewed," 
Monthly Labor Review
, Vol. 106 (April), pp. 21-24.
Mark, Jerome A. 1982. "Measuring Productivity in the Services," 
Monthly Labor Review
, Vol. 105
(June), pp. 3-8.
ŠŠŠ. 1988. "Measuring Productivity in Service Industries," in 
Technology in Services: Policies
for Growth, Trade, and Employment
, Bruce R. Guile and James Brian Quinn (eds.),
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Mincer, Jacob. 1974. 
Schooling, Experience and Earnings
, Columbia University Press, New York.
Roach, Stephen S. 1991. "Services Under Siege: The Restructuring Imperative," 
Harvard Business
Review, September-October, pp. 82-91.
Smith, Anthony D. 1972. 
The Measurement and Interpretation of Service Output Changes
, National
Economic Development Office, London.
Waldorf, William H., Kent Kunze, Lawrence S. Rosenblum, and Michael B. Tannen. 1986. "New
Measures of the Contribution of Education and Experience to U.S. Productivity Growth,"

paper presented at annual meetings of American Economic Association, Dec. 28-30, New

Orleans, La.
INTRODUCTION AND IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE
MACROECONOMIC LEVEL
51Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Impacts of Information Technology at the
Industry LevelAs discussed in 
Chapter 1
, it is difficult to generalize about the impacts of
information technology (IT) on productivity or performance in the service
sector, because the effects of using IT cannot be isolated from the effects of
other factors and because the service sector is highly heterogeneous. A better

picture of IT's impact can therefore be obtained by focusing on individual

industries. Although firms differ within a given industry, they must generally

share a common environment whose factors are relevant to their performance
Šfor example, an industry's requirements for particular kinds of workers and

skills, the quality of its labor-management relations, the presence or absence of

regulation, how capital- or labor-intensive the industry is, and the kinds of

technology applications associated with it all influence the performance of the

firms within that industry.
Likewise, an industry's environment affects the nature of the benefits that
companies can realize from use of IT. Although the dimensions on which
performance may be evaluated
Šsuch as the nature of improvements in product
quality, increases in product variety, and product innovations
Šwill therefore
vary across industries, industry context is important for understanding both how

and how much the use of IT has affected an industry's performance in providing

services. In addition, the experience of one industry may provide insights

relevant to understanding or anticipating effects in another.
To explore how industry context affects the use of IT and performance, the
committee focused on six industries: air transport, telecommunications,
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL52
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.retail and wholesale trade, health care, banking, and insurance. Together the
industries chosen accounted for about 27 percent of the gross domestic product

and 35 percent of U.S. employment in 1989; they are also proportionately much

higher users of IT than are some other industries (Tables 
2.1 and 
2.2).1 The
sectors to which some of these industries belong are relatively capital-intensive;

for example, the ratio of capital investment to value added in 1991 for
transportation and telecommunications exceeded the comparable
TABLE 2.1 Six Selected Service Industries Compared to All U.S. Industry and All
U.S. Service Industries, 1989 (figures in billions of 1982 dollars)
GPO in 1989Investment in IT
in 1989 (as % of

GPO)Value of IT
Capital Stock

in 1989GNP4117.7

GDP4087.6
All industry(manufacturing,
construction, mining, and
non-goods-producing)
3610.5128.4(3.6)513.3
Mining127.21.2(0.9)8.8
Construction179.00.7(0.3)3.2

Manufacturing929.024.3(2.6)78.0
All services (non-goods-
producing industries)
2375.3102.3(4.3)456.1
Transportation156.35.5(3.5)20.6
Communications109.417.6(16.1)124.7

Utilities136.66.3(4.6)26.0

Wholesale304.711.6(3.8)54.0
Retail412.010.6(2.6)44.8
Financial, insurance, real
estate604.033.7(5.6)123.2
Business, personal,professional services
652.316.9(2.6)62.8
Six selected serviceindustries (air transport,

telecommunications, retail
and wholesale trade, health
care, banking, insurance)
1119.762.5(5.6)291.1
Six industries as fraction of
"all services"
47%61%64%
Six industries as fraction of
"all industry"
31%49%57%
Six industries as fraction of
GDP and GNP27%SUMMARY: In 1989, six service industries (air transport, telecommunications, retail
and wholesale trade, health care, banking, insurance) accounted for 27% of GNP, 31% of
the 1989 GPO of "all industry," and 47% of the 1989 GPO of "all services." However,

they accounted for 49% of 1989 IT expenditures by "all industry" and 61% of 1989 IT
expenditures by "all services." Similarly, they accounted for 57% of the 1989 IT capital
stock value of ''all industry" and 64% of the 1989 IT capital stock value of "all services."
In addition, these six industries averaged 5.6% in their 1989 IT investment as a
percentage of GPO, while for all industries the comparable percentage was 3.6% and for

all service industries it was 4.3%.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL53
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 2.2 Snapshots of Selected Service Industries, 1981 and 1989
Air TransportTelecommunications
Retail Trade
1981GPO (billions of 1982
dollars)16.875.7286.4
Revenues (billions of
1982 dollars)45.291.8453.6
Number of employees
(millions of jobs)
0.51.116.9
Number of hours worked
(billions)0.92.427.4
Annual investment in IT
(billions of 1982 dollars)
1.021.05.1
IT capital stock (billions
of 1982 dollars)1.8125.313.2
GPO per labor-hour (1982
dollars)17.7031.9710.44
Annual IT/GPO6.2%27.8%1.8%
Annual rate of change in
GPO per labor-hour
-2.7%5.2%1.6%
1989 (1989 Value as Percent of 1981 Value)
GPO (billions of 1982
dollars)31.7(189)98.8(131)412.0(144)
Revenues (billions of
1982 dollars)66.6(147)100.6(110)628.3(138)
Number of employees
(millions of jobs)
0.7(149)0.9(82)21.2(125)
Number of hours worked
(billions)1.4(148)2.0(83)32.8(120)
Annual investment in IT
(billions of 1982 dollars)
3.0(288)13.8(66)10.6(207)
IT capital stock (billions
of 1982 dollars)9.8(543)113.7(91)44.8(340)
GPO per labor-hour (1982
dollars)22.64(128)49.97(156)12.54(120)
Annual IT/GPO9.4%(153)14.0%(50)2.6%(144)
Annual rate of change in
GPO per labor-hour
-8.0%4.0%1.2%Note: See 
Box 2.1
 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL54
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Wholesale TradeHealth Care
BankingInsurance1981GPO (billions of
1982 dollars)212.7138.164.235.4
Revenues(billions of 1982dollars)317.6204.888.766.8
Number of
employees(millions of jobs)
5.75.92.01.2
Number of hours
worked (billions)
11.410.23.92.4
Annualinvestment in IT(billions of 1982dollars)5.01.81.90.7
IT capital stock
(billions of 1982dollars)13.28.95.11.7
GPO per labor-
hour (1982
dollars)18.6413.4916.6614.76
Annual IT/GPO2.4%1.3%3.0%2.0%
Annual rate of
change in GPO
per labor-hour
4.7%-1.2%0.0%-9.0%
1989 (1989 Value as Percent of 1981 Value)
GPO (billions of
1982 dollars)304.7(143)164.4(119)71.4(111)36.7(104)
Revenues(billions of 1982dollars)400.8(126)286.6(140)99.8(112)77.5(116)
Number of
employees
(millions of jobs)
6.6(116)7.9(134)2.3(112)1.4(116)
Number of hours
worked (billions)
13.1(115)13.5(132)4.3(110)2.8(116)
Annualinvestment in IT(billions of 1982
dollars)11.6(230)3.6(204)13.8(715)6.2(856)
IT capital stock
(billions of 1982
dollars)54.0(409)15.7(177)35.1(690)17.9(1080)
GPO per labor-
hour (1982
dollars)23.30(125)12.14(90)16.80(101)13.18(89)
Annual IT/GPO3.8%(160)2.2%(171)19.3%(643)16.8%(826)
Annual rate of
change in GPOper labor-hour
2.3%-3.6%0.2%-1.1%IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL55
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL56
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ratio for durable manufacturing, while the capital expenditure per full-time
employee for transportation, communications, and financial services, insurance,

and real estate (FIRE) was larger than or comparable to that for durable

manufacturing.2The discussion of these industries was informed by a variety of sources:
the individual expertise and knowledge of committee members, interviews with

senior executives from the six industries, data drawn from federal and other

sources, and published articles and books. However, because the data available

at the industry level are limited in scope and detail, this chapter's brief vignettes
of each industry are intended in part to capture the direct and intuitive
observations of experienced industry executives and industry analysts. Given

the multidimensional nature of performance in the service industries and the

resulting difficulty of isolating the specific impact of using IT vis-
à-vis other
factors, these vignettes are largely anecdotal but suggest the important factors

that have affected overall industry performance and the scale and impact of the

use of IT in each industry.
Box 2.1 describes the origin of the data on each industry presented below.
AIR TRANSPORT
In the last two decades, the U.S. air transport industry has undergone
remarkable change, expanding its equipment inventories and facilities rapidly to

handle substantial increases in passenger volume. In 1989, it operated a fleet of

some 4000 large jet aircraft,
3 produced 433 billion revenue passenger-miles
(RPMs),4 generated revenues of $67 billion (1982 dollars), and employed about
691,000 people
5 (Table 2.3
). However, poor profitability
Šand even sometimes
net lossesŠhave characterized the industry for much of the last decade.
6The industry has also undergone considerable consolidation and today is
highly concentrated. As of September 1991, four large air carriers (America

West, Continental, Midway, and Pan American) had filed for bankruptcy
protection, and Eastern Airlines ceased operating in January 1991. Twenty-two
large carriers (out of over 200 certificated U.S. air carriers) account for 95

percent of total airline revenues for scheduled passenger operations.
7A major event in the last decade was the deregulation of the airline
industry. Beginning in the early 1980s, there was a gradual lifting of

government regulations whose effect had been to reduce the efficiency of air-
craft use and to generate incentives for the acquisition of certain kinds of
equipment and for the maintenance of routes that did not optimize the use of

resources for the country as a whole. Deregulation has allowed airlines to

employ a much more efficient "hub-and-spoke" routing system, rather than the

point-to-point routing used in a more regulated environment.
8 OtherIMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL57
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.important influences on the airline industry in the last decade have included
significant increases in fuel costs, the 1981 strike of air traffic controllers,

expensive purchases of new airplanes owing to need or to regulations calling for

greater fuel efficiency or quieter aircraft, and a recessionary economy for much

of the 1980s that drove down demand for air travel.
TABLE 2.3 Air Transport Industry
19691980198119821983GPO (billions of 1982 dollars)15.117.316.819.022.8
Revenues (billions of 1982

dollars; SIC 45
a)34.852.145.241.444.2
Output measure (billions of
RPMsc)132b254248260281
Employment (millions of jobs)0.40.50.50.40.5
Number of hours worked (billions)0.81.00.90.90.9
Annual investment in IT (billions
of 1982 dollars)0.00.71.00.91.2
IT capital stock (billions of 1982
dollars)0.01.01.82.43.2
GPO per labor-hour (1982 dollars)20.0018.1917.7020.8824.49
Annual IT/GPO0.1%3.8%6.2%4.5%5.3%
RPMc/labor-hour174
b267262285302
Annual rate of change in GPO per
labor-hourd-0.9%e-2.7%17.9%17.3%NOTE: See 
Box 2.1
 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.
a Standard Industrial Classification system code.
b 1969 figure.
Extensive deployment of IT has been necessary to help the air transport
industry deal with larger volumes of passengers and inquiries, higher operating

tempos, and more complex flight and ground operations. Indeed, the air

transport industry is a major consumer of IT, having spent $3 billion in 1989

(1982 dollars) on IT. The importance of IT is suggested, though not proven, by

the fact that in both the air-cargo and passenger-transport segments, air

transport companies prospering in the last decade have tended to be those with

strong IT systems (e.g., American Airlines, United Airlines). However, the wide

range of external influences on the industry in the last decade makes it difficult

to identify with confidence the impact of any single factor such as IT. Indeed,

some analysts assert that the benefits of IT, substantial though they
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL58
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.may be to the leaders in the airline industry, are small compared to the general
economic problems that the industry faces at present.
9198419851986198719881989GPO (billions of 1982
dollars)23.423.228.433.032.431.7
Revenues (billions of
1982 dollars; SIC 45
a)47.951.157.762.365.166.6
Output measure (billions
of RPMsc)305336367404423433
Employment (millionsof jobs)0.50.50.60.60.70.7
Number of hours
worked (billions)
1.01.11.21.21.31.4
Annual investment in IT
(billions of 1982 dollars)
1.11.53.11.71.83.0
IT capital stock (billions
of 1982 dollars)3.84.66.97.68.29.8
GPO per labor-hour
(1982 dollars)23.1521.3024.2726.7424.6022.64
Annual IT/GPO4.5%6.4%11.1%5.2%5.5%9.4%
RPMc/labor-hour302308313328321309
Annual rate of change in
GPO per labor-hour
d-5.5%-8.0%13.9%10.2%-8.0%-8.0%c RPM, revenue passenger mile.
d The compounded annual rate of change in GPO per labor-hour from 1981 to 1989 was 3.1 percent.
Labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of GPO per labor-hour.
e Average annual rate of change in GPO per labor-hour from 1969 to 1980.
In the air transport industry, IT has had an impact on both business and
operational dimensions. In the business dimension, IT has been used to improve

both the cost efficiency and quality of performance as well as to provide

services not otherwise available. Perhaps the most significant of these services

is the use of computerized reservation systems (CRSs). CRSs are a classic

example of IT use that has had a large-scale strategic impact on an industry.

Generally owned by individual airlines, these systems contain fare and route

information for both the CRS owner and other carriers, and they make it

possible for agents to book passage on any carrier in the database. CRSs have
enabled airlines to manage passenger loads and hub-and-spoke routings that
would otherwise have been extremely cumbersome and time consuming
Šifpossible at allŠunder less automated conditions.
Two CRSs, SABRE (American Airlines) and APOLLO (United Airlines),
dominate the industry: in 1981, nearly 80 percent of travel agencies
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL59
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.with connections to CRSs were tied to one or both of these systems.
10 Today,
virtually all airline bookings are made through one of four airline-owned

CRSs.11 Carriers without their own CRSs pay CRS owners to have their flights
and fares listed, thereby providing CRS owners with additional revenue.
12Initially, CRSs simply replaced manual reservation systems and did not
communicate either with the systems of other companies or with other

departments within the owning company. However, by making relevant

information about most scheduled flights available in a single database,
13 CRSs
now enable passengers to use independent travel agents as well as agents from
each participating airline as one-stop points of contact to gather schedule and
fare information on all carriers providing the desired service and to make

complete trip reservations, rather than having to call individual airlines directly.

In the future, it will be common for CRSs to provide gateways to other non-

airline systems through which hotel reservations and automobile rentals can be

obtained.CRSs have played an important role in facilitating the interlinkage of
major and regional carriers through a process known as cross-coding. Regional

carriers operate in specialized markets, whereas major carriers provide what

could be called "trunk" service on major routes. Flying between two small

airports on opposite ends of the country usually requires coordination of flights

operated by a major carrier and by smaller regional carriers; from listing its
flights on CRSs owned by major airlines, it is a relatively small step for a
regional carrier to affiliate formally with a major carrier to provide a higher

degree of operational integration.
CRSs have enabled implementation of a fare structure that can be very
finely tuned to maximize revenues through yield management,
14 and they have
provided a mechanism for the rapid implementation of price changes and for

monitoring the prices of competitors. Moreover, CRS-based IT figures

prominently in marketing mechanisms that have flourished since deregulation

(e.g., incentives and bonuses for travel agents) and indeed in the growth of the
travel industry itself. For example, CRSs have been linked to "frequent-flyer"
databases that have themselves been made operationally feasible by IT.
The potential drawback of CRSs is their ability to communicate the fares
of one carrier very quickly to other carriers. As of this writing, the U.S.

Department of Justice (DOJ) has alleged that carriers participating in various

CRSs use postings of future fare changes to fix prices at artificially high levels.

For example, the DOJ suit alleges that one airline announced on January 15 a

price increase to take effect on February 1, and that other airlines noticed the

posting and raised prices upward accordingly. In effect, CRSs are alleged to
have replaced face-to-face meetings to set prices that are illegal under antitrust
laws. In response, the airlines have argued that
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL60
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.they provide notices of future price changes for the benefit of consumers, who
may wish to know when price increases are to take effect. The DOJ is seeking

to enjoin the airlines from posting changes that will occur in the future.
15The impact of IT on the air transport industry's operations has also been
quite significant. For example, IT-based systems connected to CRSs keep track

of flight arrivals and departures, and they manage the many changes in planned

schedules that are inherent in complex planning operations. Some airplane

maintenance crews make use of knowledge-based "maintenance advisors" that

guide mechanics through certain repairs. Inventories of spare parts are
maintained and supplies are replenished via IT-based systems,
16 and airline
food services are also being automated.
17Computer-based flight simulators are used extensively to train pilots for
reasons of cost and safety. An hour in a flight simulator costs far less than an

hour of actual flight (hundreds of dollars vs. thousands of dollars), thereby

reducing fixed costs associated with crew training. In addition, emergency

situations can be simulated and pilot responses rehearsed with no real danger to

life or to an airplane, enabling the pilot to obtain experience and familiarity with

situations that occur only rarely in actual flight. Today's simulators are so good
that pilots for some commercial airplanes can be certified entirely on the basis
of their experience in flight simulators.
18Flight safety is critically dependent on IT. Highly automated air traffic
control systems manage thousands of en route flights. Weather
Šan important
influence on safety and flight schedules
Šis monitored and predicted using IT-
based systems. In-flight communications and navigation depend on state-of-the-

art IT.
19 Weight, and therefore fuel costs, are reduced by on-board IT that
monitors every aspect of an airplane's flight performance. On-board computers

complement pilots' abilities in flying airliners, thus enhancing safety.
20IT is becoming increasingly important to airplane design, since computer-
aided design and engineering save time and design effort and reduce

construction costs.
21 In some cases, airframe designs stored in digital form are
tested in simulated wind tunnels, and high-fidelity results can be obtained

without a single model having to be built.
The logistics planning requirements of major airlines managing hundreds
of flights per day are formidable, especially with hub-and-spoke routing. Today,

centrally located dispatchers that previously operated out of three or four

locations use IT-based systems to assist pilots with crew scheduling, flight

plans, and fuel-load and weather-change calculations, an approach resulting in

significant improvements in efficiency.
22 (One estimate suggests that Delta
Airlines was able to reduce the amount of unproductive crew time from 11
percent to 8 percent, thereby saving $14 million per year;
23 United Airlines
saved $6 million per year by installing, at a cost of
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL61
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.$500,000, a computer-based planning system for scheduling shift work.
24)Working with expert systems that take on-line variables from local sites, such

as the number of bags loaded onto a plane, crew schedulers and load planners

are able to balance loads and to communicate directly with pilots. Airlines also

use expert systems to generate least-cost routings of flights.
The benefits of using IT to assist with operations are relatively easy to
demonstrate quantitatively: for example, computer-assisted route planning

provides for more optimal use of fuel and assignment of crews than would

manual planning. However, specific financial bottom-line benefits of using IT

are more difficult to quantify. A vice president of a major airline noted,
We want to convert our unintelligent workstations to intelligent ones because
we've developed a number of programs that we believe are going to be
significant in terms of their support and enhancement of customer service
activities and other types of activities at the airports. Though the benefits are
there, we cannot quantify them specifically. We're doing this to enhance the

overall environment for the passenger.
U.S. air transport companies have consistently led the worldwide industry
in major innovations such as customer reservation systems, overnight package

handling, special customer services (e.g., frequent-flyer programs and package

tracking), and differential pricing systems to maintain load factors. Well-
automated major U.S. airlines have maintained their relative competitiveness
with other international carriers and have extended their penetration of U.S. and

foreign markets. Indeed, none of the several senior executives from major

airlines interviewed by the committee believed they could operate without

extensive IT systems, and all pointed to important cost and quality

improvements enabled by IT. Given the relatively poor financial performance

of the industry as a whole,
25 the ability to make necessary investments in IT
may have been an important element in the survival of current industry leaders.
In the future, IT may be used by the airline industry to create a variety of
additional benefits. For example, airport operations and procedures could be

greatly streamlined if the current manual system of check-in were automated to

link CRSs and airport systems.
26 In-flight time could be used to entertain
travelers or to help them be more productive; a number of pilot projects to
provide relevant services have been launched or planned.
27 IT could also be
used in customized, proactive marketing
Šfor example, potential customers
could be alerted to the existence of inexpensive fares.
TELECOMMUNICATIONSOver the last decade, the telecommunications industry has undergone
dramatic structural change. It has also been highly successful in financial
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL62
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.terms, although whether this success is despite or because of these changes is
open to debate. Revenues and contributions to the gross domestic product have

grown substantially for telecommunications (
Table 2.4
), and the industry's rate
of growth in productivity of 4.8 percent per year over the period from 1979 to

1989 exceeds that of manufacturing (3.3 percent per year), as indicated in

Table 1.1
 in 
Chapter 1
. In 1990, the telecommunications industry supported
over 136 million access lines.
28 Although data on total minutes of local calls are
not available, the Federal Communications Commission reports that 308 billion

minutes in interstate calls were connected in 1990 through these access lines.
29Two major factors have shaped contemporary telecommunications: (1)
deregulation, in combination with the divestiture of AT&T, and (2) advances in

technology, with concomitant reductions in cost and changes in product

offerings. The divestiture of AT&T and the consequent restructuring of the

regulatory environment completely changed the character of the domestic

telecommunications industry. Prior to December 1983, the industry operated as
a regulated monopoly. However, in August 1982 the courts approved a consent
decree that required divestiture of AT&T intra-LATA service (i.e., service

within local calling areas) to seven regional holding companies by January 1,

1984. This action created more direct competition in inter-LATA (long-

distance) services and equipment. The combination of the breakup of the Bell

system, deregulation, and the proliferation of new, technology-based businesses

has fragmented the telecommunications industry; the result has been the

emergence of about a half-dozen major long-distance/interexchange carriers

such as AT&T, MCI, and U.S. Sprint, and several hundred smaller carriers

operating via COMSAT and leased private lines.
Such competition, combined with federally regulated charges for local
access, has driven long-distance calling prices down and volume up, and much

of the growth in the telephone industry in the last decade has been associated

with the provision of long-distance services. Moreover, the separation of long-

distance service from local carriers has forced local carriers to seek additional
sources of revenue, and they have responded to these pressures by using IT to
improve operations (e.g., collection of revenues from unbilled calls
30) and to
provide new services (e.g., Caller ID) to supplement traditional local telephone

service (''plain old" telephone service). Some have argued that today's

regulatory environment, which mandates equal charges for local access to all

long-distance providers and thus has reduced pricing differentials among

providers, has placed an increased emphasis on quality of service and

reliability. However, the growth in the number of services that are critically

dependent on telecommunications and the experience of several major and

highly publicized telecommunications outages have raised the question of

whether current levels of reliability are as high as those that existed before the

breakup of AT&T.
31IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL63
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 2.4 Telecommunications
19691980198119821983GPO (billions of 1982 dollars)33.271.475.777.383.2
Revenues (billions of 1982
dollars; (SIC 481,2,9
a)36.387.791.892.892.3
Minutes of calls (billions)1,7331,7871,8531,923
Employment (millions of jobs)0.91.11.11.11.0
Number of hours worked (billions)1.92.32.42.32.1

Annual investment in IT (billions
of 1982 dollars)12.722.721.017.314.3
IT capital stock (billions of 1982
dollars)54.1115.8125.3126.5124.6
GPO per labor-hour (1982 dollars)17.1730.4031.9733.0239.49
Annual IT/GPO38.2%31.8%27.8%22.3%17.2%

Annual rate of change in GPO
per labor-hour
b5.3%5.2%3.3%19.6%
Minutes of calls per labor-hour
737.8754.6791.5912.7NOTE: See 
Box 2.1
 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.
The growth of telecommunications parallels advances in information
technology, because the technological substrate of telecommunications is

wholly dependent on IT. The telecommunications industry's investments in IT

have been very large, amounting to $12 billion to $15 billion per year in the late

1980s (1982 dollars), and those figures are for hardware only; they do not

include the substantial investments in software associated with the expansion

and upgrading of telecommunications networks and services. Meanwhile,

during the 1980s the capabilities of underlying microelectronic technologies for

telecommunications were improving at average rates of 40 to 50 percent per

year.Over the years, major innovations have improved underlying service and
hardware technology, including satellite, cellular, and fiber-optic

communication systems. Historically, applications of IT have driven changes in

long-distance telephone service, beginning with the introduction of direct

dialing between 1950 and 1952. Since then, the telephone industry has

witnessed the introduction of computer-based toll operator assistance systems,
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL64
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.automatic credit card validation and billing, automated directory assistance
systems, automatic coin recognition in pay-telephone systems, and, recently,

voice-recognition systems that build on the digitization of network and voice-

recognition technology.
32 Such innovations have reduced the amount of labor
required to provide telecommunications services
33 and have facilitated a gradual
shift in employment toward executive and staff occupations. There has also
been ongoing progress relating to encoding, processing, and transmitting
messages (e.g., voice and video compression), all of which provide for more

efficient use of telecommunications facilities.
198419851986198719881989GPO (billions of
1982 dollars)80.881.785.093.297.898.8
Revenues (billions of
1982 dollars; (SIC
481,2,9a)89.291.591.192.898.4100.6
Minutes of calls
(billions)2,0452,1452,2072,2672,3852,460
Employment(millions of jobs)
1.01.00.91.00.90.9
Number of hours
worked (billions)
2.12.12.02.02.02.0
Annual investment in
IT (billions of 1982
dollars)13.815.916.915.913.913.8
IT capital stock
(billions of 1982dollars)122.0121.2121.1119.9116.7113.7
GPO per labor-hour
(1982 dollars)37.9339.3542.4245.9848.0649.97
Annual IT/GPO17.1%19.4%19.9%17.1%14.2%14.0%
Annual rate of change
in GPO per labor-
hourb-3.9%3.7%7.8%8.4%4.5%4.0%
Minutes of calls per
labor-hour960.110331101.31118.411721244.3a Standard Industrial Classification system code.
b The compounded annual rate of change in GPO per labor-hour from 1981 to 1989 was 5.7 percent.
Labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of GPO per labor-hour.
A substantial amount of IT is used to support the people operating and
managing the network. Operations support systems monitor traffic as well as

the health and condition of facilities and switches, provide telemetry, detect

faults, and provide alerts. Databases record what is in the network and how it is

hooked up. Operations support systems help in keeping track of circuits and

reconfiguring them. IT-based systems are used to collect vast amounts of data

from multiple sources to support rate filing and network
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL65
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.planning. Today's use of test equipment often incorporates expert-system
technology in applications that automatically signal when maintenance is

necessary and in techniques for optimizing network routing, especially under

emergency conditions.
Managing the huge volumes of billing data that are generated in providing
telecommunications services would not be possible without sophisticated IT

systems. Billing is complex because companies must continuously record each

use of every service, and then rate it and price it based on multiple variables

(distance, time, specific service, quality of service, pricing plans, and so on).
For this reason, automated billing systems are built directly into central
switches, and most billing systems are therefore relatively inflexible.
Enhancements to billing systems have transformed them from being
simply support systems that emphasize rates, prices, invoicing, and billing, to

being strategic systems that emphasize accuracy, speed, calling patterns, and

other attributes of customer service. For example, MCI developed a new
marketing program by using IT for sophisticated billing and data processing:
Friends and Family involves accurate monthly tracking of customers and calling

circles (designated groups of people who call each other) across their use of

various telecommunications services. Other billing system enhancements have

given rise to customer billing and usage management tools that have historically

been focused on corporate users. For example, MCI has a relatively new

product, Service Without Paper, that provides corporate telecommunications

managers with billing and usage data on optical disk.
Telephone credit cards (calling cards) were made possible by using IT,
34and they represent an area of current innovation. Calling cards serve as
marketing tools, promoting easy access to products and services, and they are

linked with proliferating services: electronic message delivery, stock quotations
and weather forecasts, language interpretation, speed dialing, and
teleconferencing. Long-distance carriers are now developing voice-recognition

systems that can substitute for operators in handling routine interactive

telephone transactions (e.g., collect calls). In the future, enhanced calling cards

may be indistinguishable from automated teller machine cards.
35Deregulation and technological advances have both contributed to shifts in
the mix of products produced by the telecommunications industry. Falling

prices for long-distance calls have contributed to a shift in the mix of local to

long-distance calls. Telecommunications companies have evolved from
defining the service they offer exclusively in terms of providing facilities to
transmit the electrical impulses representing voices or data to redefining

themselves as enterprises that help customers collect, process, and distribute

data. More specifically, using IT, telecommunications companies provide more

information to customers on the way infrastructure is used
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL66
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(e.g., billing and network management services), new information-based modes
of access to information (virtual private networks, calling cards), and gateways

to information services, if not information services themselves. Thus there is a

blurring of the traditional categories of telecommunications and information

processing, as well as a convergence of public and private networking.
36In recent years, much of the capital investment in the telecommunications
industry has been driven by the enhancement of the communications

infrastructures installed by both regional and national carriers. Today, the

infrastructure of modern telecommunications makes increasing use of broad-

band transmission and digital switching.
Compared to analog transmissions, digitized communications improve
signal fidelity and, through signal processing, use available bandwidth more

efficiently. Digitized communications also facilitate data transmission (although

voice signals are increasingly digitized), thereby changing the mix of voice and

data traffic, and enable as well the use of companion overlay networks for

network management functions (e.g., call setup) and for new services (e.g.,

automatic number identification
ŠBox 2.2). The entire AT&T interchange
network is digital today, as are about 40 to 50 percent of central office
switching facilities in local exchanges.
37Broad-band transmission is associated primarily with optical fiber cable,
which offers huge gains in capacity over that provided by copper cable. The

bandwidth provided by fiber will greatly exceed what is needed to handle the

expected traffic volume upon installation and will thus be able to accommodate

increased traffic or new services. (At the same time, the prospect of "dark fiber"

or unused capacity contributes to the controversy over how fast to increase

network bandwidth.)Thanks in part to deregulation, new telephone services are now introduced
much more rapidly than before. IT
Šin particular, programmable digital
switchesŠhas been integral to the rapid development of such innovative
services as call waiting, caller identification, and call forwarding. By extending

the traditional notion of plain old telephone service, such services increase the

number of options for local customers and generate substantial revenue for local

telephone companies today.
IT has also been used in the telecommunications industry to enhance and
improve corporate image and the quality of customer service, even when these

considerations do not relate directly to calling volume. MCI's Richard

Liebhaber described a $35 million investment to provide the capability for

customer service representatives to display customer invoices and

correspondence on graphics terminals, saying, "It is an opportunity to improve
the image, the feel, the touch of MCI. Intuitively, I would tell you it's going to
provide market share, customer satisfaction, bottom-line. I can't prove it. I'm not

going to waste my time trying."
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL67
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 2.2 APPLICATIONS FOR AUTOMATIC NUMBER
IDENTIFICATIONAutomatic Number Identification (ANI) is a service usually (though not
always) provided through an integrated services digital network (ISDN)

that enables the telephone number of the calling party to be transmitted
along with the signal that carries the call itself.
Telemarketing organizations initially used ANI to identify callers; the
calling number would trigger a database inquiry, enabling the marketer to
identify the caller and his or her previous history. However, many callers
were disconcerted by the fact that their identities were known to the
marketer without their providing any identification.
New applications of ANI are being used to provide different levels of
service. For example, if a caller is known from previous interactions to

speak Spanish, ANI can be used to route calls from that party to Spanish-
speaking operators. Credit card holders can be routed to different service
staffs depending on the type of card they hold. Equipment service
organizations can route calls to the appropriate staffs based on databases
that coordinate telephone numbers with equipment present at given sites.
SOURCE: Sweeney, Terry. 1993. "Carriers, Users Discover New
Applications for Automatic Number ID," 
Communications Week
, January4, p. 27.
Future advances in telecommunications are likely to include multimedia
transmission (e.g., combined two-way video and audio) made possible with the

wide availability of digital networks, the assignment of telephone numbers to

individuals rather than locations (resulting in a single telephone number for an

individual regardless of where he or she is), and automatic translation services

(giving, e.g., an American and a Japanese businessperson the opportunity to

converse through a telephone, but both in their native tongues). Broad-band

networking technologies supporting transmission speeds in excess of 45

megabits per second will be deployed widely in the next decade; by contrast,
the technology that supports most home telephones today is limited to
transmission speeds measured in tens of kilobits per second. Broad-band

networking technologies will require substantial deployment of fiber optics to

end users (initially commercial ones). Wireless communications (cellular

telephone, personal communications services) is a market in which considerable

growth is expected (subject to availability of spectrum bandwidth). Advanced

intelligent network technology is expected to continue facilitating the

development of additional customized communications services.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL68
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Implementing these advances is likely to have a substantial impact both on
users and providers of telecommunications technology. Using sophisticated

telecommunications technology most effectively will most probably require

substantial learning of new skills comparable to the new skills demanded of

those using increasingly powerful software packages on personal computers. As

importantly, sophisticated telecommunications technology will depend
increasingly on the capability to develop complex software, a task that routinely
pushes the state of the art of current knowledge in computer science and

software engineering.While both financial performance and growth in productivity in the
telecommunications industry have been strong, the benefits of technological

innovation and investments have sometimes appeared in other segments of the

economy. Private companies, whether manufacturing or service firms, may

realize improvements in productivity from the installation of their own switches

and terminal equipment, but these improvements are not reflected in the data for
public providers of communications services. Nonregulated companies outside
the industry have been able to install their own wide-area networks and

"cherrypick" profitable service opportunities by selling such systems and

services to others. Returns from these activities show up in sellers' and users'

books of account, rather than those of telecommunication providers. There is a

substantial cross-substitution between the "product" and "service" components

of the telecommunications field and an increasing merging of the

telecommunications business between equipment manufacturers and service

providers as currently defined.
RETAIL AND WHOLESALE TRADE
The retail and wholesale trade industries are responsible for the ordering,
collection, distribution, and sale of goods. Both industries have been growing.

Retail revenues increased from $447 billion in 1980 to $628 billion in 1989

(1982 dollars; 
Table 2.5
). Wholesale revenues grew from $310 billion in 1980
to $401 billion in 1989 (1982 dollars; 
Table 2.6
). For wholesale and retail trade
taken together, the 1989 investment in IT in constant dollars was 2.6 times the
amount invested in IT in 1980.
The retail industry consists of a broad collection of segments with rather
different businesses (department stores, restaurants, specialty stores, grocery

stores, and so on) that vary greatly in terms of the categories of the items they

sell, the range of prices of the items, the market size for the items, and profit

margins. Retail trade is dominated by relatively few, large, national or regional
chain operations specializing in merchandise trade, food, and pharmaceuticals.
38A much larger number of smaller "mom-and-pop" retail operations are locally
based; such operations are relatively easy to start (compared to ventures in

telecommunications or air transport) because
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL69
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.their requirements for capital and technology infrastructure are relatively small.
For example, a means for displaying merchandise is often the minimum capital

requirement, a task that can in some cases be accomplished by publishing a

catalog.TABLE 2.5 Retail Trade
19691980198119821983GPO (billions of 1982 dollars)212.7281.7286.4287.5307.8
Revenues (billions of 1982 dollars;
SIC 52-59
a)326.5446.5453.6459.9485.4
Employment (millions of jobs)12.316.816.916.917.4
Number of hours worked (billions)22.927.427.427.227.8
Annual investment in IT (billions of

1982 dollars)0.14.65.15.87.0
IT capital stock (billions of 1982
dollars)0.410.013.216.620.7
GPO per labor-hour (1982 dollars)9.3110.2810.4410.5611.06
Annual IT/GPO0.1%1.6%1.8%2.0%2.3%
Annual rate of change in GPO per
labor-hourb0.9%1.6%1.2%4.7%NOTE: See 
Box 2.1
 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.
Wholesalers provide all activities involved in selling goods or services to
those who buy for resale or business use. They exist as an industry because they

provide efficiencies that manufacturers often are unable to support themselves.
39Given the heterogeneity of the products sold by retailers and wholesalers,
aggregate trade output is best measured in terms of financial value. (Output

measures for trade are discussed in greater detail in Appendixes B and C.)

However, measured productivity varies greatly among such different elements
of the retail trade industry as supermarkets and other food stores, restaurants,
apparel and accessory stores, new-car dealers, gas stations, home furnishings

and equipment stores, and drug stores.
Moreover, financial measures do not necessarily capture other important
elements of performance. For example, the 1980s saw improvement in

measures of quality such as the variety of products, geographic dispersion,
demographic specialization within stores, fashion responsiveness, and hours
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL70
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.open. Significant increases in the diversity of their products, the growth of chain
store branches, and the proliferation of small specialty chains may have masked

other elements of improvements in productivity in large chain operations. In

addition, because of "overstoring" and competitive pressures, margins at both

retail and wholesale levels dropped during the 1980s, despite major

improvements in operational performance enabled by new IT capabilities.
198419851986198719881989GPO (billions of 1982
dollars)334.0354.4377.5371.6399.2412.0
Revenues (billions of 1982
dollars; SIC 52-59
a)521.7549.5574.9595.6623.5628.3
Employment (millions of
jobs)18.318.919.520.120.621.2
Number of hours worked
(billions)29.329.930.631.532.232.8
Annual investment in IT
(billions of 1982 dollars)
8.98.59.08.010.510.6
IT capital stock (billions of
1982 dollars)25.930.234.236.841.144.8
GPO per labor-hour (1982
dollars)11.4011.8612.3511.7912.3912.54
Annual IT/GPO2.7%2.4%2.4%2.1%2.6%2.6%
Annual rate of change in

GPO per labor-hour
b3.1%4.0%4.2%-4.5%5.1%1.2%a Standard Industrial Classification system code.
b The compounded annual rate of change in GPO per labor-hour from 1981 to 1989 was 2.3 percent.
Labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of GPO per labor-hour.
Retail and wholesale enterprises seek faster receipt of goods, lower
inventories and more inventory turns per year,
40 a better fit between goods
offered and goods bought, and reduced labor costs. In retailing, considerable

effort is made to attract customers to retail establishments, because the marginal
cost of providing service to a new customer is relatively low.
In retailing, investments in IT increased from $4.6 billion in 1980 to $10.6
billion in 1989 (1982 dollars; 
Table 2.5
). In wholesaling, investments in IT
approximately tripled in the 1980s, from $4 billion in 1980 to $11.6 billion in

1989 (1982 dollars; 
Table 2.6
). The vast bulk of these expenditures was made
by large establishments, which now depend on IT for planning and control of
inventories, merchandising, and logistics management. By contrast, smaller
retailers use relatively little IT, except in
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL71
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.catalog sales operations. IT has contributed to the growth observed in these two
industries and also to the growing competition between them: large retail chains

now use IT to provide many of the services wholesalers used to provide, and

wholesalers have linked "downstream" to tie retail customers together into

voluntary chains.
TABLE 2.6 Wholesale Trade
19691980198119821983GPO (billions of 1982 dollars)149.0200.1212.7219.0222.2
Revenues (billions of 1982 dollars;

SIC 50,1
a)210.0310.3317.6318.8315.4
Employment (millions of jobs)4.25.65.75.65.6
Number of hours worked (billions)8.811.211.411.211.3
Annual investment in IT (billions of
1982 dollars)0.34.05.05.910.4
IT capital stock (billions of 1982
dollars)0.810.413.216.523.2
GPO per labor-hour (1982 dollars)16.9717.8118.6419.6219.70
Annual IT/GPO0.2%2.0%2.4%2.7%4.7%

Annual rate of change in GPO per

labor-hourb0.4%4.7%5.3%0.4%NOTE: See 
Box 2.1
 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.
IT has become critically important to the retail and wholesale trade
industries as a competitive tool; instead of merely providing information at

greater speeds, IT can be used to help manage information that can then be

coupled with strategic planning to optimize the efficiency of a business. Indeed,

the National Retail Federation credits the use of IT with helping to cushion the

impact of the recent recession: "Technology helped to cushion the blow. Many
retailers had better information about their sales and inventories than in the last
recession and were thus able to more selectively promote merchandise."
41 By
enabling better and faster matching of inventories and customer needs, IT can

decrease the need for retail markdowns, a major cost in retailing.
In the 1980s, wholesalers often installed direct links to suppliers through
electronic data interchange and support systems for retailers to deal with stock

management, merchandising, and price marking. Wholesalers for
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL72
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.foods, pharmaceuticals, and hospital supplies placed computerized ordering
systems directly on customers' premises to great effect. These investments

tended to shift shares of the market among wholesalers (or between wholesalers

and retailers) rather than increase the total volume of products, so that benefits

were frequently not captured in measures of output. Although volume grew

during the 1980s without proportionate increases in employment, competitive
pressures kept wholesalers from realizing significant gains in profitability. The
number of products and the complexity of services offered by wholesalers

expanded enormously during this period. Consequently, the data on profits

suggest that wholesalers were passing benefits from their investments in IT

through to their customers and suppliers.
198419851986198719881989GPO (billions of 1982
dollars)254.9267.1284.7284.3290.6304.7
Revenues (billions of 1982
dollars; SIC 50,1
a)347.2362.2371.8373.4386.9400.8
Employment (millions of
jobs)5.96.16.16.26.46.6
Number of hours worked
(billions)11.912.112.212.312.813.1
Annual investment in IT
(billions of 1982 dollars)
13.912.313.79.612.611.6
IT capital stock (billions of
1982 dollars)32.338.845.547.651.754.0
GPO per labor-hour (1982
dollars)21.4522.0023.4023.0522.7823.30
Annual IT/GPO5.5%4.6%4.8%3.4%4.3%3.8%
Annual rate of change in
GPO per labor-hour
b8.9%2.6%6.4%-1.5%-1.2%2.3%a Standard Industrial Classification system code.
b The compounded annual rate of change in GPO per labor-hour from 1981 to 1989 was 2.8 percent.
Labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of GPO per labor-hour.
A current trend is for large retailers to develop their own direct
connections to suppliers and manufacturers; both Kmart and Wal-Mart have

direct links to over 2000 vendors. It is an enabling element of such connections.

In one case, point-of-sale data from the retailer have been used to adjust the mix

of sizes of a manufactured product based on how frequently various sizes are
sold.42The fact that the trade industries are very labor-intensive has led to interest
in technologies and processes that reduce labor costs. For example, a top
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL73
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.executive of a major supermarket chain noted that ''scanning [has] had the
highest impact of any technological advancement from IT in this business

because of its improvement on productivity at the front end and through

improved [e.g., faster] checkout and price removal, taking the prices off the

products and not having to do price changes." Similarly, retailers have used IT

to improve labor scheduling and to minimize costs.
Scanning systems are used to read a product's universal pricing code label
at the cash register, look up the product's price and the applicable tax, and

record this information at the register as part of the transaction. Thus price

changes can be recorded in a central database at the store rather than on each

item or on the shelves. Moreover, the cashier is freed from having to enter

prices on the register manually. Both attributes can improve accuracy and
reduce requirements for personnel; they also change the mix of skills required
of cashiers. In addition, data made available at the point of sale facilitate

accurate analysis of what gets sold, when, and, sometimes, to whom, while

faster access to information facilitates better ordering, marketing, and

merchandising; improved management of inventory; and improved scheduling

of personnel. Communications systems that link point-of-sale systems in stores

to headquarters allow daily and even hourly analysis of sales and trends. A

major benefit can be better insights into what sells well and poorly, thus

minimizing overstocking and deep discounting.
In some cases, point-of-sale systems (whether or not using scanners) have
been tied to inventory control systems. Such systems are often used to link retail

stores and wholesale vendors through electronic data interchange systems and

allow nearly paperless and highly automatic ordering. In some instances, these

systems allow orders to be shipped from wholesalers directly to retail stores,

bypassing warehouses.
The large-scale deployment of point-of-sale systems and their integration
into centralized ordering and inventory control networks have been important

elements in the expansion of the giants in the retail industry. For example, by

using standardized ordering practices and inventory control procedures and

drawing on the expertise of the entire corporation regarding sales and

operations techniques, a new branch of a retailer like McDonalds can be opened
more economically than a store of comparable size that lacks an existing
support infrastructure. One result of this trend has been a division in the number

of companies as a function of size
Šthe retail industry now consists primarily of
a handful of giants and a plethora of small institutions with one or a few stores

under their control.
IT has been used effectively in specialized trade applications. In furniture
retailing, video catalogs are being used to show a large variety of fabrics and to

aid in room planning, special orders, and follow-up, allowing the customer to

more easily visualize and compare products. Restaurants today often use IT to

perform location and layout analyses; manage recipes
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL74
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and menus; track supplies, markets, and costs; and handle general ledger
accounting (accounts receivable and payable, payroll accounting and labor

scheduling, and financial reporting). Supermarkets are using IT to generate

cents-off coupons at the point of sale (i.e., at the cash register) that are

customized to a particular consumer's shopping patterns.
43In other cases, IT is applied across functional activities. An example is the
use of a computer-aided design (CAD) system in the general merchandise

segment. Without CAD, several individuals with three separate specialties are

needed to design floor plans, determine shelving requirements, and designate

specific items to be placed in exact locations. Today, through the combined use

of technology, historical data, and projections, individual functions can be

reengineered into one process to best achieve the final goal of shelf-space
management. IT is also used to support buyers in making decisions about the
mix of products for individual stores and to determine optimal item-to-store

allocations.IT can be used to extend the activities of a business. A retail store may sell
to other organizations the customer information captured in its marketing

database. Telemarketing, which first relied on telephones and now involves

combinations of telephones and computer systems, is wholly dependent on IT

for collecting information on existing customers and new prospects, for

disseminating information through promotional efforts, and for conducting
various other sales-related activities. In addition, computer systems are used
throughout the telemarketing process, for sorting, merging, and purging lists of

prospective customers; distributing leads to agents; preparing for calls; dialing

contacts; delivering sales presentations; referencing information; scheduling the

next contact; recording contact information; carrying out the fulfillment

process; and management reporting.
44A most promising future application of IT is its use to track the number of
people entering a store, an approach pioneered by Kmart. At present, few stores

can count how many people pass through its doors; measures of success (e.g.,

for sales and advertising) derive from measures of sales volume (number of

purchases). Yet the conversion of potential customers (those who visit the store)

into actual customers (those who make a purchase) is a critical but poorly
understood element of the retail business, and a small upward change in
conversion ratios could have a dramatic effect on sales volume. Kmart believes

that the installation of IT to count customers will enable managers to determine

conversion ratios with unprecedented accuracy and will guide them in their

improvement.HEALTH CAREIn recent years, public concern over the health care industry has reached
unprecedented levels. The industry provides a huge volume of service:
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL75
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 2.7 Health Care
19691980198119821983Health services GPO (billions of
1982 dollars)a73.4133.8138.1142.0143.7
National health expenditures (GPO,
SIC 80,
b estimated billions of 1982
dollars)an/a309.6321.4326.1330.1
Revenues (billions of 1982 dollars;
SIC 80
b)120.1194.5204.8213.6223.2
Employment (millions of jobs)3.25.75.96.26.3
Number of hours worked (billions)5.6
c9.810.210.710.8
Annual investment in IT (billions of
1982 dollars)0.91.91.81.52.8
IT capital stock (billions of 1982
dollars)3.38.68.98.910.0
GPO per labor-hour (1982 dollars)13.0113.6413.4913.2713.25
Annual IT/GPO1.2%1.4%1.3%1.1%2.0%

Annual rate of change in GPO per
labor-hourd0.4%-1.2%-1.6%-0.2%NOTE: See 
Box 2.1
 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.
a GPO figures differ substantially from figures often reported as "national health expenditures" but
are presented for the sake of consistency with other industries. National health expenditures are the

most comprehensive measure, including both public and private spending on health care. The

national health expenditure (NHE) figures presented in constant 1982 dollars are 
estimated on the
basis of NHE figures in current dollars widely available in various publications. Current-dollar NHE
figures are deflated by a multiplicative factor that is the ratio of the GPO for health services for a

given year in 1982 dollars divided by the same quantity in current dollars for that year.
Americans made 1.3 billion visits to physicians for ambulatory care and 31
million visits to hospitals in 1988.
45 The health care industry absorbs a large
and increasing percentage of the income of workers in all sectors: the private

health care industry generated $120 billion in revenues in 1969 and $287 billion

in 1989 (1982 dollars; 
Table 2.7
).46 It is also a large employer that in 1989
provided 7.9 million jobs. 
Table 2.7
 describes the evolution of the health care
industry over the last decade.
A key element of the U.S. health care system is the massive presence of
third-party payers, both private and government, that pay for most or all of the

health care received by individuals. A large number of third parties obtain the

resources to pay for these services from some combination of the individual and

the employer for whom the individual works, or through taxes levied on the

population at large.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL76
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198419851986198719881989Health services GPO
(billions of 1982 dollars)
a145.0148.6150.5158.0161.1164.4
National healthexpenditures (GPO, SIC
80,b estimated billions of1982 dollars)a334.3340.2341.7345.3351.4362.6
Revenues (billions of
1982 dollars; SIC 80
b)230.6239.8252.8266.0279.2286.6
Employment (millions of
jobs)6.56.66.97.27.57.9
Number of hours worked
(billions)11.111.411.712.212.813.5
Annual investment in IT
(billions of 1982 dollars)
2.82.73.03.13.53.6
IT capital stock (billions
of 1982 dollars)11.111.812.713.614.715.7
GPO per labor-hour
(1982 dollars)13.0813.0712.8512.9712.5912.14
Annual IT/GPO2.0%1.8%2.0%2.0%2.2%2.2%
Annual rate of change in
GPO per labor-hour
d-1.3%-0.1%-1.7%0.9%-2.9%-3.6%b Standard Industrial Classification system code.
c Health care hours worked in 1969 are extrapolated from 1979 ratio of jobs to hours worked.
d The compounded annual rate of change in GPO per labor-hour from 1981 to 1989 was -1.3
percent. Labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of GPO per labor-hour.
Rising health care costs have been attributed to many different causes,
including the prescribing of newer, more complex, and more costly medical

procedures with only marginally better clinical outcomes; a litigious climate

that encourages the practice of defensive medicine; the transformation of the

underpaid and partly volunteer nursing force of the 1960s and early 1970s into

the more professional hospital and nursing staffs of the 1980s; third-party

payment of the medical expenses of large numbers of patients who are therefore

not motivated to seek lower-cost care; and an aging population that can be

expected to incur higher medical costs. These factors suggest that output

measured by health care expenditures is problematic at best.
The physical output of the health care system is also notoriously difficult
to measure. For example, using treatment outcomes as a measure in
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL77
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.individual cases is complicated by the fact that outcomes depend on factors
other than the treatments provided, such as preadmission health of the patient.

Measures of public health, for example, incidences of disease, are complicated

by external factors such as the increasing medical needs of an aging population.

Issues such as unequal access to health care further compound the difficulties of

measurement. Another key issue is measuring the quality of care that patients
receive.Against this backdrop, technology, including IT, has had an undeniable
impact on the success with which many medical problems are treated, e.g.,

cancer as treated with computer-controlled beams of radiation. IT is today an

integral part of diagnosis and therapy. Microelectronics and embedded

computing are essential parts of digital thermometers and sphygmomanometers;
high-speed computing is at the heart of computerized tomography scanning and
magnetic resonance imaging. Laboratory tests are increasingly automated, as

computer-based instrumentation is used to take readings with consistency,

reliability, and speed equal to or greater than that of human technicians.

Monitoring of the vital signs of hospital patients and automatic signaling of the

need for clinical action are performed more effectively and reliably by IT than

by human monitors.The use of IT in the business side of the health care industry is a different
matter. As a whole, the health care field has been slow to use IT in its business

operations and record-keeping activities. Nevertheless, pressure on the health

care industry to explore the use of IT is now being exerted by a variety of

factors, including the explosion of medical knowledge, the larger volume of
clinical information potentially relevant to individual patients, the increasingly
cooperative nature of medicine, the need for more detailed clinical audit trails to

defend against potential malpractice litigation and to ensure proper third-party

payment, greater regulation, greater competition among health care institutions,

and greater pressure for outcomes assessment and improvement of quality and

patient satisfaction.By far the most common use of information systems in health care is for
billing, accounting, and administrative tasks, which typically include the

admission, transfer, and discharge of hospital patients; materials management;

and scheduling and management of human and physical resources. Increasingly,

hospitals recognize the need for integrating these tasks across departments.

Integrated health care data systems can pass information electronically in a
common format among all departments in the system, thus reducing or
eliminating the need to reenter data manually. With an integrated system,

billing information from the laboratory and the pharmacy can be electronically

integrated in a hospital's financial office. Billing for consumable items used by

a patient can be integrated with the hospital's inventory control system. In some

cases, inventory control systems themselves
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL78
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.are tied directly to hospital supply companies, and replacement orders are
generated automatically when necessary.
The actual clinical practice of medicine has not effectively used IT for cost
reduction as widely as would be desirable. A recent study examined the

potential of IT-based physician order entry in an Indianapolis hospital to steer

physicians toward lower-cost treatments; the result was that patient bills were

reduced by an average of 13 percent.
47 The networked PC-based system used
software that alerted physicians to the cost of various drugs and tests, warned

about potential drug interactions, and specifically discouraged the use of certain
expensive drugs under particular circumstances.
In the future, computer-based patient records (CPRs) hold considerable
promise for improving health care and reducing costs. Today, patient records

are contained on numerous slips of paper (e.g., laboratory tests, physician notes

perhaps produced by transcribing the physician's dictation using a word

processor) stuffed into a folder and perhaps arranged in chronological order.

However, in some institutions CPRs are beginning to supplement paper records,

over which they have many potential advantages. CPRs are or can be more

legible, more current, more reliable and accurate, more comprehensive, more
easily accessible, and more easily searchable. CPRs could also be the basis of
longitudinal databases that would allow development of "best-clinical-practice"

guidelines coupling treatment to expected or likely outcomes. Outcome-based

treatment is thought by many to have considerable potential for reducing health

care costs.
A second growing application of IT in health care is its use in giving
physicians remote access to hospital information systems through dial-up

modems or leased lines, allowing them to check on the status of patients

through CPRs. Physicians practicing in rural areas can thus use wide-band

video to consult with specialists, who tend to reside in urban areas; one often-

cited use is the transmission of x-ray images by network from rural family

practitioners to urban radiologists. City-to-city teleconferencing can also be
used so that the best specialists can consult together. Remote access provided
by IT-based systems is also very important to emergency medical teams sent

into the field. Ambulance teams or rescue squads do not typically include

physicians. However, radio communications can link on-site personnel with

physicians elsewhere. Voice communications provide advice and direction from

the physician, and both voice and data downlinks from the field to the physician

provide information about the condition of the patient.
Automated systems to support clinical decision making have been the
subjects of research since the mid-1960s. Given a set of data on a patient, these

systems commonly act as a consultant that advises the physician on diagnosis or

treatment. Such systems attempt to capture in machine-readable form the

expertise that clinical physicians have about their patients and
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL79
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.diseases. Two relatively old examples of medical "expert" systems are MYCIN,
a system designed to help physicians manage different types of infection, and

INTERNIST, a system designed to support diagnosis of diseases in internal

medicine.The widespread use of IT in clinical practice will require IT that can be
used to support the wide range of clinical functions for which the medical

profession is responsible, taking into account the high degree of variability in

clinical practice from practitioner to practitioner and the reluctance of

physicians to alter their practices on the basis of outside influences.
Nevertheless, if physicians are willing to use data on outcomes and to adapt
clinical practice to take the best advantage of IT's potential to reduce costs and

improve efficiency, there are many opportunities to use information more

effectively in providing health care. Future applications may include

multimedia CPRs, explicit coupling of medical and related knowledge (e.g., the

medical literature, government regulations regarding practice, or guidelines for

practice) to a patient's medical record and/or to a specific treatment program for

the individual, and universal electronic interchange of data and information.
BANKINGAs a major component of the U.S. financial system, the banking industry is
vital to the U.S. and world economies and to individual financial well-being.

Banks mediate a wide range of commercial and personal transactions involving

the exchange and investment of money, providing such services as loans,
deposits, and trust services to individuals, small businesses, and corporations.
The banking industry is a major factor in the economy. It generated
revenues of $209 billion (current dollars) in 1990. At the end of 1989, insured

commercial banks alone held about $3.3 trillion in assets, $2.0 trillion in loans

and leases, and $2.5 trillion in deposits. There were 12,713 banks in this

category, down from a peak of about 14,481 in 1984;
48 however, the number of
commercial banking offices (central and branch) grew from 57,010 in 1984 to
61,162 in 1989.
49 The industry exhibits considerable concentration. For
example, in 1989, 4.8 percent of federally insured commercial banking

institutions (614 commercial banks) held 74.9 percent of all assets ($2.47

trillion); 23.4 percent of these institutions held 88.9 percent of assets.
50 Savings
banks exhibit similar concentration, although not as intense; in 1989, 15.8

percent of federally insured savings banks (534) held 77.2 percent of all assets

($1.2 trillion).
51 Table 2.8
 describes the evolution of depository institutions over
the last decade, of which banks were by far the largest component, about 90

percent.Although the banking industry has grown at a moderate rate over the
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL80
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.last two decades, the most significant changes in this period concern its
character rather than its size. For most of its history, banking has been subject to

extensive federal and state regulation. However, partial bank deregulation in the

late 1970s and early 1980s led to a sharp increase in the variety of services and

products offered by commercial banks. Driven by both technology and

competition from nonbank financial institutions, increasing product
diversification continues today in commercial banking, although it is still
constrained to some extent by current regulations.
The banking industry has experienced a variety of economic and financial
problems over the past several years, including losses from bad real estate

loans, a large fraction of portfolio assets tied up in borrowings for takeovers and

for loans to less developed countries, the failure of a number of well-known

financial institutions, the widespread implications of the savings and loan crisis,

and, finally, the economic downturn of 1990-1991.
52 In large part, these
problems are ultimately responsible for the considerable consolidation that the
banking industry has undergone in the last decade. Bank failures, contractions,
mergers, and acquisitions have reduced the number of all banks and the number

of large banks, and as a result, industry employment has been shrinking. Most

reductions in personnel have been concentrated in back-office jobs.
Given the magnitude of the banking industry's investments in IT over the
last two decades, large increases in productivity might have been expected. One

reason these have not appeared in measures of macroeconomic productivity is

that such measures in the banking industry remain highly problematic. Figures

on the gross domestic product originating in the U.S. economy (GPO) for the

banking industry are derived by the Bureau of Economic Analysis essentially

from employment data (
Table B.3
, Appendix B
), whereas measures of gross
output that are generated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics take into account
commercial banks' three major services
Šdeposits, loans, and trust services
(Appendix C
). Neither approach is able to account for improvements in the
quality of service offered to customers or for the availability of a much wider

array of banking services. For example, the speed with which the processing of

a loan application is completed is an indicator of service that is important to the

applicant, as is the 24-hour availability through automated teller machines

(ATMs) of many deposit and withdrawal services previously accessible only

during bank hours. Neither of these services is captured as higher banking

output at the macroeconomic level.
A second reason for the lack of large increases in measured productivity is
that early applications of IT proved to be costly and cumbersome. Software and

equipment had to be updated and replaced frequently. A dizzying array of new

products constantly called for new software and communication capabilities. IT

systems required large amounts of tailoring,
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL81
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.training, upgrading, and updating. Cost control, management skills, and
productivity tracking systems lagged behind the new technologies in a rapidly

changing competitive marketplace. Margins long protected by regulations were

squeezed by inverted yield structures (i.e., financial instruments whose yield

varied inversely with their time to maturity), changing markets, and cross-

competition with other savings and investment instruments. Risks and
opportunities for profit both increased. The result was that tangible paybacks
from IT investment were delayed.
TABLE 2.8 Banking
19691980198119821983GPO (billions of 1982 dollars)39.661.964.265.266.1
Revenues (billions of 1982 dollars;

SIC 60
a)56.490.588.796.4100.9
Employment (millions of jobs)n/a2.02.02.12.1
Number of hours worked (billions)n/a3.73.93.93.9
Annual investment in IT (billions of
1982 dollars)0.11.61.91.82.9
IT capital stock (billions of 1982
dollars)0.24.45.15.66.9
GPO per labor-hour (1982 dollars)16.6716.6616.7716.77
Annual IT/GPO2.6%3.0%2.8%4.4%

Annual rate of change in GPO per

labor-hourb0.0%0.6%0.0%NOTE: Figures include all depository institutions. Commercial banks, Federal Reserve banks, and
savings and loan banks account for about 90 percent of all figures. See 
Box 2.1
 for explanation of
terms and sources of data given.
Consolidations in the industry have had the desirable effect of reducing
excess IT capacity, particularly that associated with back-office processing

functions, and also excessive branch network structures.
53 IT has been an
enabler of consolidation. However, studies of smaller mergers in the mid-1980s

suggest that the noninterest expenses of merged banks do not differ

significantly from the expenses of nonmerged banks.
54 Other studies suggest
that economies of scale characterize some but not all activities undertaken by

banks.55Today, IT is being used to support growing efficiency and greater
dispersion among banks. Back-office IT systems for internal accounting and
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL82
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.customer accounting were the focus of IT investment throughout the 1970s and
early 1980s. Virtually all banks were interconnected to regional and national

networks. A large percentage of paper-based transactions were transmitted and

processed electronically. ATM services and direct electronic deposits and

withdrawals by large automated users replaced many paper processes. As new

products and services expanded, and as margins became less predictable,
commercial banks began investing in front-office automation to provide contact
people with better information and to enhance the delivery of products and

services.198419851986198719881989GPO (billions of 1982
dollars)67.268.570.371.170.871.4
Revenues (billions of
1982 dollars; SIC 60
a)98.699.9100.3100.399.599.8
Employment (millionsof jobs)2.12.22.22.32.32.3
Number of hours
worked (billions)
4.04.14.24.34.24.3
Annual investment in
IT (billions of 1982
dollars)4.15.97.99.812.613.8
IT capital stock
(billions of 1982 dollars)
9.112.516.922.228.835.1
GPO per labor-hour
(1982 dollars)16.6016.5816.6216.7016.7716.80
Annual IT/GPO6.0%8.7%11.2%13.8%17.8%19.3%
Annual rate of change
in GPO per labor-hour
b-1.0%-0.2%0.2%0.5%0.4%0.2%a Standard Industrial Classification system code.
b The compounded annual rate of change in GPO per labor-hour from 1981 to 1989 was 0.1 percent.
Labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of GPO per labor-hour.
Initially, investment in IT was concentrated in computers, since banking
involved input-output intensive processing and huge databases. Most bank work

involves establishing accounts (or customer relationships) and handling

transactions within those accounts; banks process an increasing number of

transactions that now total many tens of billions per year, a number that would

be unthinkable without automation.
56 For example, Visa's peak capacity for
processing credit card transactions grew from 30,000 per day in 1978 to over
1.4 million per day in 1991, while its response time for authorizations dropped

from 5 minutes in 1973 to 1.1 seconds in 1991.
57IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL83
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Banks developed the technology for magnetic ink character recognition,
which enables a high degree of automation in the check-processing system.

Stand-alone systems for check processing, credit applications, and savings

accounts are used by a large number of banks today. More recently, new IT-

based systems have helped to consolidate mainframe-based operations. For

example, the Bank of Boston revamped its securities-processing business in
1989, consolidating these operations from 11 separate locations into 2. This IT-
based consolidation reduced staff requirements by 17 percent while volume

increased by 80 percent.
58In the late 1980s, the banking industry began to focus on automation of
data communications. The installation of on-line terminals in the early 1970s

enabled automation of the customer interface and front-office applications in

such areas as corporate treasury. ATMs, first introduced in the late 1970s, have

become an agent of a strategic change in banking. More than 75,000 ATMs in

the United States handle about 6 billion transactions per year for cash
dispensing, funds transfer, credit card payments, and obtaining credit lines.
59The deployment of an ATM network in 1977 was a major contributor to
Citibank's growth of market share from 4 percent to 13.4 percent; between 1977

and 1988 Citibank's branch staff grew by 18 percent while they served three

times as many customers.
60) Data communications also lies at the heart of bank-
to-bank transactions all over the world: the Clearing House for Interbank

Payments System handles daily transactions worth nearly $2 trillion.
61IT enables banks to provide better service to customers. For example,
Mellon Bank has installed an IT-based system to help resolve credit card billing

disputes; this system enables the clerk to view in one place all documents

relevant to a particular disputed transaction. Using this system, which also

involved considerable reengineering of its process for handling customer
complaints, Mellon was able to reduce its backlog of customer complaints from
5200 to 2200, resolving them in 25 days on average (versus 45 days

previously).62IT has been used to support a plethora of new products, including ATM
access to banking services, the ability to shift funds between multiple accounts,

and overdraft privileges.
63 Many of these new products are made possible by
''securitization" of mortgages and credit card portfolios. Bank products are

arguably information combined in new ways; for example, variable-rate

consumer loans depend on computer-generated indexes and interest-calculating
algorithms,64 while unified statement processing enables the display of
information from all accounts at one bank on one statement and "sweep"

services enable customers to consolidate dividends and interest from different

investment funds in one central interest-paying money market account.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL84
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Changed by sophisticated IT-based systems, loan processing shifted from
personal loan officers accessing branch cash reserves to automated access to

credit databases and external funds acquisition with asset-backed security

arrangements.65 Trade processors have eliminated the gap between front and
back-offices through automated interfaces.
66 Automated credit scoring
simulates the organizational structure of centralized approval; instead of branch
personnel sending applications to a central site for approval, work-stations
connect lenders to centralized computer systems that are used to help make

decisions about granting credit.67Dan Schutzer, a vice president of Citibank, asserts that IT has been used to
create "whole new industries in investment banking that never existed before

with the growth of derivative products, mortgage-backed securities, credit card

receivables, commercial paper, corporate bonds to a large extent, and so forth.

Many of these things didn't even exist as sources of revenue the way they are

now."The banking industry has invested heavily in building a sophisticated
information infrastructure, which now includes high-powered desktop systems,

artificial intelligence applications, automated credit scoring, electronics funds

transfer, and links among a wide range of services and providers. IT will be

used to enable an increasingly diverse set of banking interactions. More than

likely, a higher proportion of banking will be carried out via ATMs, or more
broadly over wires
Švia telephone or screen-based transactions
Šas well as by
mail. Thus the interaction will be more indirect. In the future, there may be

more card-based interactions, as the uses of credit cards grow and as cards

themselves become "smarter" (e.g., smart card-telephone services). An

increasing amount can be done at little extra cost, with relatively few people, a

circumstance that promotes diversification into generation of assets (e.g.,

mutual funds), insurance products, and so on
Šbuilding blocks for the industry.
There will also be a high premium on integration of products and services
Šthatis, standardization up to some level
Šfollowed by specialization to the customer.
Lastly, the banking industry has come under considerable competition
from "nonbank banks." While the relaxation of the regulatory environment in

the last decade has been important, IT has enabled a variety of nonbanking

institutions to take advantage of this new environment by offering services that

previously only banks could offer. For example, supermarkets with ATMs are

now surrogate bank branch offices for transactions such as cash withdrawal.
Large corporate entities such as AT&T and General Motors now offer widely
accepted credit cards similar to Mastercard and Visa. With the cooperation of

local banks, investment firms offer mortgages at favorable rates across the

nation. Thus the traditional boundaries of the banking industry are blurring, and

the ultimate impact of new competition is uncertain.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL85
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INSURANCEThe insurance industry is divided into two large segments: (1) life and
health insurance, including pensions and annuities, and (2) property and

casualty insurance. Life and health insurance is divided among individual

products (sold to individual consumers) and the group market (life, health, and

pension insurance products sold to employee or other groups).
68 Property and
casualty insurance products are divided between personal lines (individual
products, mainly automobile and homeowners' insurance) and commercial lines
(e.g., coverage for liability, errors and omissions, business continuation, and

employee fidelity bonding, as well as fire, theft, and so on).
Total premium receipts for life and health insurance and annuities
approach $300 billion annually. Life and health insurance is provided by about

2350 companies;
69 total life insurance in force (i.e., aggregate policy face value)
exceeds $10 trillion, with the average U.S. household now having more than

$100,000 in coverage. Net written property and casualty premiums total about

$225 billion annually,
70 with about 3800 companies providing such coverage.
71About 55 percent of this figure covers commercial liabilities, with the

remainder covering personal liability. The scale of these dollar flows makes

insurance companies a major element of the U.S. financial system and major

institutional investors.
The several thousand companies that provide insurance coverage range
from very large multiline companies that sell a broad range of products in all

states, to small companies that sell particular products to fill specialized

customer or product niches. Policies are sold to the public through direct writers

that sell through their own agents (often known as captive agents) or directly
through telemarketing, the mail, and so on, and through agency companies that
sell through independent agents who offer products from several insurance

companies. In 1989 about 1.4 million people worked for insurance carriers

(Table 2.9
). Expenditures on IT in the insurance industry have grown
significantly more rapidly than those of most of the other service industries

examined. Table 2.9
 describes the evolution of the industry in more detail.
In recent years, major changes have taken place in the insurance industry.
Life insurance carriers have relied less on traditional whole-life policies, having

been pushed by market forces to offer products that compete with a wide range

of other investment vehicles. In the very competitive market for pensions and

annuities, life insurance companies offer a wide range of investment vehicles to

individuals and corporate pension plans. In the health insurance market,
traditional indemnity-based group health plans now are in a minority, as
insurers more often offer and serve as administrators of managed health care

plans, such as health maintenance organizations and preferred provider

organizations. Insurance companies are facing increasing
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL86
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.competition from a range of entities, including banks and other financial
institutions, health insurance plan administrators, and corporations' increasing

willingness to self-insure.
Understanding the impact of these changes on productivity in the insurance
industry is highly problematic, and the BLS has been unable to develop a

meaningful measure of output for the insurance industry. Still, certain structural

features of the industry can be identified.
Much of the insurance industry, especially the property and casualty and
health segments, is data-intensive, being characterized by huge volumes of

accounting, analysis and statistical data, and transaction-processing. Insurance

companies are concerned about the quality of business generated by their

agents, as measured, for example, by the level of loss payouts resulting from the
mix of products offered by a company. These companies need to be able to
assess the risk to which a given portfolio exposes them, and thus they are large

users of actuarial data that enable them to calculate statistically the likelihood of

these risks with adequate levels of predictability. In addition, a large volume of

data persists throughout an insurance product's life cycle, which includes

underwriting (in which a substantial number of risk factors are evaluated in

determining the acceptability of a risk and the premiums to be charged),

maintaining policyholder and policy and coverage information, and keeping

records of claims and payments.
Thus, it is not surprising that insurers were among the first in the
commercial and corporate community to invest heavily in computers of all

sizes, to develop their own extensive software and to use packaged software,

and to install major telecommunications networks. For example, the insurance

industry was quick to automate claims processing, which involves verifying that

a claim has been submitted by a current policy holder, validating the
consistency between the particular claim made and the policy's coverage
(perhaps checking other policies held to coordinate benefits), and generating a

check for the appropriate amount along with an explanation for how that

amount was derived. All of these functions are performed today in a highly

automated fashion. Automation has enabled the volume of claims processed to

grow enormously with a minimal increase in personnel requirements, clearly an

increase in productivity. As importantly, such systems enable claims processing

to be carried out more quickly on a decentralized basis by employees (or

agents) in the field who can access the necessary databases remotely.
Beyond reducing labor requirements and increasing processing speed in
back-room operations such as accounting and records, insurance companies are

using IT to do qualitatively different things. For example, portable computers

are being used increasingly in field operations to communicate with the home

office for a variety of functions. An agent tied by modem to the home office can

serve a customer much more effectively now, by providing
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL87
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.customized quotes or claims payments instantaneously, than in the past.
Insurance companies have connected their own agents and independents

through networks they have designed and built themselves, or through systems

such as the Insurance Value Added Network System (IVANS) developed by

IBM.TABLE 2.9 Insurance
19691980198119821983GPO (billions of 1982 dollars)20.238.735.429.833.2
Revenues (billions of 1982

dollars; SIC 63
a)44.167.866.867.867.3
Employment (millions of jobs)1.01.21.21.21.2
Number of hours worked (billions)1.92.42.42.42.4
Annual investment in IT (billions
of 1982 dollars)0.00.60.70.81.8
IT capital stock (billions of 1982
dollars)0.11.31.72.03.1
GPO per labor-hour (1982 dollars)10.5416.2114.7612.4513.97
Annual IT/GPO0.2%1.6%2.0%2.5%5.3%

Annual rate of change in GPO per

labor-hourb4.0%-9.0%-15.6%12.2%NOTE: See 
Box 2.1
 for explanation of terms and sources of data given.
Development of insurance policies for different corporate clients has also
benefited from the use of IT. For example, the Aetna Life and Casualty

Company used IT to revamp its "case installation" process for developing health

plans for new clients.
72 The networked PC-based system now used by Aetna's
Health Plan business unit for case installation was based on reengineering

Aetna's installation process to homogenize case installations across regional
offices and to reduce the volume of paperwork associated with each new
installation and its different requirements.
Knowledge-based expert systems are being used increasingly by
underwriters to help decide acceptance of applicants for coverage. Such systems

facilitate the rapid comparison of a particular individual's risk profile with those

in the community at large and make it easier to customize a policy based on the

risks faced by that individual. They also provide the capability, based on quite

sophisticated and elaborate data analysis developed by
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL88
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the insurance industry, to implement widespread and varied cost-containment
techniques in paying group health claims.
198419851986198719881989GPO (billions of 1982
dollars)35.939.536.034.437.036.7
Revenues (billions of
1982 dollars; SIC 63
a)70.274.273.773.576.977.5
Employment (millionsof jobs)1.21.31.41.41.41.4
Number of hours
worked (billions)
2.42.52.72.72.82.8
Annual investment in
IT (billions of 1982
dollars)3.33.64.65.66.46.2
IT capital stock
(billions of 1982 dollars)
5.47.510.012.915.817.9
GPO per labor-hour
(1982 dollars)14.9315.7213.5212.5313.3213.18
Annual IT/GPO9.2%9.1%12.8%16.4%17.3%16.8%
Annual rate of change
in GPO per labor-hour
b6.9%5.3%-14.0%-7.4%6.3%-1.1%a Standard Industrial Classification system code.
b The compounded annual rate of change in GPO per labor-hour from 1981 to 1989 was -1.4
percent. Labor productivity is sometimes measured in terms of GPO per labor-hour.
Quality in the insurance industry can be reflected in the extent to which
insurance products can be tailored to meet the needs of individuals and in the

manner in which customers are served. As is the case with many other service-

providing activities, measuring the quality of the service delivered in the

insurance industry is problematic. Although in some cases quality does have

quantitative indicators (e.g., the average number of days needed to issue a

policy or settle a claim), often the value of quality is subjective; i.e., it is in the
minds of customers.
Today, many companies are using customer surveys and focus group
sessions to find out what is important to their customers. Many insurers are

focusing their initial reengineering efforts in areas that will affect customer

service, seeking ways to further differentiate themselves in what is being

viewed increasingly by many customers as a commodity market. The ultimate

goal is to sell insurance to a market of one
Šsingle clients to whose individual
circumstances a policy's payments and benefits are specifically tailored. The

way each company uses IT will help determine whether and how it meets this
goal.IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL89
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Selling customized insurance to markets of one may change the traditional
notion of insurance as the sharing of risk among large groups of individuals.

Insurance companies have always differentiated among some risk groups (e.g.,

male drivers under the age of 25 usually pay more than others for auto

insurance). But prior to the widespread availability of IT, data to differentiate

more finely among individuals were simply unavailable. Today, the use of IT
enables insurance companies to collect data on individuals from multiple
sources and thereby define risk groups consisting of relatively small numbers of

individuals, individuals with AIDS or cancer. Insurance may not be available to

such groups at all, or only at a very high price
Ša possibility that poses
significant questions for social policy.
IT has also been used effectively by insurance companies attempting to
compete in new markets. For example, James Stewart, executive vice president

and chief financial officer, noted that CIGNA invested in IT "to significantly

improve and enhance the ability to deal with an individual participant's

statements and a whole bunch of other services that we felt were responsive,

both to the competition and to the customer's needs. That decision was made,

not on a cost-benefit basis, but rather [to answer such questions as], What
markets do we want to compete in? What do we need to do to position
ourselves against both the insurance company and non-insurance company

competition?"Insurance agencies that provide coverage to individuals have followed a
similar path with respect to using IT. A recent survey of independent agents

found that 85 percent of independent agencies have some automation and that a

growing number are using integrated, comprehensive full-function agency

systems for back-office work (e.g., commission analyses, accounts receivable

and payable). Regardless of whether they have agency systems, 90 percent have
word processing, 85 percent have automated insurance rating, 76 percent have
automated accounting, and 72 percent have automated billing. Somewhat fewer

have automated underwriting (33 percent) and automated interfaces to multiple

companies (44 percent, up from 23 percent in 1987). Seventy-two percent of

these systems were installed before 1989.
73Agency systems, like corporate systems, have been used largely to
automate what were previously manual processes (accounting, billing,

marketing, and customer service). Although such systems enable the same

number of people to handle a larger volume of work (and thus hold down labor

costs), independent agents' desires and expectations for agency automation are,

according to some observers, largely unfilled. Early agency users of IT

experienced more difficulties than they had expected, partly as a result of their
failure to understand the new systems, plan appropriately for their use, and train
employees accordingly.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL90
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.J. Raymond Caron of CIGNA Systems argues that
There is a big evolution of IS (information systems) in an insurance
environment. We went through an era with massive tab card sorting. We left
that era and went into mainframe computers, data centers, and batch

processing. We left that era and went into on-line applications, networks, and
all that stuff. I think we're on the verge of a significant change in what IS
organizations are all about, and I think that change is going to be radical.
Reengineering, how we build applications, and how we work on solutions will
be the new drivers.
CIGNA's systems organization is going through the process of reengineering
along with every other division within the company. What we are striving for
in our reengineered systems organization is to be an integrated part of the
business strategy. To accomplish this, we have had to help our people change
their mind-set from a narrow technology perspective to a more global business

perspective. Today, CIGNA systems professionals use their skills to solve
business problems, not technology problems. And they understand that their
performance will now be measured by customer satisfaction and business
results.One of the things I'm planning is changing the way IS people think. If you
get them to think about it right they can provide solutions that have nothing to
do with technology. We need to get them to think that way because those
might be the most powerful solutions rather than thinking the only thing IS can
bring is technology. So we're restructuring IS, and I think the difference will be
dramatic.Put differently, IT may be used to drive restructurings that might not
happen in the absence of technology. Developing better ways to use IT is

already an integral part of many insurance companies' strategic planning and is

a key factor in the industry's growth and in the successes of individual

companies.OBSERVATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
In both scale and nature, the use of IT is highly varied within and among
the industries the committee examined. That is, IT has been used by companies

for many different purposes, both operational (e.g., accounting, logistics

scheduling) and strategic (e.g., changing competitive positioning or providing

totally new services). Although IT has been used primarily to improve the

efficiency and effectiveness of specific activities, the impact of IT in these
individual instances has sometimes had a large influence on the structure of the
industry as a whole. Because of the effects of other non-IT forces, the

significance of IT's use for an industry may be observable in aggregate industry

data only when its impact is truly overwhelming or revolutionary. A good

example is the telecommunications industry, which literally has been built on IT

and which is now pervaded by IT. In other
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL91
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.instances that are more likely the norm, IT's impact may be measurable only at
the level of individual enterprises (e.g., in shifts of share or profit) or in

activities within various companies.
At the same time, it is clear that the use of IT can bring about changes in
the boundaries and definition of an industry. For example, deregulation and new

technologies have allowed new players to provide services that were once the

exclusive domain of traditional telephone carriers; today, private carriers and

value added carriers handle voice and data long-distance traffic for paying

customers, and even some corporate networks have spare capacity that can be
sold to other outside users. IT has been used to alter existing relationships
among wholesalers, retailers, manufacturers, and end users (e.g., to eliminate

intermediaries and enable direct sales from manufacturers to end users).

Insurance companies are moving ever deeper into the business of health care

management, and the lines between the two are already blurring. Through the

use of IT, different industries are moving into banking, thus threatening the

traditional understanding of what constitutes the banking system. IT (in the

form of CRSs) has been part of what one airline executive suggested has been

the transformation of the airline industry into one of the largest retailers of

perishable goods (i.e., empty seats that disappear when the flight takes off).

Further examples and amplifications of this point are contained in 
Chapter 3.Lastly, IT may well create entirely new sectors for business that will
encompass a variety of new and different industries. For example, a powerful

telecommunications and information infrastructure has the potential to open the

private home to a host of new information-related services. Although most

network-based services have been aimed at businesses and other organizations,

many now envision the creation of large home-based markets for new products

combining computing and communications devices and services (e.g.,
multimedia technology). Although past attempts to develop services for the
home such as videotext information delivery or computer-based teleshopping

were largely unsuccessful, greater potential is seen in the more sophisticated

offerings promised by recent and announced efforts to blend telephone, cable

television, software, video, audio, text, and image database services. Better

services for the home imply changes in the existing communications,

information services, and entertainment industries; new markets for services;

and new possibilities for home-based work. Consistent with the benefits-pass-

through phenomenon discussed in 
Chapter 5
, these new markets will likely
generate public or private financial gains that far exceed those realized by the

first companies entering these new markets.
Although an industry perspective offers particular insights about the actual
performance of IT-based systems versus IT's measurable effects on

productivity, further analysis at the enterprise and activity levels is necessary
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL92
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to understand where and how deployment of IT can be most effective and how
IT's use is changing the basic structure of the economy, individual

organizations, and most jobs.NOTES AND REFERENCES
1. In 1989, the United States employed 116.6 million workers in full-time and part-time jobs. See
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1990. 
Survey of Current Business
,July, Table 6.6B, Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

2. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1992. 
Survey of Current Business
,July, Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. Table 6.22C (p. 91) provides corporate capital

consumption allowances by industry, Table 6.1C (p. 82) provides national income by industry, and

Table 6.5C (p. 84) gives full-time-equivalent employees by industry.

3. U.S. Department of Commerce. 1992. 
U.S. Industrial Outlook
, Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C., p. 40-1.

4. The revenue passenger-mile (RPM) is the principal measure of output for the air transport

industry: a single paying passenger carried for a 1000-mile airplane flight counts as 1000 revenue

passenger-miles. The RPM is thus a direct measure of the service being delivered: the movement of

passengers between different points.

5. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1991. 
U.S. Statistical Abstract
, Table
1072, p. 627, Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

6. Scheduled passenger carriers suffered losses from 1981 to 1983, in large part due to the recession

and high fuel prices. From 1984 to 1989, the industry earned positive net income in four of the six

years and reported a minimal loss in another. However, the industry's financial losses were so severe

in 1990 (an operating loss of $3.95 billion in 1990-1991) that any gains in the 1980s were wiped

out; scheduled passenger carriers lost about $2 billion from 1981 to 1990. (U.S. Department of

Commerce, 1992, 
U.S. Industrial Outlook
, p. 40-2.)
7. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1992, 
U.S. Industrial Outlook
, p. 40-1.
8. Recent trends suggest that hub-and-spoke routing systems are most profitable under conditions of

relatively high demand. Lower demand reduces the revenues that airlines can generate, while the

costs of maintaining a hub are considerably less elastic. As recessionary pressures have driven down

the demand for air travel, many airlines are starting to scale back the number of hubs they maintain.

See Hirsch, James. 1993. "Big Airlines Scale Back Hub-Airport System to Curb Rising Costs," 
WallStreet Journal
, January 12, p. A1.
9. See Margolis, Nell. 1992. "AMR Cuts Costs, Jobs," 
Computerworld , December 21, p. 2.
10. Transportation Research Board, National Research Council. 1991. 
Winds of Change: Domestic
Air Transport Since Deregulation
, Special Report 230, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.,
p. 54.

11. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1992, 
U.S. Industrial Outlook
, p. 40-4.
12. For example, this revenue stream is worth $100 million per year to American Airlines (Quinn,

James Brian. 1988. "Technology in Services: Past Myths and Future Challenges," p. 37 in

Technology in Services: Policies for Growth, Trade, and Employment
, Bruce R. Guile and James
Brian Quinn (eds.), National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.).

13. The CRS is conceptually a single database, although in fact the data it contains may be

physically distributed over many different computer systems. Technologically, the CRS provides a

single standard interface to the human user (e.g., the travel agent) for access to multiple

heterogeneous databases.

14. The term 
yield management
 refers to the practice of continuously managing the number and fare
class of seats on a given flight. By combining knowledge of how quickly seats of a given fare are

selling with knowledge of competitors' pricing, yield management minimizes the number of empty

or low-paying seats on any given flight, thus increasing revenues.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL93
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15. See Tolchin, Martin. 1992. ''U.S. Sues 8 Airlines Over Fares," 
New York Times
, December 22, p.
D1.
16. Air Transport World
. 1991. "Ryder Automates Parts Location," September, p. 106.
17. Air Transport World
. 1991. "Recipes by VideoSpecs," August, pp. 78-81.
18. The A320 Airbus is a case in point. See Stix, Gary. 1991. "Along for the Ride," 
ScientificAmerican, July, p. 97.
19. Air Transport World
. 1991. "ICAO Looks to Space," December, pp. 96-98.
20. Science. 1989. "Flying the Electric Skies," Vol. 244(June 30):1532-1534.
21. Aviation Week and Space Technology
. 1991. "Airbus Employs Advanced Procedures in A330/
A340 Manufacturing, Assembly," November 4, p. 48.

22. Air Transport World
. 1991. "Command Center on the Prairie," May, pp. 38-39.
23. Kindel, Sharen. 1991. "The Route Cause," 
Financial World, August 20, pp. 70-72.
24. Larson, Richard. 1988. "Operations Research and the Services Industries," in 
ManagingInnovation: Cases from the Services Industries
 , Bruce R. Guile and James Brian Quinn (eds.),
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.

25. From 1990 to 1992, the U.S. airline industry lost $9 billion to $10 billion dollars, wiping out all

that it had earned, and more, in the 1980s. See Lenorovitz, Jeffrey. 1993. "Panel Issues Guidelines

for Airline Recovery," 
Aviation Week and Space Technology
, August 9, p. 31.
26. See O'Leary, Meghan, 1991, "Airport '91," 
CIO, June, pp. 40-52; 
Air Transport World
, 1991,
"Ionworks," May, pp. 62-66; and 
Air Transport World
, 1991, "Automation Picks Up Speed,"
September, pp. 51-56.
27. Air Transport World
. 1992. "New Cabins in the Sky," April, pp. 75-80.
28. U.S. Telephone Association. 1992. 
Statistics of the Local Exchange Carriers: 1992 for the Year
1991, U.S. Telephone Association, Washington, D.C., p. 2.
29. Federal Communications Commission. 1991. "FCC Releases Report on Long-Distance Market,"
news release, October 2, FCC, Washington, D.C.
30. Schatz, Willie. 1992. "Who's Calling, Please?" 
Computerworld, November 23, p. 69.
31. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1992, 
U.S. Industrial Outlook
, p. 28-3.
32. In some countries, long-distance calls are still logged by operators with hand-written tickets.

33. According to Peter Chinloy, labor costs constituted approximately 75 percent of the operating

costs for the Bell system in the early 1980s. (See Chinloy, Peter. 1981. "Implications for the

Communications Workers of America of Technological Change at the Bell System," reproduced in

Productivity in the American Economy
, 1982, Hearings before the Subcommittee on Employment
and Productivity of the Committee on Labor and Human Resources, U.S. Senate, March 19 and 26

and April 2 and 16, Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.) This study of the Bell system

from 1947 to 1978 also found that labor input grew more slowly than output, resulting in a steady
increase in labor productivity. However, note that "labor" costs refer only to the costs incurred by
telecommunications service providers; customer-provided labor (e.g., the keying by customers of

telephone and credit card numbers) is not included in such costs. In other words, "reductions" in the

labor required are at times more accurately characterized as shifting labor costs from provider to

customer. Customers can also benefit from such shifts, as they can complete their calls more

quickly, more securely, and less expensively by keying numbers themselves.
34. Calling cards were invented in the 1950s but became especially popular after 1982, when AT&T
automated the calling and billing processes, eliminating the need for operator intervention. See

Ramirez, Anthony. 1992. "Plastic Keys to Phone Wizardry," 
New York Times
, May 30, p. 48.
35. See 
Wall Street Journal
. 1992. "AT&T Unveils Card for ATMs That Has Wider Range of
Uses," December 8, p. A6.

36. Today, with a few exceptions (notably cable TV companies), telecommunications companies

provide their customers with the ability to move and manage data and information that
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL94
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the customer generates and/or owns. Local telephone companies, especially the regional Bell
holding companies, are actively interested in providing information content as well as delivery.

Legislative action may be taken in the future to remove the constraints placed by the 1982 consent

decree on providing such services.

37. Personal communication, Joseph Timko, vice president, AT&T Architecture, June 1992.

38. See 
Business Week
. 1992. "Clout! More and More, Retail Giants Rule the Marketplace,"
December 21, pp. 66-73.

39. For example, small manufacturers often have limited financial resources that prevent them from

creating a direct-selling organization. To the retailer the wholesaler offers multiple lines of

merchandise and a larger assortment than is available from an individual manufacturer; wholesalers

also obviate the need to work with multiple manufacturers. The wholesaler has the ability to buy in

huge bulk portions that can be broken down into smaller units for the retailer. Some manufacturers

are engaged in the wholesale business through the use of their sales branches. Retailers may also

choose to buy directly from the manufacturer through chain-store warehouses; however, this activity

does not fall within the wholesale classification.

40. Inventory can represent as much as 70 percent of a retailer's assets. See, for example, Standard

& Poor's Corp., 1992, "Retailing: Current Analysis," 
Industry Surveys
 160(2), sec. 1, January 9; and
Standard & Poor's Corp., 1991, "Retailing: Basic Analysis," 
Industry Surveys
 159(17), sec. 1, May 2.
41. National Retail Federation, Financial Executive Division. 1991. 
Merchandising & Operating
Results of Retail Stores in 1990
, National Retail Federation, New York.
42. Business Week
. 1992. "Clout! More and More, Retail Giants Rule the Marketplace," December
21, pp. 66-73.
43. See Elliot, Stuart. 1993. "A Last Hurdle for Shoppers: The Checkout-Counter Pitch," 
New York
Times, January 11, p. D-7.
44. Bencin, Richard L., and Donald J. Jonovic. 1989. 
Encyclopedia of Telemarketing
, Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, p. 276.
45. U.S. Department of Commerce, 
U.S. Statistical Abstract
, 1991, Table 162, p. 104, for
ambulatory care and Table 173, p. 109, for hospital usage.
46. But see also explanatory note in 
Table 2.7.47. Tierney, W.M., M.E. Miller, J.M. Overhage, and C.J. McDonald. 1993. "Physician Inpatient
Order Writing on Microcomputer Workstations: Effects on Resource Utilization," 
JAMA 269
(January 20):379-383.

48. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1991, 
U.S. Statistical Abstract
, Table 807, p. 501.
49. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1991, 
U.S. Statistical Abstract
, Table 804, p. 500.
50. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1991, 
U.S. Statistical Abstract
, Table 802, p. 499.
51. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1991, 
U.S. Statistical Abstract
, Table 802, p. 499.
52. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1992, 
U.S. Industrial Outlook
, p. 46-1.
53. Humphrey, David B. 1991. "Productivity in Banking and Effects from Deregulation," Federal

Reserve Bank of Richmond, 
Economic Review
 77(March/April):16-28.
54. Srinivasan, Aruna. 1992. "Are There Cost Savings from Bank Mergers?," Federal Reserve Bank

of Atlanta, 
Economic Review
 77(March/April):17-28.
55. Andersen Consulting. 1991. 
Strategies for High Performance
, Arthur Andersen, Chicago.
56. Steiner, Thomas D., and Diogo B. Teixeira. 1990. 
Technology in Banking: Creating Value and
Destroying Profits, Dow Jones-Irwin, Homewood, Illinois, p. 29.
57. Ganley, Oswald, and Gladys Ganley. 1992. "To Inform or to Control?," 
The NewCommunications Networks
, Second Edition, Ablex Publishing, Norwood, New Jersey, p. 223. Also
personal communication with Visa, 1992, cited in "Rewards and Risks: Communications and
Information in the Global Financial Services Industries," PIRP, Harvard University, Cambridge,

Mass., June 1992.
58. Stewart, Thomas. 1992. "U.S. Productivity: First But Fading," 
Fortune, October 19, p. 56.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL95
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.59. Bove, Richard X. 1991. "Bank Technology Reshapes Industry," 
The Bankers Magazine
, May/
June, pp. 17-20.

60. Glaser, Paul. 1988. "Using Technology for Competitive Advantage: The ATM Experience at

Citicorp," in 
Managing Innovation: Cases from the Services Industries
, Bruce R. Guile and James
Brian Quinn (eds.), National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.

61. Passell, Peter. 1992. "Fast Money," 
New York Times Sunday Magazine
 , October 18, p. 42.
62. Fortune. 1992. "How to Steal the Best Ideas Around," October 19, p. 106.
63. Steiner and Teixeira, 1990, 
Technology in Banking: Creating Value and Destroying Profits
, p. 23.
64. Steiner and Teixeira, 1990, 
Technology in Banking: Creating Value and Destroying Profits
, p. 49.
65. Bove, 1991, "Bank Technology Reshapes Industry."

66. Andersen Consulting, 1991, 
Strategies for High Performance
, p. ix.
67. Andersen Consulting, 1991, 
Strategies for High Performance
, p. 5.
68. There are two large subgroups within the group arena: Medicare (health insurance for the

elderly) and Medicaid (health insurance for the poor) are government-sponsored programs that are

administered by companies under contract to states. Blue Cross and Blue Shield organizations are

also state organized but privately administered. Over three-quarters of life insurers' health premiums
come from the group health market (usually through employer plans). See U.S. Department of
Commerce. 1992. 
U.S. Industrial Outlook
, p. 50-2.
69. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1991, 
U.S. Statistical Abstract
, Table 851, p. 518.
70. The Department of Commerce estimates life and health insurance premium receipts in 1991 at

$283.5 billion and net written premium receipts for property and casualty insurance at $224.9 billion

(U.S. Department of Commerce, 1992, 
U.S. Industrial Outlook
, pp. 50-1 and 50-6).
71. U.S. Department of Commerce, 1992, 
U.S. Industrial Outlook
, p. 50-7.
72. Cafasso, Rosemary. 1993. "Manual No More: Aetna Unit Gets PCs, Results," 
Computerworld,January 18, p. 37.

73. Acord Corporation. 1992. 
Moving Into the 90s: The 1992 Acord Agency Automation and
Interface Survey
, Acord [Agency Company Organization for Research and Development], White
Plains, New York.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE INDUSTRY LEVEL96
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Impacts of Information Technology at the
Enterprise Level
The differing structure, environment, and competitive situation in each
service industry explain only some of the differences in performance relative to
investments in IT. Other differences reflect the experiences of individual
companies within each industry. Both performance and the use of IT can vary

greatly among companies in the same field (see 
Appendix A
 for references to
relevant studies). Most of the variation reflects the fact that decisions

concerning IT investment programs are made at different points in time by

managers with different abilities and perspectives. Since most major decisions

about IT investment are made by individual executives at the enterprise level,

understanding how these decisions are made and evaluated is critical if national

policy initiatives are to be effective.
This chapter examines why firms invest in IT, how firms invest in IT and
the categories of applications that are typical, and how firms assess the impacts

of their use of IT. It also discusses cross-cutting observations on IT and
examines the widespread belief among executives that IT has enhanced
performance overall, regardless of what macroeconomic measurements may

indicate. The chapter is based on committee discussions informed by a set of

semistructured interviews (
Appendix D
) held with about 80 senior managers in
46 major firms drawn from each of the major service industries
Štransportation,communications, retailing, wholesale distribution, health care, financial

services, and professional services.
The interviews sought (1) to discover what types of enterprise level data
and experience might be available, (2) to validate further or raise
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL97
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.informed questions about the basis for industry- and macroeconomic-level data
and analysis, (3) to understand what factors managers consider important in

making decisions about investing in IT, (4) to obtain some useful insights into

how companies manage their IT investments for greater effectiveness, and (5)

to explore further the causes for and implications of the IT paradox.
This exploratory investigation was designed to yield insights, not to
substitute new statistical data for data obtained in other studies. The particular

firms whose managers were interviewed were chosen because they had

verifiably strong reputations as leaders in the use of IT. As such they were more

likely to have both positive and negative experiences to draw on, to have

thought carefully about critical issues, and to be willing to discuss them.

However, their response cannot be generalized beyond this sample, because
these firms were clearly more likely than the average company to provide
evidence of a positive relationship between use of IT and performance. Some

conclusions follow.
WHY FIRMS INVEST IN IT
Executives generally invest in IT to increase expected profits, margins, or
returns on capital. Some investments
Šthose made to reduce costs, to generate
new products, to make measurable improvements in quality
Šmay be
discernible as gains in productivity in standard published reports. However,

executives may also invest in IT for reasons that do not show up readily in such

reports but may still be vital to the success of enterprises. For example, in some
endeavors (e.g., research, engineering design, or medicine), the capacity to
work at the intellectual frontier or to solve advanced problems may depend on

having the most current technologies. In others (e.g., accounting, consulting,

legal work, credit clearance, or trust management), flexible access to the most

powerful current databases and efficient datamanipulating capabilities may be

essential to deliver a competitive level of quality.
Managers generally regard IT as only one of many possible investments
that may benefit their firms. When they choose to invest in IT, they do so in the

belief that such an investment will provide better returns as compared to other

alternatives, for example, not investing or investing in other programs. But

many of the factors they consider and many of the effects of their successful

investments may not show up in aggregated economic measures such as
productivity, return on investment (ROI), sales, or margins.
1 For example, since
companies can neither calculate nor report their "alternative cost" gains or losses

Šwhere their companies would have been positioned without an investment
versus where they are with it
Šit is impossible
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL98
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for more aggregated databases to reflect such gains or losses.
2 Managers,
especially in professional firms, may consider the cost of over investment in IT

as insignificant against (the potentially much larger) losses the firm might incur

if it fails to attract top talent, sustain its competitive edge, or hold market share

because its IT systems are inadequate.
Among the more important rational reasons for investing in IT that are not
picked up in aggregate databases are the following:
   Expanding market share or avoiding catastrophic losses
. Whileaggregate industry output is a key economic indicator for policy-

makers, managers focus more on the performance of their individual

companies. A company may gain or lose share even though statistics

on an industry's performance in the aggregate may indicate relative

stability. For executives, market share is a key parameter of successful

performance as well as a basis for marketing, purchasing, and personal
power for those in the company. Investments in IT that only shift
market share may indicate little or no measurable benefit at the

industry or macroeconomic level. The same is true of investments that

successfully prevent very large losses
Šlike airplane crashes or
environmental catastrophes. Yet both types of investment are

economically rational.   Creating greater flexibility and adaptability for future business 
environments. Changes in the business environment (e.g., greater
regulation, increased market or operational complexity) often demand

significant changes in the way a company operates. In some cases,

investments in IT may represent essential elements of the

infrastructures that allow companies to survive despite rapid and
unforeseeable changes in the external environment. In other cases,
companies may invest in IT to gain future flexibility for creating

products that may not yet be planned or even conceived. In still other

cases, IT may enable a company to maintain or reduce its costs while

providing greater variety and flexibility in its services.
   Improving the quality and stability of internal environments
. Somefirms invest in IT to obtain and analyze information that can provide a

greater degree of predictability or stability in their operations and that

can help them to avoid undue fluctuations in sales, profitability, or

employment. Other firms may invest in IT to improve employee

satisfaction or to enhance worker safety. IT can help to eliminate

burdensome tasks, make jobs more attractive, shorten training cycles
before an employee becomes productive, and improve morale. IT is an
especially powerful tool that companies with life-critical operations

can use to manage large amounts of data in real-time to improve the

safety of employees, customers, and the general public.
   Improving the quality of products and of a firm's interactions with
customers. For many service firms, IT is an important element in
creatingIMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL99
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.services that are better customized and tailored to meet the needs of
individual customers. Companies increasingly compete in other

aspects of customer service quality, often using IT to serve customers

more rapidly, pleasantly, responsively, accurately, and completely.

Such improvements help generate long-term loyalty among customers.

Similarly, IT can play an important role in improving reliability by
ensuring more consistent levels of performance and minimizing errors
and can thus enhance customers' perceptions of a company and its

products.As indicated above, individual firms have invested in IT to achieve a
variety of results that are not generally captured in aggregate databases. A

recent study by Brynjolfsson and Hitt
3 provides quantitative support for these
ideas. Specifically, Brynjolfsson and Hitt analyzed output data and data on IT

spending from 380 large firms that generate about $2 trillion in output annually,
and found that increases in output at the firm level correlate strongly with IT
expenditures, even if the macroeconomic data do not demonstrate increases in

productivity across the national economy or in individual service industries.

These data were taken from the 1987 to 1991 time frame.
HOW COMPANIES USE AND INVEST IN IT
Types of Applications
Senior managers interviewed by the committee tended to cluster their
selected use of IT into several broad categories that they evaluated using

various techniques. The uses of IT included systems to support (1) basic

infrastructure for communications and data handling, (2) mandated
requirements, (3) cost reduction, (4) specific new products, (5) desired
improvements in quality, and (6) major strategic repositionings (perhaps

including a complete reorientation of a company's business). Companies tended

to evaluate investments in IT on a program-by-program basis, rather than being

concerned with measures of overall productivity. In the committee's sample, the

techniques used to estimate or evaluate the impacts of IT were comparable to

those used for other major investments.
Basic Infrastructure for Communications and Data Handling
Information technology infrastructures consist of those basic information
storage, retrieval, communications, processing, and distribution systems that

provide the backbone or framework interconnecting the multiple information-

generating and information-using nodes in an organization. Although

definitions may differ in detail from company to company, the IT part of a
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL100
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.firm's basic infrastructure generally includes the core voice-transmission, data-
communication, record-keeping, and transaction-processing systems necessary

to conduct business. What a firm regards as infrastructure may change over

time as new technologies become available and customers come to expect

certain basic facilities from their service providers. Interactive data

communications, for example, may be essential today, although this was rarely
the case a decade ago.
Basic IT infrastructure systems are often approached as a "cost of being in
the business." The majority (67 percent) of companies interviewed by the

committee had done preproject analyses of IT investments in this area. But they

often found that it was not worthwhile to separate out and justify individually

the IT component of infrastructure
Šany more than it would be to use ROI
techniques to justify the purchase of hammers for a carpenter, the acquisition of
a telephone for a lawyer, or the installation of a roof on a new building for a

real-estate developer. Some items are integral to being in a certain business.

Firms tend not to give serious thought to doing without such elements of

infrastructure in toto, and they often do not make a formal evaluation of their

overall payback. But they frequently do evaluate incremental investments in

infrastructure on a cost-benefit basis relative to other means of accomplishing a

particular goal. On this basis, a majority (73 percent) of interviewed companies

said that they had attained acceptable to high measured returns on such

investments. But 27 percent reported negative or indeterminate returns.

Measurement complexities represented serious problems.
For example, a study by the Aetna Insurance Company once analyzed the
impact of IT on expense-revenue ratios over a 15-year period. Although the

study concluded that IT had had little impact on these ratios, it also noted that

the company could never have increased its handling of health care claims from
250,000 per week to 1.3 million per week without using IT and acknowledged
the fact that this business was very profitable. Back-office automation in

financial services, electronic point-of-sale systems in retail and wholesale trade,

computer reservation systems in travel services, communications systems in all

companies, and automatic flight control systems in aircraft for air transport are

examples of large IT infrastructure systems without which individual

companies could not compete today
Šbut for which specific financial impacts
are difficult to calculate.
Observed Richard Liebhaber, chief strategy and technology officer at MCI,
There is an extensive infrastructure of holes in the ground, structures on the
ground, and apparatus in the sky. That is our fundamental infrastructure. We
regard it as a commodity asset: the transportation mechanism of our company.
We view it from the standpoint of a cost factor, and we either build it, buy it,
or lease each component depending on comparative cost and performance
characteristics. The real problems in evaluating
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL101
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.productivity for these IT applications lie in those situations where the outputs
are difficult to quantify in financial terms: "If I do this I will save 2 minutes
here; if I do that I will save 8 minutes there," versus another alternative, "If I
do this, I will save $9 million."
As noted above, managers are not indifferent to infrastructure costs and
impacts. When IT is regarded as basic infrastructure, the managerial decision is

not whether to invest in IT, but rather how to obtain needed IT capabilities at

the lowest cost. If a firm's IT infrastructure requires some new capability,

managers may consider alternative sources of that capability (e.g., performed in-

house vs. purchased from an outside source) and seek to obtain it at the lowest

long-term cost. When providing new levels of service to existing customers

requires that incremental power or features be added to the base structure,

companies may compare the net incremental costs and benefits of each of these

features, in financial terms if possible. If features cannot be evaluated directly in

financial terms, many companies use other metrics such as improvements in

response times, levels of customer satisfaction, market penetration, or company
image.Several of the firms interviewed by the committee suggested that the only
truly rigorous way of evaluating the payoff from investments in IT

infrastructure would be to calculate the opportunity costs of not being in the

business, that is, the losses that would have been incurred if the investment had

not been made. However, such a calculation could be highly tenuous because of

difficulties in estimating what would have happened if the investment had not

been made. As Roger Ballou, president of the Travel Services Group (USA),

American Express, noted:
A good example of an infrastructure investment would be our automated
authorization system. To determine the benefit of that system even today, I'd
have to recreate mathematically what would exist if we didn't have it and only
had our old personal telephone authorization system. For that you'd have to

guess how a 20-year-old system would operate in today's world. That would be
a highly theoretical exercise.
The complications of evaluating the impacts of infrastructure
Šand the
possibilities of basing some decisions about investing in IT on cost and others

on factors besides cost
Šwere illustrated by J. Raymond Caron, president of
CIGNA Systems, who observed that
there are two types of infrastructure investments. For some, specific payback
and evaluation mechanisms are used; for others, they are not. For example, for
our data or voice communications we have put together a program based on
AT&T's Tariff 12 and network costs. We know what our costs are, and we
have goals to reduce those costs per minute, per connect, to the point where

there are clear measures of benefits. In this case we can show dramatic
evidence of our communications facilities costing
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL102
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.far less today than they did 5 years ago. 
– When it comes to PC platforms
(our CIGNA-Link platforms, which include PCs, LANs, the software to go
along with them, plus e-mail), we find it very difficult to develop a useful cost-
benefit measure. We've taken a position that we shouldn't waste time trying to
do it.Caron's comments about personal computers (PCs) illustrate a special
problem in measuring enterprise level impacts of infrastructure. The falling

costs of computer hardware and applications software, the greater user

friendliness of many computer systems, and the increased capability to

interconnect local and remote systems have started to change the very nature of

business infrastructure. IT systems are used to increase the level of information

and flexibility within an entire enterprise. Such generalized impacts are

exceedingly difficult to measure in the short run.
However, similar PC-based hardware and software can be specifically
targeted to improve the performance of a particular operation. When used in

this way, PC applications (e.g., to improve order handling, purchasing,

customer inquiries or complaints, truck dispatching, field repair, editor-to-

printed-page cycles, and broker-to-customer interfaces) have had considerable

payoff. When specific goals are set, processes are properly reengineered,

organizational interfaces are redesigned, and new incentives are provided,

performance gains from specific applications can be impressive. Cycle times

can be cut from days or weeks to a few hours or minutes. Layers of
management or entire departments can be eliminated. For example:
   At the New York Times Company and Time Inc., PCs enable editing to
continue right up to the moment when a story is electronically typeset

for printing. Entire intermediate hierarchies and the attendant

complexity of coordinating different functional centers have been

eliminated.   At McKesson Corporation, retail customers can use PCs to interact
directly with the company's computers to eliminate many delays in

order-processing and much of the bureaucracy that used to exist to

handle this function. The number of order takers at McKesson has

been reduced from more than 700 to almost zero. The size of the sales

force has been cut in half, even while sales have risen by a factor of 8.

The number of buyers has been reduced from 150 to 200 located at

over 100 distribution centers to just 12 sitting in front of desktop
computers at a central site. Levels of management have been reduced
in keeping with these changes.
In other settings (e.g., universities, research laboratories, or publishing
houses), professionals often prefer to write and edit directly at their own

computers, thus decreasing the number of secretaries needed for these tasks and

flattening and downsizing the organization. It is not clear at this point whether

measured productivity improves when (often) higher-priced employees like

professors or researchers undertake such tasks.
4 In other situations,
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL103
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.built-in desktop computer controls have eliminated much of the need for
personal oversight in insurance, brokerage, and accounting applications
Šeliminating layers of bureaucracy.
Despite the undeniable utility of PC applications in certain settings, many
executives interviewed by the committee were ambivalent about the impact of

across-the-board access to desktop computing in their firms. Measures of

performance are unclear, and personal intuitions about the potential and real

payoffs from this type of IT vary widely. For instance, a majority of managers

interviewed believed that the printed appearance and visual clarity of
correspondence, graphics, reports, and desktop printed matter are better because
of PC use. Communication between knowledge workers (i.e., the professionals

responsible for interpreting and analyzing information made available to a

company), as well as the information available to such workers, may also have

been improved. But the measurable value of these improvements remains

unclear when compared to the significant costs of having desktop computing

available throughout an organization.
   At CIGNA Corporation, James Stewart, executive vice president and
chief financial officer, said, ''I'm not yet convinced that dispersal and

utilization of PC-based technology have proven to be efficient. The

business people in our organization drive me crazy on the subject of
cost and benefit. I see increasing expenditures for what I perceive
occasionally as 'toys in the business world,' which don't add up to

measurable output or improve our results. I think better discipline in

the effectiveness of PC technology is one of our great challenges."
   At BankAmerica, Martin Stein, vice chairman, noted: "The area where
I would be the first to agree is that the banking industry has not done a

good job in utilizing the PC as an office automation tool. We are faced

with the typical problem. Everybody's secretary must have a 486 chip

in his or her PC because it's much faster. And the question becomes,
So what? The metrics for measuring this kind of productivity are not
very good."Interviewees reported that, to better manage the costs of their basic IT
infrastructures, some companies regarded them as a "utility" and charged

divisions for their use, just as divisions would be charged for externally
purchased services. To further control costs, a few companies (10 to 20 percent)
had begun to benchmark the utility's costs and performance against the prices

and performance available for similar services bought externally.

(Benchmarking is discussed in greater detail in 
Chapter 5
.)Skepticism concerning the degree of payoff from general office use of
desktop computers seemed widespread among interviewed executives. This
may reflect the fact that PC software in its first decade was not well suited to
the needs of nontechnical users and that many senior executives used computers
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL104
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sparingly because of unfamiliarity or discomfort with them. However, this is
clearly changing; software is improving rapidly, and upper-level managers

increasingly are individuals who grew up with personal computing.
BOX 3.1 USING LOTUS NOTES AT CHASE MANHATTAN
BANKChase Manhattan is beginning a project to deliver financial
information to its customers using Lotus Notes, a "groupware" application

designed to facilitate transfers of information contained in large
databases. Senior Vice President Craig Goldman argues that Notes
creates a new attitude for the information services department, allowing
managers to focus on the front office where employees interact with
customers rather than on the back-office. Goldman believes that Notes

provides an environment that will let employees react quickly to new
business opportunities.
SOURCE: Vizard, Michael. 1993. "Chase Banking on Notes to Reach
Customer Desktops," 
Computerworld, April 12, p. 47.
Recently, a number of companies have reported observing enhanced
performance when new, specialized "groupware" communication tools (like
Team Focus, Lotus Notes, or Vision Quest) are used to capture system
knowledge, make meetings more efficient, and realize some of the

communications benefits sought for PCs (
Box 3.1). The emergence of simpler
network software, multimedia capabilities made possible by autosynchronous

transfer technologies, and greater capacities for electronically connecting fixed

and mobile workstations may increase the benefits derived from desktop

computing.Mandated Systems
Regulators such as the Internal Revenue Service, the Food and Drug
Administration, the Securities and Exchange Commission, state and local
regulatory agencies, and other constituents like the investment community now
require companies to provide specific reports or to have in-line monitoring

systems for operations. Most respondents to the committee's questions

considered the necessary investments as costs of being in their particular

business and used IT as an element in reducing the cost of complying with

increasing demands from regulators and other constituents. These investments

in IT are made with no possibility of showing a specific profit or gain to the

companyŠexcept as compared to performing the task by more manual means.
On that basis, most interviewed executives believed that the returns on

investments in mandated systems were satisfactory. For
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL105
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.many companies, mandated requirements for reporting and monitoring have
escalated in recent years, perhaps because computers have made more complex

reporting easier or even possible. Almost by definition, mandated investments

in IT do not contribute to a company's measurable overall productivity or gains

in performance.But interviewed company executives did not manage mandated
investments in IT casually. Many estimated the relative cost of achieving the

desired result using system A versus system B. While no evaluations were made

of direct payoffs or returns for such investments, they were carefully monitored

and evaluated using benchmarks, performance metrics established on

installation, and operations costs versus other alternatives.
Cost ReductionCost reduction is often a major goal of investing in IT. This was especially
true in first-generation applications, in which IT often substituted directly for

manual or clerical labor in repetitive transactions such as materials-handling

activities or in large record-keeping departments such as accounting,

purchasing, or personnel. Other first-generation uses allowed firms to achieve

substantial gains by avoiding costs associated with excessive capital float,

inventories, and billing or payment errors
Šand by saving on the costs of paper
processing, check handling, production set-up, engineering drawings, or
shipping. While the benefits of these systems were said to be substantial,

independent studies and the committee's interviews suggest that large

companies have begun to reach limits in automating repetitive functions and

achieving what might be called the industrialization of services.
5 They are now
focusing on using IT for other, more complex
Šand often strategicŠpurposes.Second-generation cost-reducing systems are often focused on
consolidating or eliminating facilities such as data centers, production-planning

departments, or order-processing bureaucracies. An interesting application in

this area was illustrated by Craig Goldman, senior vice president and chief

information officer of Chase Manhattan Bank:
There is a significant cost-reducing phenomenon that is not well documented
in the industry. That is picking a single site [from which] to deliver an
information-intensive product on a global basis. It means you have common
software in one location that delivers outputs to multiple sales locations or
distribution centers. Anytime you have software in multiple locations, it is

never common and this lack of commonality is usually very expensive. That is
where we see large potential efficiencies.
A large majority (85 percent) of the companies interviewed made formal
evaluations of their cost-reducing IT projects. These firms generally found that

direct financial savings and returns on investment could be calculated
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL106
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.with relative ease. Standard formal capital planning and payback analysis
techniques widely accepted in industry are applicable in this context. Although

often not implemented consistently or well in the early days of IT, ROI

calculations for these projects were said to be fairly straightforward now. In

most cases, interviewed companies now claimed to achieve targeted results or

to exceed them through secondary uses of the same IT technology. At the same
time, the payoffs from cost-reducing systems often were not as high as they
could have been because of inadequate reengineering of processes and

inadequate reorganization of personnel. (This point is addressed further in

Chapter 4.)Specific New Products or Opportunities
IT can enable the creation and delivery of specific new information-based
service products that are extensions of a company's basic repertoire. Sometimes,

such extensions are relatively modest, for example, a new "shopping channel"

offered by a cable TV company. In other cases, such extensions have a major

impact; for example, a telecommunications company may install new software
that allows differential billing rates for calls placed to special parties or at a
given time of day (MCI's Friends and Family program or AT&T's Reach Out

America program).If a new product is distinctive enough, a company can measure its impact
on profit and sales quite explicitly. However, many new products merely apply

new applications software to flexible IT infrastructures already developed, as

when a new insurance product is offered using existing systems. In such cases,

it is difficult to assess the total costs of the new product, although its

incremental costs may be easy to evaluate. Such joint cost situations may
introduce other complexities. By further utilizing existing IT infrastructure,
some particularly innovative new products may simultaneously lower average

costs in the system, thus allowing greater pricing and servicing flexibility on

existing products. A prime example is MCI's Friends and Family program,

which lowers costs for residential customers yet uses the network's otherwise

excess capacity in nonbusiness hours. In the words of Richard Liebhaber at MCI:
The decision to do Friends and Family was a combination of retention and
market share: 62.8 percent of MCI's traffic was during the day; 33 percent of
the traffic (in 1990) was off shift. The percentages in residential traffic were

approximately reversed. Even today much of our infrastructure is idle during
the night. So when we introduce a new product for nighttime residential traffic,
such as Friends and Family, it may not require much capital. Many of the key
investments will be for marketing rather than technological infrastructure.
Returns are going to be largely the difference between increased market
volume (share) and marketing costs.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL107
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The creation and delivery of specific new service products have a more
modest and often a much more predictable impact than do strategic innovations

(see below), because such products can be offered within the context of a well-

understood business concept. A majority (64 percent) of the companies

interviewed by the committee said that IT investments used to support new

service products could usually be analyzed explicitly for profitability and
returns. The vast majority (90 percent) of responding companies noted that they
received satisfactory to high returns on these investments.
It is important to note that the corporate financial statements that are the
basis for macroeconomic statistics reflect total returns from specific products,

rather than the prorated returns that might be more appropriately assigned to IT

as just one component of total investment. Any bias in reported data would

therefore overstate positive returns on IT at more aggregated levels. Even for

investments in IT that seemed to have quite measurable results, companies

whose representatives were interviewed only had an overall correlation between
investments and total project returns. This is a special problem in interpreting
results when
Šas has been noted
Šmany new information-based products
capitalize on installed infrastructure and marginal investments for the new

products themselves are minimal.
Conversely, if new products do not achieve desired returns, one cannot
conclude that the fault lies in the IT system. Poor planning and implementation

may be the principal culprits. Further, since potential payoffs from new

products are always probabilistic, multiple projects and investments in IT are

often necessary
Šas in any other innovative field
Što obtain a single payoff.
Hence, average payoffs on new products will be considerably less than those on

established ones. And actual returns may not appear until long after investments

have been made.
Improvements in Quality
Improved quality is often a most important output of IT systems. Yet most
service companies encounter major problems in appraising the impacts of IT on

service quality, and especially in measuring that impact in financial terms. This

is true when two services are compared simultaneously or when a service output

at one time is compared to an output at an earlier date. Service quality is often

an intangible whose real value exists only in the mind of a customer.

Respondents to the committee's interviews noted that it was impossible to

quantify how much more valuable it is to a customer to receive a monthly bank

statement within 48 hours versus a week later; how much more a cleaner,
neater, more professional letter is worth; how much better served a customer
may be in choosing from 100 financial service products rather than from 50; or

how much it benefits a customer to have a shorter wait, a more accurate sales

slip, or a more relaxed clerk in a
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL108
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.checkout line. Companies reported that it was also very difficult to define the
relative worth to customers of the more precise analytical and diagnostic

capabilities now available in, for example, medicine or design, versus the less

powerful but sometimes cheaper techniques of the past.
Often IT allows the handling of enormous increases in complexity.
Although large benefits accrue to customers, competition may prevent the

service company from increasing its sales or profits. For example, travel agents

must complete in minutes arrangements that they could not have handled in days

Šor in some cases weeks
Šonly a decade ago. To optimize their load factors,
airlines make an average of 175,000 fare adjustments a day and up to 600,000
on some days. While these may payoff in higher profits at the airline level,

travel agents must often research and reissue tickets multiple times for a given

customer's flight. Complexity, compounded by tasks such as worldwide

arrangements, has increased by orders of magnitude; however, agents' average

commissions have held steady at between 7.5 and 9.5 percent on airline prices

that have dropped in real terms since deregulation.
Other factors further complicate determinations of quality. First, the
quality of outcomes is heavily dependent on the actions of the buyer. Superb

educational, health care, consulting, or financial services can be rendered

useless if the buyer does not follow-up properly. Alternatively, excellent

customer implementation can convert poor-quality services into astounding
successesŠas successful graduates from poor schooling systems so often prove.
Second, final outcomes may not be known until long after the delivery of a

service. The true costs and benefits of education, surgery, dentistry, or

insurance, for example, may not be known to either the customer or the

provider for years or decades. Even then exogenous events may largely

determine outcomes. But the customer will perceive
Šand receive
Štheservice's value in terms of actual outcomes, not only those over which the

producer might have had reasonable control.
Measures of IT's impact on performance are essentially useless unless they
adequately reflect the quality of output. While a significant majority (over 80

percent) of the responding companies had established formal metrics to measure

the quality of their service, these were almost always engineering metrics (such
as system response times, percentages of time computers were available, and
cycle times for operations) or data from customer surveys (expressing

customers' views of the services of the company) that could not be converted

into financial measures of the quality of output. Even when they had elaborate

engineering and survey mechanisms to monitor quality, companies could not

isolate the relative contributions of IT, versus those of other factors such as

management, in creating these outputs. Nor could they relate such measures

directly to financial results.
American Express's $6.8 billion Travel Related Services (TRS) Group
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL109
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.is a case in point. The TRS Group samples client satisfaction monthly on such
matters as timeliness, accuracy, and problem resolution for all its transaction

types. It tracks some 46 measurements
Šdefined as important by client research
Šbroken down into six main categories. American Express asks its clients to
weigh the importance of each issue, leading to a weighted customer satisfaction

index that summarizes the key metrics and aggregates the number of
"dissatisfying incidents" recorded in interviews and in customer complaints.
American Express uses these indexes as direct measures of the quality of its

performance. These metrics are tied into a total quality management approach

throughout the TRS Group division for improving the overall effectiveness

(efficiency and quality) of its operations. Yet American Express cannot place a

direct dollar value on improvements in quality.
Unless sales increase or capital or labor requirements decrease as a direct
result of investing in IT to improve the quality of output, companies are

generally unable to place a financial value on the benefits they receive from

using IT. Surrogate measures of quality
Šengineering metrics or data from
customer surveys
Šwere used by a vast majority (90 percent) of the companies
interviewed by the committee. Yet no company stated that it could reliably
convert such measures into metrics of financial payoff. Intangibles such as a
firm's better responsiveness to customers and increased coordination with

suppliers do not always increase the total volume or the margins and prices on

products a company sells or services.
6 Competitors may quickly match the new
capability, and each company may merely maintain its share of a total market

that has not grown in size.
Although companies often try hard to measure the impact of IT on quality,
capturing such impacts and presenting them in ways that can be aggregated at

higher levels of data are real problems.
Major Strategic Innovations
Strategic investments in IT are those that significantly change the
positioning of a company in its markets, redefine the basic nature of the

company, or are necessary to maintain the viability of the company despite

unforeseen competitive incursions. Strategic systems tend to simultaneously

change many different elements of customer, cost, and competitive relationships

Šnot just revenues or costs. They affect such things as quality of customer
service, flexibility, break-even points, response times, and market image, which
cannot be measured in simple financial terms and hence be picked up in

macroeconomic data.
Strategic changes almost always induce a competitive response whose
timing, scope, and force are unpredictable. So many things happen at once in

the marketplace that respondents reported that it was difficult, even post
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL110
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.hoc, to sort out impacts precisely. As in the introduction of new products, major
effects may not be felt for a long time. For example, both the retail trade and

telecommunications industries are in the midst of huge transformations
Šinvolving optical scanning, computing, and digital communication technologies

Šthat were largely unforeseen when these innovations were first introduced.
In some cases, incremental applications of IT may ultimately restructure a
company so much that they redefine the very nature of the company's business

in ways that could not have been foreseen at the time of installation. For

example, Bankers Trust automated its back-office functions so successfully in

the early 1980s that it was able to handle many wholesale banking operations

with a sophistication much greater than that of most of its competitors. As its

wholesale volume grew, it sold its credit card operations and its New York
retail and upstate commercial banking operations. The core of its business
became proprietary trading in bulk capital market activities, and Bankers Trust

reoriented itself toward wholesale banking and trust operations. Within the

wholesale markets it understood well, Bankers Trust could take higher risks

with newer, more complex instruments, making possible much higher margins.

In terms of efficiency, automation enabled Bankers Trust to cut its staff by two-

thirds, while tripling its volume. But more importantly, Bankers Trust had

redefined its total business concept and its options for future growth.
When they are successful, strategic systems offer the highest potential
payoffs from IT. But, by definition, strategic investments in IT systems are

infrequent and the results are difficult to forecast precisely because no one has

developed or exploited such systems before. Classics among systems

representing strategic investments are ECONOMOST and its successor systems

at McKesson, Cosmos II at Federal Express, automated teller systems at

Citicorp, and AANET at Arthur Andersen & Co. Other examples include Bank
of America's COIN, Levi Strauss's Levi-Link, CHIPS (Clearinghouse for
Interbank Payments system), and the Depository Trust. All of these systems

enabled their sponsoring companies to offer new services to clients, but it was

their capacity to restructure the business in its industry that qualified the

systems as strategic. In some cases, investments in IT that the sponsoring

companies hoped would have strategic impact failed or yielded disappointing

returns: these include videotext, the New York Times Reference Service,

Federal Express's Zap-mail, and AMR-AMRIS's CONFIRM system. Systems in

the latter category show up both in higher cumulative IT investment figures

(until written off) and in decreased profits at the macroeconomic level.
Perhaps the best known example of an IT application with strategic impact
is the SABRE system of American Airlines. In addition to providing efficient

and accurate flight reservations, SABRE enables the company to
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL111
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.handle hundreds of thousands of pricing and routing changes each day to
optimize customer value and its own costs. The airline can hold Friday

afternoon seats open for business travelers who are willing to pay a higher price

than leisure passengers will pay. While offering discount fares early in the year

for the Christmas season, the airline can ensure that seats are available for

passengers who wait until later in the year, thus balancing and increasing profits
over the long haul. It can also control oversales on flights and the customer
unhappiness that results. By using a post-departure checkout procedure,

American can also sell at later stops the seats opened up by "no-shows." And it

can better control subsidiary services, such as special meals and handicapped

support, as well as flight operations. American believes its greater capability in

these respects and its capacity to finely segment its customer base because of

the detailed information it has available have enabled it to grow steadily during

the post-deregulation shakeout when many other airlines have lost control of

their costs. Many credit SABRE for converting American from one of the

weaker airlines in the late 1970s to one of the strongest airlines today (although,

like other airlines, it faces financial challenges).
The strategic use of IT to change a company's positioning in the
marketplaceŠand the difficulty of measuring that impact
Šis illustrated in
telecommunications by Richard Liebhaber of MCI, who said,
We deal with 20 million customers every month. It's the only business in the
world where companies invoice every minute, every second, every line item.
And people send us letters about details in their bills. Wouldn't it be powerful,
as a service provision, if we could convert all our workstations in customer
service to image capability and provide our representatives with the invoice

and any letters about it in image form? When the customer call comes, we
could answer questions immediately and better, but there would be no
measurable productivity increase there. 
– It is an opportunity to improve the
image, the feel, the touch of MCI. Intuitively, I would tell you it's going to
provide market share, customer satisfaction, bottom-line. I can't prove it. I'm

not going to waste my time trying.
The strategic use of IT may also enable industries to develop additional
revenue streams of considerable value. One example is the sale of mailing lists

created and maintained by IT systems among mail-order retail houses; in some

instances, the revenue from such sales is an important fraction of the revenue

generated by actual sales. A second example is the revenue stream that goes to

owners of major computerized reservation systems (CRSs); airlines unable to

afford their own CRSs must buy services provided by existing CRS owners.

The revenue from such sales is substantial.
IT may also help to create whole new lines of business for an entire
industry, as mortgage-backed securities, swaps, and derivative securities have in

investment banking. As Daniel Schutzer, vice president at Citibank, noted:
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL112
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The quality of the total service we deliver and the fact that these are whole
businesses now handling trillions of dollars and making hundreds of millions
in profit leave no doubt in my mind that there has been productivity. But if
we're talking about productivity in terms of the number of people that run
branches and how much profit we're making on our old lines, we probably

haven't really decreased the number of people; for years, we were building
many more branches.
The use of IT has facilitated the formation of many new industries or
markets, as the examples in 
Table 3.1
 indicate. The list there is incomplete, and
the data indicate only approximate scales. The full impact of creating these new

industries often will not be reflected as benefits for the originating firm(s) or to

the original service industries they might supplant. There can often be

substantial delays before macroeconomic data are restructured to reflect such

new industries. Although other forces helped to create these new markets and

industries, most would have been essentially impossible to operate at their

existing scales and efficiencies without IT. How much they substituted for other

businesses is unknown. Even the incomplete list in 
Table 3.1
 suggests that new
service benefits to customers substantially outweigh aggregate investments in IT.
One of the most powerful strategic applications of IT is the large-scale
capture, segmentation, and integration of data about both markets and

operations (
Box 3.2). Use of the resulting data and information has helped
revolutionize the ways in which business (and even government) is conducted.
7For example,   Retail chains, by keeping track of product features and sales trends in
detail, can help innovators design products most suited to the market.

By using these data to constantly update operations, producers can

access markets more quickly, shorten cycle times, and decrease their

risks from innovation. Customers are presented with the products they

most want. And shortening production-to-market times (as Levi

Strauss's Levi-Link does) reduces inventory risks for both producers

and distributors.   Researchers in companies routinely use electronic networking to
communicate internationally and with more centers of expertise than in
the past, bringing together the best minds in an entire company (and

the outside world) to bear on a problem. Professional service firms can

quickly access their expertise anywhere in the world. The potentials for

synergy and value are well recognized in research and consulting

networks such as Internet or AANET.
Arthur Andersen & Co. has developed a network, AANET, that helps link
over 60,000 people in some 300 offices in 70 countries. The company's

cumulative experience is growing so rapidly that executives say, "Even those in

the know may not have the best answer to the totality of a complex
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL113
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 3.1 Scalar Estimates of New Markets and Industries Largely Facilitated by IT
Industry Type
aSales Volume orRevenues(billions of dollars)
bYearSourceCatalog retailing47.21992
Catalog Age
, March1993Computer software

and services79.81989
The 5th Annual
Computer Industry
Almanac, 1992Fast-food restaurants75.61992
Frozen Food Digest
,March 1993
Wholesale clubs33.01992
Financial Times
, May
21, 1993
Discount merchandise

retailers151.51989
Discount Store News
,July 2, 1990Computerizedreservation services(worldwide)1.81989
PC Week, August 7,
1989Public information
resources (North
America)11.01991
Information Week
,August 26, 1991
Cellular telephones7.21992
U.S. Industrial Outlook
,1993Home video sales and
rental12.21992
U.S. Industrial Outlook
,1993Basic cable television
(subscription revenue)
12.61992
U.S. Industrial Outlook
,1993Satellite services1.51992
U.S. Industrial Outlook
,1993Video games(worldwide)7.01992
Forbes, January 18,
1993Computer animation

(worldwide)>5.01994
Computer Graphics
World, March 9, 1991
Assets Managed
Credit card receivables206.01990
Faulkner & Gray
, 1992Swaps (worldwide
Šoutstanding balance)
300.01991
The Bankers Magazine
,May/June 1993
Mutual funds

(worldwide)161.01992
Business Week
, January
18, 1993
Credit card charge
volume464.01991
Faulkner & Gray
, 1993''Securitized" home
mortgages100.01991
Business Week
, July 20,
1992Asset-backedsecurities50.9 public 8.0private1992The Bankers Magazine
,May/June 1993
Transaction Volume

New York Federal

over Fedwire150,000 transactions/
minute1990Computerworld, April22, 1991
Automated tellermachines600 million
transactions/month
1991American Banker
,December 7, 1992IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL114
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Industry Type
aSales Volume or
Revenues
(billions of dollars)bYearSourceTransaction Volume (continued)

CHIPSc$250 trillion1990Interviews with
Clearinghouse for
Interbank Payments
Foreign exchange
market> $600 billion/day1990
The Economist
, July 21,
1990Treasury bond market$100 billion/day1990
The Economist
, July 21,
1990Depository trust(outstandingcommercial paper
issues)$555 billion1992American Banker
,September 28, 1992
a U.S. only unless otherwise indicated.
b All figures are approximations only.
c Clearinghouse for Interbank Payments system.
question." AANET attempts to capture and leverage knowledge wherever
it exists at Arthur Andersen. Partners say that the company's distinctive
competency has become "empowering people to deliver better-quality
technology-based solutions to clients in a shorter time." Auditors and

consultants who find unique solutions to problems introduce the solutions to the

system through specially indexed subject files maintained in the Chicago

headquarters. Field professionals who encounter a new problem can query

everyone on the system for solutions through an electronic bulletin board. On

its audit reference and resource disk (a CD-ROM system connected to desktop

microcomputers), Arthur Andersen & Co. collects and distributes as much up-

to-date data as it can on taxes, customers, solutions to special problems,

Financial Accounting Standards Board pronouncements, court rulings, and

professional standards to guide its auditors and consultants in the field. Field

personnel can both tap into the headquarters database directly through AANET

and carry onto a customer's premises a CD-ROM with the power of many firms'
central libraries.The capacity of many companies to develop a knowledge-based
competitive advantage depends largely on the level of detail to which they can
break down their contact point data and then analyze, mix, and match these data

in different ways (see 
Box 3.2
). The company with the largest and most detailed
information base can segment and target its marketing and customer service

activities with a precision and unit cost that smaller competitors
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL115
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 3.2 COMPREHENSIVE AND COMPANY-WIDE
DATABASESProperly designed systems for comprehensive data capture offer
companies one of the few and most important economies of scale in the

current marketplace. Just as the utility of a telephone network increases
dramatically with the number of telephone subscribers connected to the
network, so also do comprehensive data sets enable highly sophisticated
business operations. Computerized reservation systems provided
important competitive advantages for individual companies, but they had
major structural impacts on the entire industry when they began to carry
flight and fare information for carriers other than their owners. These more

comprehensive data sets enabled much tighter integration of services
provided by different companies (e.g., feeder airlines and national
carriers, auxiliary services such as car rentals and hotels) and facilitated
"one-stop" shopping, thereby making trip planning much less onerous for
individuals or travel agents. In the telecommunications industry, detailed

per call records of telephone traffic have enabled long-distance
companies to develop a wide variety of call pricing plans to suit different
calling patterns. In the retail industry, detailed profiles of customer
preferences have increased the efficiency of marketing by enabling
focused and targeted sales campaigns. The databases of Dow Jones,
Merrill Lynch, Readers Digest, The New York Times, and many other
service companies are unique competitive resources individually worth

billions of dollars.
A firm that has taken particular advantage of comprehensive
databases is Toys "R" Us, which enjoys $5.5 billion in annual sales and
three times the revenues of the world's largest toy suppliers. With its
command of information about the marketplace and capacity to control the
positioning, display, retail advertising, and pricing of toys, Toys "R" Us can

sell products virtually year around while its competitors can afford to carry
significant inventories only during the short pre-Christmas season, when
over 60 percent of all toys are sold at retail. Toys "R" Us, with its high
volumes and sophisticated electronic inventory and point-of-sale systems,
has a powerful mechanism for pretesting which toys are likely to sell
Šandin what form
Šwhen the big Christmas sale season comes. In addition,
with its sophisticated models of toy sales, toy production, and changing
tastes, it can invest in its inventories with considerably less risk than other
companies. By insisting on ''just-in-time" deliveries, it can further decrease
mark-down losses, which are as much as 25 percent of the toy industry's
cost for other retailers.
To create such comprehensive databases, it is virtually essential to
capture information at the point of its creation. For example, point-of-sale
systems that capture price and item information in real-time are a critical
element of the foundation for the use of IT in the retailing industry. Modern
telecommunications systems generate large amounts of transaction
information with each call (e.g., calling number, called number, time and
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL116
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.length of call), thus enabling a host of new services (e.g., Caller ID
and Friends and Family, as well as very detailed billing information).

Airline companies capture transactions at the source through their
computerized reservations systems, enabling downstream improvements
in scheduling, food preparation, maintenance, and so on. Securities
companies must capture each element of a transaction instantaneously
and be able to display both that transaction and market averages
continuously. The most valuable resources of a brokerage firm are often
its electronic database, data-tracking, and computer-tracking programs

without which it could not compete. Customer expectations about the
professional capture and use of this information
Šand legal liabilities for its
non-useŠhave grown apace.
Point-of-creation data capture, coupled with a higher degree of
automation in the actual mechanics of capturing data, reduces both the
time required and the error rate for data entry; bar-code scanners make
many fewer errors than human cashiers. In addition, capturing data at the

source means that data need not be repeatedly entered (further
eliminating opportunities for error), and the availability of data at the
beginning of the data-processing cycle means that the benefits of
automation can be captured at any point downstream. Transactions with
customers are the originating point for all work processes within an

industry and the key to providing new and better customer services.
cannot match. Data systems have thus become one of the most important
economies of scale for service enterprises.
This fact has strategic significance in systems design. Companies that do
not consider the future strategic implications of comprehensive data capture at

the time they develop their systems
Šor that attempt to save upfront costs
during early systems design and installation
Šoften lose important data and
associated opportunities, as well as incur higher costs when they try later to

exploit more refined breakdowns of data. Many companies have discovered that

it is much easier to aggregate overly refined data later rather than to try to

introduce disaggregations to a structure not built for them. A good example is

provided by MCI, whose Friends and Family program is based on flexibilities
designed into its IT systems from the beginning. As Richard Liebhaber of MCI
said,How we do this is probably the most important trade secret in our company.
We didn't think about Friends and Family specifically at the time we designed
our IT system. What we did was focus on what we had to be able to control
from an information base viewpoint
Šbecause we are an information service
business
Šand designed in extra flexibilities at that time.
Making quantitative judgments about the impact of investments in IT for
strategic purposes, as for infrastructure, presents unique problems. Strategic
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL117
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT systems are not necessarily less intensive in either labor or capital than
existing operations; indeed, they may well require more of both. Precise

preproject calculations of expected return are difficult because ultimate

consequences are often unknown. And postproject calculations require massive

assumptions about what a company's cash flows would have been with and

without the chain of investments involved. For example, as noted by Liebhaber,
To analyze payoffs of Friends and Family we would have to introduce
assumptions both about what our share would have been without [the product]
and about how much longer you [the customer] will be a member of the MCI

family as a result of this product.
In some cases, potential payoffs from success may be so obviously high as
not to warrant detailed evaluation. As Robert Elmore, partner and worldwide

director of the Business Systems Consulting Group at Arthur Andersen, said,
It is often not necessary to take a detailed look at paybacks on certain strategic
investments. Strategic use of information is often dealing with a 100-to-1

return or at least a 10-to-1 return, and in these cases returns should be obvious.
For example, our electronic bulletin board was installed about 4 years ago, and
there is no question among our practitioners that it gives us a competitive
advantage and that it has made a large direct contribution to sales growth. We
expect our line of business to triple in size in the next few years. We couldn't

even think about being that large if we did not have this capacity to leverage
our intellectual capital across the entire division.
In other instances, broad gauges such as changes in market share, total
profitability, growth rates, overall sales, and returns on investment may be

relevant to judging strategic impact. When a major strategic change results from

a series of incremental decisions (as in the case of Bankers Trust), it may be

possible to justify each incremental step by using traditional measures.

However, when the aggregate impact is considered post hoc, these detailed
numerical analyses may have little meaning because of failures in some projects
and unexpected synergies among others. In some cases, the risk posed by a

strategic project may be unassessable by strict financial analyses. The only

reason some projects succeed is that an individual entrepreneur evaluates risks

differently and actually enters the field to test the assumptions underlying a

project. Turner Broadcasting Company and Federal Express's overnight

package service are success stories in this category.
Decision Making About Investing in IT and the Rigor of
Program Evaluation
Given the multitude of reasons for investing in IT and the different ways in
which firms use IT, processes for decision making about IT of course vary from

firm to firm. Nevertheless, two common characteristics
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL118
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.stood out in the committee's sample group: (1) the similarity between the
practices these companies use for decision making about IT and those used for

other types of corporate technology investments and (2) the difficulty of

separating IT's impacts from those of other factors affecting the success or

failure of a project.
The committee's sample of firms tended to use decision making procedures
for IT investments that were (1) comparable to those they use for other projects

and (2) similar to those other companies use when investing in high-technology

projects. A large majority of the companies interviewed by the committee (see

Question Box 2
 in 
Appendix D
) reported that they routinely undertook
preproject evaluations of investments in IT program by program. Depending on

the nature and purpose of a given project (IT or not), preproject assessments
varied greatly in the degree of quantification used. Few companies felt they had
effective systems for evaluating the aggregate paybacks from all IT programs.

A vice president of a major airline reflected the position that many respondents

expressed. He said,
The process that we've followed for the last 10 years
Šfor all of the projects
that have been large investments
Šis to put them through a very rigid
justification process. The focus is on ROI justification. There are some
strategic implementations or implementations which you can't justify, no
matter how hard you might try, in terms of dollars and cents. But there must be

the implication that implementation will be an advantage for the company
from a strategic viewpoint. It's basically a system-by-system process that is
very similar to our capital allocation process. As a matter of fact, all the
resources that are used at the IT end of the business are allocated through a
process that very similarly matches our capital allocation process within the
company.In certain cases in which the desired result is relatively easy to specify
(e.g., for cost-reducing systems and certain new-product projects), companies

tend to use the same rigorous ROI and financial evaluation techniques for IT

investments that they would use for non-IT investments devoted to the same

ends. But for many systems, data forecasts are less precise, and calculations of

ROI are often not as useful as other metrics. For example, because there are no

positive returns from mandated systems, companies often merely compare

various IT systems to see which will give the desired effect at the lowest long-

term cost. Because it is frequently impossible to measure the impacts of

improvements in quality precisely in terms of sales or profit, firms often use
engineering metrics like response times, error rates, or service availability times
when evaluating investments in systems intended to improve quality. Similarly,

the long-term effects of strategic flexibility, more refined data handling

capabilities, or more detail in databases may defy financial quantification.

Hence strategic investments may be evaluated in terms of their probable effects

on market share, customer
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL119
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.satisfaction, capacity to attract or empower personnel, or potential for future
flexibility, as well as their capacity to accomplish a specific current mission or

major goal.
Major effects of strategic investments may not be felt for a long time, and
the timing and impact of specific events, if they occur at all, are also

unpredictable. The entire cost structure and cost competitiveness of a firm

within its industry may be affected, also unpredictably. In some cases, so many

intangibles are involved that management's judgment may be a better indicator

than detailed metrics. Although many interviewed companies noted that it is
often not possible to develop accurate quantitative or financial metrics to
measure the potential or actual benefits of some strategic investments in IT,

they tended to treat such decisions within the same framework used for other

complex advanced-technology ventures.
A good analogy can be found in research and development (R&D) Both
R&D and IT are often intended to provide new options for the investing

company. In many cases, investments in R&D and IT are uncertain with respect

to payoff. Payoff is usually not immediate, and the expected value is often not

quantifiable or even estimable, let alone predictable. Executives try their best to
forecast expected benefits, but success is often driven more by vision and
superb implementation than by meeting accurate financial analyses. As with

R&D, some IT projects succeed, and some do not. It is not surprising that the

experience of firms in implementing new IT systems varies from extraordinary

success to utter failure, a fact illustrated by many studies at the enterprise level.
Sometimes, the analogy goes much deeper
Šimplementing a new IT
application may in fact 
be an R&D venture. If IT has never been used in a
particular application before, managers may not understand whether, how, or

how well the system will function in practice. There can be large uncertainties
in the amount of time it takes to develop the application, apply IT to it, and
develop specific software for it. Such efforts can be very expensive. Often a

functionally complete IT infrastructure must be put into place before the real

pros and cons of possible applications can be reasonably tested. If the system is

installed in an ongoing operation, there are additional risks of interrupting the

business itself. For example, the New York Stock Exchange had to install its

automated trading system successfully without any interruption of operations;

otherwise losses could have been catastrophic. Similarly, in the mid-1980s,

Kmart invested in an expensive relational database system to store scanner data

(hundreds of gigabytes) from retailers with only the belief (not the assurance)

that once such data were made available, retailers would be able to exploit that

data to their advantage.
A second key characteristic of decision making for investing in IT in any
complex situation is that it is virtually impossible to separate IT's contributions

to success or failure from the effects of other factors such as
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL120
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.planning, training, management, or other supporting investments
Šor from
other important changes that may be happening in the marketplace and business

environment at that time and that may make it difficult to sort out net effects,

even post hoc. Against a backdrop of extensive external change, it is often

impossible to discern the financial impact of entire programs, let alone the

contribution of IT to those programs.
Like a milling machine or a grinder, IT is only one component of a system
that enables a company to produce and deliver a good or service effectively;

actual production usually requires many other components, including

management, facilities, training, support, organizational factors, systems,

equipment, and even materials. For example, when incremental increases in

sales or levels of service require an incremental buildup of a firm's physical
plant or capacity, the cost of IT may be just another component in the aggregate
investment needed to bring the new business opportunity into being (e.g., the IT

accompanying an extension of operations into a new geographical area). At

best, it may be possible for a company to impute to the IT investment a prorated

share of a project's total return based on its relative cost as one factor. In many

cases, executive intuition and judgment may be as satisfactory as more complex

numerical allocations of cost and benefits.
In a strict sense, the proper way to evaluate the impact of IT is to measure
the effects of a total system and then to analyze IT's direct contribution to them

on a factor contribution basis.
8 However, due to the inability to separate the
influence of IT from that of other important factors at the enterprise level, such

an approach to evaluation is rarely feasible, and no company interviewed by the
committee had used it. However, this is also true for evaluating investments in
fixed equipment in manufacturing industries and other, non-IT business

investments in most enterprises. Although a majority of those interviewed by

the committee had tried to evaluate their firm's overall payoff from IT, none felt

that they had satisfactory financial metrics for this purpose.
9To supplement or take the place of unsatisfactory financial metrics, many
companies reported using engineering metrics to determine important impacts

of IT. Engineering metrics often reflect more detailed aspects of an individual

firm's work process (e.g., the number of individual transactions processed per
employee in the banking industry, the number of claims processed per
employee in the insurance industry, the time taken per customer service request

in the telecommunications industry, the time before the arrival of desired

merchandise in the retail trade industry; 
Box 3.3
 gives additional examples).
10Engineering metrics are very useful for diagnostic purposes and to compare the
performance of one company to that of another (benchmarking). For those types

of investments in IT for which financial measures are ineffective (particularly

for improvements in quality), managers rely heavily on engineering
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL121
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.metrics to plan and oversee performance. Often such metrics cannot be related
directly to bottom-line measures of revenue or profitability. The fact that no

company interviewed by the committee had been able to do so supports the

contention that macroeconomic data based on financial reports cannot

accurately reflect changes in quality. Data from engineering metrics on the true

impacts of IT on many aspects of quality are available only at the enterprise
level and are not captured at any higher level of aggregation.
BOX 3.3 EXAMPLES OF ENGINEERING METRICS
Airlines  Fuel cost per passenger-mile
  Load factors (average percentage of occupied seating on scheduled
flights)  Response time for customer inquiries on reservations lines
Telephone Companies
  Average repair time for service calls
  Number of calls processed per operator-day
  Cost per mile to install cable
  Sources and destinations
   Connection delays
  Number and duration of interruptions
  Frequency of disconnects
  Signal variation over different intervals, signal strength and other
measures of signal quality
  System "down" times
CROSS-CUTTING OBSERVATIONS REGARDING ALL USES
OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Despite the wide variety of IT uses described above, several observations
seem to apply to all of them.
Controlling the Costs of IT
IT has become a significant element in the cost structure of many
companies. From 1981 to 1989, absolute annual expenditures on IT in constant

dollars grew by 86 percent nationally across the entire service sector.
11 More
importantly, this figure understates by a substantial amount the total cost of IT,

since it reflects only expenditures on hardware
Šmainframe computers, PCs,
terminals, data communications networks, and the like. At least as
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL122
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.important for an organization that wishes to make effective use of IT are several
other essential elements that seriously affect profits from IT's use:
   Software, whether custom-made, off-the-shelf, or user-developed
.Initial investments can vary from very costly domain-specific software

to inexpensive "shrink wrapped" diskettes and user-developed

spreadsheets, databases, and so on.   Training and support
. Users often require extensive training and
support if they are to use a technology effectively. Even then they are

unlikely to achieve the ability to use a system's full capability before

the next generation of technology and customer demands require

further changes.   Maintenance and upgrading
. Hardware and software in place must be
constantly maintained
Šand often upgraded or replaced
Šlong before
they have reached the use life calculated at the time they were

acquired. The latter two categories often represent over 60 percent of

the ongoing cost for a sophisticated system.
Despite the importance of the elements listed above, the accounting rules
that determine a company's book value do not treat hardware, software, and IT

service (e.g., maintenance, training, support) equally. IT hardware costs (and

initial software costs, if demanded by IRS) are usually carried on a company's

books as depreciable assets. The costs for equally important software support,

training, and IT service are generally treated as expenses (see 
Appendix D
).Since overall IT costs are typically divided about equally among hardware,
software, and service, a company's true investments in IT are rarely reflected in

statements of book value.
Even for elements of IT captured on a balance sheet, the capabilities of IT
improve so rapidly that any given IT investment may be obsolete before a

company can obtain the full benefits for which the technology was purchased.

Various studies have suggested the effects of over investment, duplication, and

dissipation of profits that may occur.
12 Repeated replacement poses problems
for all companies. But the committee's interviews confirmed studies indicating
that replacement costs are a special issue in professional services, such as
accounting, consulting, medicine, scientific research, architecture, engineering

design, advertising, entertainment, or the law. These concerns were well

captured by Marshall Carter, currently chairman and chief executive officer of

State Street Bank and Trust Company, who said:
The investment side of this poses problems. We have traditionally invested in
technology on a 3- to 7-year cycle. But now the shelf life of a lot of things is
18 to 36 months. If you're not putting in tens of millions per year, you'll find
you're falling behind the competition. Yet you must constantly invest even
more in your capital base before you can get a complete payoff. For example,

we're now installing a global treasury system. Within 18 to 36 months, there'll
be a new version or modules that we'll have to rebuy.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL123
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Once a significant IT infrastructure is acquired, costs for hardware,
software support, and maintenance become more fixed than variable in nature.

These fixed IT costs become especially burdensome when revenues are

squeezed by recessions or competitive pressures. A special problem exists

because IT systems are purchased in "lumps." Because of the power of

individual systems and long learning times, companies tend to purchase more
capacity than warranted by average levels of demand. As a result, entire
industries tend to overcapacity. In such situations where costs are mainly fixed,

each producer can (up to the constraints on its capacity) gain total margin by

selectively lowering prices to increase volume. The result is strong downward

pressures on average prices (and thus on the percentage of margins) in services

using IT,
13 even though the services provided may be much more complex and
of higher absolute value to the customer.
Daniel Schutzer at Citibank expressed one strategic response to this
problem:Today we would like to move to an architecture which is less fixed-cost based
and more variable. This would let us make sure our businesses remain
profitable as they're growing and as they're shrinking, without being stuck with

big fixed costs just at the wrong times. We see the technology moving more
toward totally network-based systems where our divisions provide services on
top of an intelligent network. All of these things dictate a more open-systems
approach, but we do not know now what their specific impact will be.
Enhancing Technological Sophistication and Developing
StandardsService companies have often driven the state of the art in IT software,
computing algorithms, hardware, and standard setting. For example: (1) Expert
system software is widely used to capture and disseminate "best practices" from

one skill source to others (e.g., for paramedics, diagnosticians, maintenance

personnel, or brokers). (2) Software programs for telephone switching systems

(million-line programs controlling real-time operations and billing records)

routinely push the software state of the art. (3) Airline scheduling problems

have generated more efficient linear programming algorithms that can solve

problems involving tens of thousands of variables. (4) Financial services firms'

demands for analysis of huge quantities of data have driven the design and

purchase of massively parallel processors.
The need to exchange data for applications extending across different
organizations has driven the development of standards for electronic data
interchange (EDI). Standards for document formats, communications protocols,
and inter-application data transfer have enabled disparate computer systems

running different software packages to communicate with each other across a
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL124
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.variety of applications. Standards have been crucial to growth and progress in a
number of industries, including travel agencies and airlines (standards for

CRSs), retail-manufacturing (universal product code and EDI standards),

financial services and banking (magnetic ink recognition and message security

standards), and standards for asynchronous multimedia (data, voice, and video)

communications. Despite such progress, meaningful standards for inter-
applications data transfer have yet to be developed for important specific
applications, such as standards for recording medical information, for

monitoring outcomes of various procedures, or even for billing.
14There are, of course, important possible drawbacks to standards
Šnotablya premature "freezing" of technology. For standards to be accepted, members of

the relevant community must be willing to forego some unforeseen future

opportunities and potential technological advances in favor of those created by

enhanced current interoperability and electronic data interchange. When the

former outweigh the latter, interested partners will resist standards, causing
higher current costs but perhaps enhancing future capabilities
Šas did the
opponents of analog standards for high-definition television.
Problems in Assessing Enterprise Performance
For companies in certain industries such as air transport and
telecommunications, there are some readily quantifiable and widely accepted

measures of output. Ton-miles or passenger-miles handled in transportation,

packages or documents processed in overnight delivery, kilowatt-hours or cubic

feet of gas delivered by utilities, and the number of calls connected, minutes

connected, or access lines provided by the telecommunications industry are

widely accepted examples.
In industries for which measures of physical output are available (e.g.,
telecommunications, transportation, electric utilities, large fast-food and

merchandise chains), levels of productivity (as measured, e.g., by revenues or

value added per unit of labor input) have traditionally compared favorably to

those in manufacturing. However, the correlation between growth in these

measures and higher profits is not always good. Fare wars in the airline industry
have destroyed profits even when revenue passenger-miles have risen, and the
profits of individual companies within the industry have shown even greater

variations. Even a uniformly positive correlation between measures of physical

output and profitability or revenues may be the result of other business practices

or investments, or the result of a regulatory environment that assures operating

companies a "reasonable" rate of return.
For many firms (e.g., those in financial services, health care, medicine,
law, accounting, design, software, or government services), it is almost

impossible to define a consistent measure of physical output that will reflect
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL125
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.variety, complexity, quality, or value produced (see 
Chapter 1
). In some cases,
gross statistics such as the number of clients or customers served or the number

of audits or medical procedures performed may be available.
15 But the
qualitative nature of the output of many service companies makes its precise

numerical measurement much more difficult than in goods-producing

enterprises.16 Yet it is often along these qualitative dimensions that individual
service firms compete with one another.
In such cases, financial metrics such as gross revenues or profitability may
be the only alternative, although even financial metrics have their limitations. A

company may be a nonprofit enterprise (e.g., a nonprofit hospital). Revenues or

profits may not be valid measures of output in enterprises where prices have

been regulated (as in property and casualty insurance or telecommunications),
where price increases are due to increased risks (as in insurance or obstetrics),
or where revenues are determined by budget allocations (as in museums,

foundations, or educational institutions).
17Assessing the performance of individual firms involves several critical
difficulties, a number of which affect the usability of measures at the

macroeconomic or industry levels and have been discussed from that standpoint

in previous chapters.
Pass-Through of Benefits
A variety of respondents reported that the rapid advances in IT and the
high levels of competition in both the IT-supplying and IT-using industries

made it difficult for even innovative companies to capture benefits from their

investments in IT. With rare exceptions, IT hardware and software
Šandsupporting communication services
Šare available from many competing
vendors. Hence it is hard to create technological barriers to entry in the service
sector other than those attributable to software developed internally. Even then,

since a wide variety of software approaches can (with almost equal efficiency)

solve almost any given problem, there are few protectable intellectual property

rights that prevent replication of results.
Fast followers can move with relative assuredness toward known results
Šand often at costs lower than those of the innovators because of ongoing

technological advances. Technologies diffuse so rapidly that even the most

innovative respondents said that, with few exceptions, IT gave them only a
temporary competitive edge. When asked how long this edge might last, the
usual answer was ''a few months," which on further inquiry resolved into 3 to 9

months' time. Once new products or improvements in quality are copied,

companies are forced to compete largely in terms of price. The same is true for

each competitor, with the result that overall industry revenues may not fully

reflect the benefits of an innovation
Šwhich are largely passed through to the
customer instead. The innovation
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL126
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.may proliferate so quickly that it soon becomes a routine and "commoditized"
expectation of all customers. Unless the total market is growing substantially,

overall industry revenues will not increase significantly despite multiple

investments dedicated to innovation.
The tendency for profits from IT-based innovations to be short-lived is
exacerbated by IT hardware trends. The computing power of IT has been

growing so rapidly relative to unit cost (recently 35 percent per year for

processors and 45 to 50 percent per year for memory) that the same dollar

investment at a later time purchases substantially more power or capability.
Competitors who invest later are able to buy more capacity per dollar than the
original innovator, and competitors end up with either an equal capacity at less

cost (reducing their fixed costs relative to those of the innovator) or a greater

capacity for the same cost (resulting in a greater potential for business

expansion relative to the innovator). The net result is that the ease of access to

productivity-enhancing hardware (usually available to all competitors) forces

many service producers to pass benefits through to others and often lowers

rather than raises their prices while increasing their break-even volume.
18Given that the benefits of IT-enabled innovations in services are not fully
realized by the innovator, who does capture them? Three beneficiaries stand

out: (1) the company's direct customers, (2) its suppliers, and (3) the general

public.For example, wholesalers such as McKesson or SuperValue are linked to
retail drugstores and grocery stores. As these wholesalers improved their

service capabilities for customers, they actually lost percentage in margins. In
the case of McKesson, currently a $7.8 billion firm, the percentage of
wholesaling margins has dropped from about 7 percent to 3 percent over the last

15 years, making another 4 percentage points available for the margins of its

retailers and producers. McKesson passed savings on to others by lowering

prices and by providing higher levels of service to its suppliers and customers

(e.g., McKesson's central maintenance of virtually all price stickers and price

files for its drug retailers). As David Malmberg, vice president of McKesson's

inventory management and systems services, said, "These used to be extremely

time consuming and expensive things for the retailer. They are done by our

technology now. But this doesn't show up in our margins, and our competitors

have to match the service. In effect, we've upped the investment ante for

everyone."The experience of SuperValue, a $9.4 billion distributor to independent
grocers, is comparable. SuperValue has developed extensive inventory and

product-handling technologies that allow it to manage thousands of product
lines and assist suppliers and retail customers with their distribution functions,
including architectural design, construction, and space management. IT systems

provide services upstream, downstream, and geographically. In
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL127
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.addition to controlling inventories in transit, SuperValue also offers extensive
host-support services for the electronic point-of-sale systems of its supermarket

customers, permitting them to manage their operations better through instant

access to price files, shelf tag printing, and detailed reports about their products'

turnover, gross profits, category profits, and so on. So effective is SuperValue at

providing these services that several major supermarket chains now buy from
SuperValue in order to obtain the economies of its system. No single food
product manufacturer could compete with these services. This is even truer for

food producers for whom SuperValue handles the complex functions of

coordinating field-produce contracting and transportation, fresh-meat delivery

and marking, and in-store shelf-price verification. Yet because of competitive

forces, SuperValue's total aggregate margins have not changed significantly.
Firms outside the service sector that purchase services from an innovator
Še.g., manufacturers buying communication services from AT&T or MCI
Šareoften major beneficiaries. Strategic alliances
Šor major "outsourcing"
arrangementsŠcan present even greater potentials for pass-throughs. A large
downstream partner may radically reduce its internal costs by cooperating with

an efficient service provider whose own costs may not be reduced by the
partnership. In these cases, the service producer may show no gain in
productivity, while service users reap substantial benefits. An example is the

alliance between State Street Bank and Trust Company and Ford Motor

Company. State Street has had a program with Ford for several years to connect

Ford's U.S. treasury and trading operations with State Street's. In the words of

State Street's Marshall Carter, "Ford feels pretty strongly that they've managed

to increase quality yet reduce their staff substantially as a result of this alliance

and its electronic connections. You wouldn't necessarily see a productivity gain

here at State Street, but you would see a dramatic productivity gain at Ford."
A third major category of beneficiary may be end users or the general
public. When a transaction's marginal benefit to a customer is high and its cost

drops precipitously, transaction volumes are likely to increase; this has been

especially true in financial services, banking, and communications. For

interstate toll calls, volume has increased since deregulation at a rate of 10.6

percent a year, while prices have decreased at a rate of 7.1 percent a year.
19New York Stock Exchange transactions have risen from a daily average of 10

million to 12 million shares in the early 1970s to an average of 183 million

shares in the third quarter of 1992.
20 Both of these service industries were
deregulated during the 1980s, eliminating the monopoly profits of existing

producers. Customers benefited from lower costs and subsequently a greater

selection of services. Often the volume of transactions increased so rapidly that

companies could not reduce the number of total employees or costs despite

much more efficient transaction-level automation.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL128
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In other nonregulated situations, many professional companies interviewed
by the committee reported that they could not increase prices to reflect the

greater value added and the lower costs enabled by their IT systems because of

overcapacity, competition, industry practice, or legal constraints on pricing.
This phenomenon appears paramount in evaluating the impact of word
processing and spreadsheets on report writing. The cost of making a change in a

document is quite small; the result is that authors or analysts revise their

manuscripts with much higher frequency (compared to pre-PC days). The

customer or user of the report receives the benefit of a thoroughly massaged
final product, but the total effort that went into the production of that draft may
not have declined. A similar situation obtains in the use of automated teller

machines (ATMs). The cost to customers of using ATMs is low; hence they

engage in many more transactions than would be the case in the absence of

ATMs. The ATM user thus benefits from the machine, but the expense incurred

in deploying the ATM was at first generally borne by the bank. Later, banks

sought to recoup some of these costs through usage fees.
21On the other hand, the use of IT sometimes allows companies to pass costs
through to customers as well
Šespecially in the form of personal labor or
waiting times. For example, IT enables telephone customers to dial long-

distance telephone calls themselves and enter their own accounting information

(credit card numbers) at pay telephones; bank customers perform for themselves
many of the functions of bank tellers at ATMs (e.g., checking account balances
or processing deposit and withdrawal transactions). While customers may prefer

to perform these activities for themselves
Šbecause doing so is more
convenient or faster
Šthe actual labor required to provide a service has not been
altered much by the introduction of IT. However, it is customers who are now

doing much of the work. In a similar manner, IT has enabled airlines to manage

more efficient "hub-and-spoke" routing systems, and retailers to provide "retail

warehouse" sales of goods in bulk. But customers also bear some of the costs

from these innovations, in the form of additional waiting times or a less friendly

shopping atmosphere. Very few firms
Šif any
Štrack costs borne by the
customer in any systematic manner, and the overall effects on society are

impossible to estimate.Time Lags and the Need for Higher Skills
Timing and implementation factors also complicate measures of IT's
impact on performance at the enterprise level.
22 Various studies indicate that, as
in other technology areas, there are long average time lags before highly

innovative new IT systems may achieve expected payoffs.
23 Workers'
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL129
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.productivity constantly lags behind the systems' potentials as workers learn new
tasks, and there are costs associated with confusion that arises as the systems

are debugged. Sometimes, workers may barely reach full capabilities before the

next generation of equipment requires changes to keep up with customer

demands for quality and responsiveness. One implication is that if the benefits

of a system are evaluated too early in its life cycle, they are likely to be
underestimated. The other is that learning effects, training requirements, backup
systems, extra supervision, and delays must be provided for in any complete

plan for introducing new IT systems.
The time needed for workers to learn how to interact with a new system
may be compounded by concurrent changes in ways outputs are produced.

Some systems may facilitate or may require the use of more expensive or more

highly trained knowledge workers in the place of less skilled workers. A now

familiar example is the movement away from centralized typing pools, first to

distributed word processing by secretaries and then to direct preparation of texts
by their professional or managerial authors. An analysis of word processing's
payoffs in the early 1980s would differ considerably from today's reality. If the

complexity of a business problem also increases sufficiently, both the number

of workers and their skill requirements may go up
24 (Box 3.4).In other cases, the use of IT may simplify tasks, so that the required skill
levels may drop, with the effect of deterring increases in wages.
25 This pattern
has been particularly evident in repetitive tasks such as product sorting, or in

retail sales. A combination of lower skill requirements and wages in some cases

may encourage higher staffing levels than in the past, and hence reduce
measured productivity.
26 On the other hand, the capacity
BOX 3.4 BETTER CANCER TREATMENTS MAY COST MORE
New cancer treatment procedures (e.g., bone marrow transplants)
often require more precise and expensive equipment, greater training,
higher wages, more laboratory facilities, and more people to operate (per
procedure) than the older chemotherapy treatments did. At the same time,
the new procedures may be significantly more effective in terms of
clinically measured patient outcomes, including morbidity, mortality, and

long-term care costs.
However, while the costs of new procedures may well be incurred by
treatment providers, none of these benefits may show up in their balance
sheets or income statements. Actual outcomes may be uncertain for
years, and prices established through diagnostic-related-group
compensation caps may prevent prices for medical services from
reflecting the higher value added.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL130
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to use less skilled people may have the benefit of increasing employment
opportunities. This appears to have been the pattern in low-wage services such

as retailing or fast foods. Such complexities obviate the use of any simple

measures of productivity at the enterprise level.
Shifts in the Basic Nature of the Business
As noted earlier in this chapter, the use of IT may change the very nature
of a firm's business. In this case, comparisons of a firm's productivity or

performance in two different time periods may not be a true "apples-to-apples"

comparison. It may even be the case that performance metrics designed for the

old business lag in reflecting changes at the enterprise level.
27For example, in many large professional service organizations, tasks that
used to be the very core of professional practices (e.g., doing audit checks in

public accounting or preparing bubble charts for portfolio analyses in financial

services or consulting firms) have become so routine and automated that they

are almost loss leaders, much of whose value is passed through in order to sell

clients other services that are now the professionals' core competencies. In
many cases, the basic business of professional firms has become the capture,
analysis, communication, and leveraging of higher-value current information

for clients. Such information-intensive tasks require a high level of specialized

intellectual expertise from sophisticated knowledge workers. Professional firms

often obtain a competitive edge by leveraging their high-priced talent through

automation of most routine tasks (e.g., literature searches, table look-ups, and

routine or standardized design calculations) and development of very powerful

analytical algorithms, expert systems, and extensive networking capabilities.
Investment companies provide a high-profile example. High performance
computing and electronic data systems have enabled development of complex,

customized financial instruments that are difficult to create and support but that

are generating totally new kinds of business. State Street Bank
Šmanagingassets of over $1 trillion and enjoying a 20 percent growth rate
Šis typical of
those working on this complex business frontier (specifically portfolio and trust

management). State Street's Carter noted:
There are people out there all the time trying to create financial instruments
that give a better yield on a portfolio. We are working on the edges of a system
creating complex instruments that
Šright at the beginning
Šwill be inefficient
operations because of their new characteristics. Yet these are expanding the
capital markets. The old instruments have become very stable, efficient, and
easy to serve. The average statistics may say you're not getting "productivity"
increases. If you disaggregate it you'd see more productivity on the older
(lower-margin) instruments than on the newer, higher-margin ones. But as a
businessman, where do you want to be?
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL131
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Executives invest in IT programs with the intent of increasing expected
returns as compared to other alternatives, for example, not investing or

investing in other programs. The returns they derive from these decisions may

be vital to the success of the enterprise but may not show up readily in standard

measures of industry revenues or sector productivity. Information technology

has enabled service firms not just to do things better in the old way (efficiency)
but also to do entirely new things that provide greater benefits to outside parties
(effectiveness). Many of these improvements in performance may not be

reflected in increased ROI, sales, or margins, or in macroeconomic statistics.

Thus, many of the difficulties in measuring the productivity and effectiveness of

IT in services at the macroeconomic level have their origin at the enterprise level.
Impacts of IT that may not show up in standard financial or data reports
include maintaining market share in a relatively mature marketplace, avoiding

catastrophic losses due to process failures, avoiding losses of market position or

profits if a competitor adopts a new technology and the firm does not,

increasing flexibility to respond to unknown future market or process changes,

improving employee relations or the work environment, improving the quality

of customer service, handling increasing complexity, and improving the scope
and responsiveness of the firm's service outputs. These are key elements of
service performance, although they may not affect 
productivity.In the committee's sample of companies, techniques used for decisions
about investments in IT are comparable to those used for corporate decisions

about investments in R&D or other complex technologies. As in R&D

investments, none of the sampled companies could separate the effects of a

single input (R&D or IT) from other factors that might affect the ultimate

success of a given project. Nor could they always estimate or calculate financial

returns accurately. For this reason many firms use engineering metrics rather
than financial measures to evaluate the potential and actual impacts of an
investment in IT. But these metrics also do not permit aggregation at the

industry or macroeconomic levels.
Within enterprises, investments tend to fit into a few basic categories:
those supporting basic infrastructure, mandated requirements, cost reduction,

new products, improvements in quality, new strategic potentials, and new

desktop or workstation information exchange networks. In some of these cases

(e.g., cost-reducing systems, systems to support new products), financial returns

are relatively easy to evaluate through the use of well-understood formal
investment analyses. In others (e.g., systems like those for basic infrastructure,
improvements in quality, and new strategic uses), other metrics
Šlikeengineering metrics or results of customer surveys
ŠmayIMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL132
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.be used to estimate impacts. Even though managers may use the best techniques
available, some investments in IT still are based to a large extent on the

intuition or judgment of management.
Some of the more important problems in measuring impacts of IT at the
firm level are (1) defining meaningful units of output that are consistent over

time, (2) defining the contributions of IT as a component in the total investment

package needed to create a result, (3) capturing or measuring benefits passed

through to customers or suppliers, (4) establishing financial measures of the

impact of intangible benefits (such as faster cycle times, greater reliability, or a
broader selection of service products), (5) estimating the "opportunity costs" of
what would have happened without use of a technology, (6) dealing with

payoffs that are delayed due to learning factors and with (sometimes extensive)

lags until actual outcomes are known, and (7) measuring changes in

productivity when IT has changed the basic nature of a business and the

competitive environment.
Granted all of these complications, a large majority (80 percent) of
respondent companies felt that their investments in IT overall had paid off well.

A majority said that they had made special studies of IT's payoff, although none

had made routine measurements of overall IT returns. A large majority

indicated that their special studies confirmed a positive overall payoff from IT

(see Appendix D
). Most expressed concern that their earlier management
techniques had not been as efficient or effective as they should have been. Most
were trying to improve these currently (see 
Chapter 5).NOTES AND REFERENCES
1. See, for example, Keen, P, 1988, 
Competing in Time: Using Telecommunications for Competitive
Advantage, Ballinger Publishing Company, Cambridge, Mass.; U.S. Congress, Office of
Technology Assessment, 1985, 
Automation of America's Offices 1985-2000
, Government Printing
Office, Washington, D.C.; and Watts, L., 1986, "What Price Automation?," 
Northeastern University
Magazine, December.
2. Denison, E. 1989. 
Estimates of Productivity Change by Industry: An Evaluation and an
Alternative, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Denison makes a strong case for the last
explanation, though there is disagreement in the community on this point.

3. Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin Hitt. 1993. "Is Information Systems Spending Productive? New

Evidence and New Results," MIT Sloan School of Management, Working Paper 3571-93,

September 24. (To appear in 
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Information
Systems .)
4. The work of Sassone suggests that downsizing secretarial pools may have the unintended result

that professionals end up doing many more non-IT-based support tasks that were previously done by

secretaries. Thus, on balance, the result may be lower measured productivity. See Sassone, Peter.

1992. "Survey Finds Low Office Productivity Linked to Staffing Imbalances," 
National Productivity
Review, Spring, pp. 147-158.
5. Levitt, Theodore. 1976. "Industrialization of Service," 
Harvard Business Review
, September-
October, pp. 63-74.

6. Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Bruce Bimber. 1991. "Information Technology and the Productivity

Paradox," Working Paper, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., February 7.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL133
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7. Porter, Michael E., and Victor E. Millar, 1985, "How Information Gives Your Competitive
Advantage," 
Harvard Business Review
, July-August, pp. 149-160; Quinn, J.B., 1992, 
IntelligentEnterprise, Free Press, New York; and Wriston, Walter B., 1992, 
The Twilight of Sovereignty
 ,Scribners, New York.

8. Loveman, Gary, 1988, "An Assessment of the Productivity Impact of Information Technologies,"

MIT Management in the 1990's Program, 88-054, July.; and Kendrick, John W., 1988, "Productivity

in Services," in 
Technology in Services: Policies for Growth, Trade, and Employment
 , Bruce R.
Guile and James Brian Quinn (eds.), National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.

9. The inadequacy of financial metrics alone for assessing the performance of a firm is discussed in

Eccles, Robert, 1991, "The Performance Measurement Manifesto," 
Harvard Business Review
,January-February, pp. 131-137.

10. A Bellcore study showed that the number of employees per 1000 access lines
Šone of the
operating company's key performance metrics
Šhad dropped from 110 to 40 (or about a 10 percent
per year compounded improvement) between 1970 and 1990.

11. Roach, Stephen, Morgan Stanley & Co., unpublished data, April 1993.

12. Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole. 1985. "Preemption and Rent Equalization in the Adoption of

New Technology," Review of Economic Studies
 52:383-401.
13. Bresnahan, Timothy F. 1986. "Measuring the Spillovers from Technical Advance: Mainframe

Computers in Financial Services," 
American Economic Review
 76(4, September):742-755.
14. Institute of Medicine. 1991. 
The Computer-based Patient Record
 , National Academy Press,
Washington D.C., pp. 85-87.

15. The meaning of aggregated statistics is also clouded by the fact that parameters such as relative

unit volumes, revenues, costs, timing factors, number of clients, and so on may have little real

meaning as indicators of productivity when ultimate outcomes are unknown. For a bank, the face

value of loans or the number of loans handled is meaningless without knowing the quality of those

loans or the creativity they represent. The number of procedures performed at a hospital compared

to their cost is useless information, unless one knows their success rate and the relative health of

patients at the time they were served. Even the success rate must be qualified by the subsequent

quality of life or care costs patients encounter.

16. Mark, Jerome, 1986, "Problems Encountered in Measuring Single and Multifactor Productivity,"

Monthly Labor Review
, December, pp. 3-11; Baily, Martin Neill, and Robert J. Gordon, 1988, "The
Productivity Slowdown: Measurement Issues and the Explosion of Computer Power," in 
BrookingsPapers on Economic Activity
, Vol. 2, William C. Brainard and George L. Perry (eds.), Brookings
Institution, Washington, D.C., pp. 347-431; and Brynjolfsson and Bimber, 1991, "Information

Technology and the Productivity Paradox."

17. Kutscher, R., and J. Mark. 1983. "The Service Sector: Some Common Perceptions Reviewed,"

Monthly Labor Review
, April, pp. 21-24.
18. Bresnahan, 1986, "Measuring the Spillovers from Technical Advance: Mainframe Computers in

Financial Services."

19. Federal Communications Commission. 1991. 
Trends in Telephone Service
, FCC, Washington,
D.C., February, p. 25.

20. Standard & Poor's Corp. 1992. 
Current Statistics, October.
21. Both the committee's interviews and independent studies testify to the ubiquity of this

phenomenon. See, for example, Brynjolfsson and Bimber, 1991, "Information Technology and the

Productivity Paradox."

22. Curley, Kathleen Foley, and Philip J. Pyburn. 1982 "'Intellectual' Technologies: The Key to

Improving White-Collar Productivity," 
Sloan Management Review
, Fall, pp. 31-39.
23. Guile, Bruce R., and James Brian Quinn (eds.). 1988. 
Managing Innovation: Cases from the
Service Industries
, National Academy Press, Washington D.C. Also Brynjolfsson, Erik, Thomas W.
Malone, and Vijay Gurbaxani. 1988. "The Impact of Information Technology
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL134
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.on Markets and Hierarchies," Sloan School of Management, Working Paper 2113-88,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.

24. Osterman, Paul. 1986. "The Impact of Computers on the Employment of Clerks and Managers,"

Industrial and Labor Relations Review
 39:175-186. Also, Krueger, A. 1993. "How Computers Have
Changed the Wage Structure: Evidence from Microdata, 1984-1989," 
The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 39(February):175-186.
25. Bright, J. 1958. 
Technology in Automation
, Harvard Business Press, Boston, Mass. This is the
classic statement of this argument.

26. Baily and Gordon, 1988, "The Productivity Slowdown: Measurement Issues and the Explosion

of Computer Power." Also, Hunt, H., and T. Hunt. 1986. 
Clerical Employment and Technological
Change, Upjohn Institute for Labor Studies, Kalamazoo, Mich.
27. Stalk, G., and T. Hout. 1990. 
Competing Against Time: How Time-based Competition Is
Reshaping Global Markets
, Free Press, New York.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ENTERPRISE LEVEL135
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Impacts of Information Technology at the
Activity LevelINTRODUCTIONFaced with a myriad of pressures to change the way they do business,
many managers in different types of firms have found it fruitful to focus on
activities or major processes, rather than just on products, organizational units,
specific tasks, or reporting relationships. They are attempting to redesign the

work flow from beginning to end, breaking it down into component segments

and asking hard questions: What should we be doing? What is the best way to

do it? Which components should remain within the firm? How should the

activities that continue to constitute the firm be structured into a better-

functioning whole? Companies are using many of the innovative technologies

and organizational methods available to answer these questions. The current

attention given by researchers and corporate decision makers to ''business

process redesign" or reengineering is one approach to process innovation, the

most recent to emerge in organizational literature.
1Today's information technology (IT)
Šwhich embeds the tools for specific
tasks and operations within networked infrastructures whose reach can extend
well beyond a firm's boundaries
Šprovides vehicles for such changes. IT
permits many of a firm's information-based tasks to be reconfigured and linked

in alternative ways to generate new work flows and processes. Put differently,

the use of IT permits the uncoupling and rearranging of key organizational

processes to achieve much more effective organizational designs.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL136
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Past efforts to deploy IT have often focused on the level of tasks or
subactivities and limited the scope of changes to existing and/or narrowly

defined processes. The result has often been suboptimization (although the

committee does not intend to suggest that each task or activity must be

optimized), or, at best, optimization of a subset of existing tasks. By contrast, a

purposive and holistic focus on the activity level
Šwhere activities are regarded
as relatively complete elements of a firm's work flow that often cross-functional
departments (e.g., departments such as marketing, production, or research and

development)Šwill often yield better results. Examples of activities include
product design, logistics, order-processing, purchasing, maintenance, and

accounting. More complete redesign of processes and changing organizational

relationships is possible when an activities-level view is taken.
The committee believes that the investments in IT made to date, in many
instances, are on the verge of providing companies unprecedented degrees of

flexibility in changing the ways activities are designed and organized. This is so

for several reasons:   A broader installed base of technologies makes new, more complex or
integrated applications possible. For example, widely deployed

workstations, interconnected network software, and sophisticated

communications links are required for many collaborative and cross-
organizational work applications to be effective.
   IT vendors are beginning to produce software that is easier to use and
whose capabilities match user and customer needs more closely. As a

result, relatively untutored users can do substantially more, more

quickly, with the IT at their disposal.
   Early implementation experiences provide opportunities for learning
about both the technology and the management of change. Thus

managers are beginning to have more realistic expectations for what IT

can and cannot do, and to understand better the time frames required to
achieve dramatic changes.
   New technologies are being designed and introduced to increase
capacities as well as integrate capabilities provided by older

technologies. Resulting changes in activities in turn make possible

more far-reaching changes in enterprises.
Overall, the use of IT has the effect of diminishing the parts played by
place, time, and hierarchy in the structure and management of organizations.
2Furthermore, the range of activities to which IT is being applied is still
expanding.The committee believes that activity level analysis yields a deeper
understanding of process innovation and its effects on performance. Focusing
on activities means paying detailed attention to the actual work being done
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL137
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.or being planned, taking into account the interplay of work flows,
organizational structures, staffing, and tools
Šincluding IT, both within and
between firms. Interfirm effects are particularly interesting where they involve

multiple firms in different industries or shifts in work among firms.
BOX 4.1 CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORKS FOR ANALYSIS OF
ACTIVITIES AND PROCESSES
The value-chain model.
 Work processes are sometimes understood
through the use of value chains that depict the sequence in which
activities typically occur and how they interact. In the simplest model, a
linear one, each activity receives an input from the previous activity, adds
value to that input, and passes it on to the next activity as an output. (Of
course, value chains are not necessarily linear.) The value-chain model
provides a useful lens for looking at how activities are linked one to

another to generate the overall net benefit of an organization's
procedures, and the analytical problem is the determination of how much
and what kind of value is added by each activity.
The process management model.
 The principles of process
management can serve as a disciplined basis for analyzing how work is
done at the activity level. Recently, enterprises in all types of industries
have applied process management techniques to varied activities. Their
goals have included both continuous or incremental improvement and

radical change or
Šin popular terms
Šreengineering of their business
processes.Sociotechnical systems analysis.
 From this perspective, activities
are sets of tasks carried out by people whose work is united by output and
by work-flow technology. The analysis treats social and technological
aspects of task processes as inherently interrelated and thus suggests
that social and technological issues in process redesign cannot be
separately resolved. The sociotechnical systems approach affords

insights into both how activities may be conceptualized and why
technological change should be expected to have significant impacts on
activities as well as their linkages.
Activity level analysis is a more refined level of analysis than has
traditionally been used in assessing the aggregate outcomes of investments in
IT. Activity level insights are also not captured either in sector- or firm-level

analyses. Thus, hard data are generally unavailable, and the literature suffers

from a paucity of analytic models and substantial empirical research at the

activity level.3A number of ideas from the current organizational literature may be
applied to assist with analysis at the level of activities (
Box 4.1). Although these
ideas do not exhaust the paradigms that might be helpful in understanding
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL138
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the role and influence of IT's use at the activity level in firms, they are useful as
working constructs for an exploratory investigation.
Activity level analysis may well require the development of new metrics
for performance (especially ones that reflect the changing values and

expectations of "customers")
Šin part because the output of service activities
may be intangible.
4 The committee hopes that the discussion presented in this
chapter can stimulate further research at the activity level that will eventually

provide a more thorough empirical base and a foundation for new paradigms

and concepts with which to conduct activity level analysis.
The discussion in this report is based on material derived from the
committee's interviews with senior managers as described in 
Appendix D
, theexperiences of committee members, accounts from secondary sources,

conceptual models in current organizational literature (some of which have only

recently appeared), and views developed in the course of the committee's

deliberations.5 Although the discussion in this chapter is more conceptual than
that presented in Chapters 
1 through 
3, the committee believes that it is essential
for completing its exploration of the relationships between investments in IT

and service sector performance.WHAT IS AN ACTIVITY
An activity is a structured set of tasks (work) leading to a specified output
for a specified internal or external client. This report uses the term 
activity in a
broad sense to refer to relatively self-contained or complete work processes

regardless of level of granularity. From this broad perspective, examples of

service activities include many functions performed both in manufacturing and

in specialized service organizations, such as accounting, research, design,
planning, marketing, advertising, or distribution firms. So viewed, service
activities contribute value, in varying degrees, to an organization's major

products. (
Box 4.2 illustrates how one analyst relates activities to other concepts.)
Within particular enterprises and work groups, activities can be defined
much more specifically in relation to tasks and outputs: writing insurance

policies, opening bank accounts, selling products in a department store, routing

airline tickets, and providing nursing care in a hospital may all be treated as

instances of activities in the sense intended in this chapter.
Activities have several important characteristics:
   Activities operate on inputs from other activities (either internal or
external to the firm).
   Activities have customers. In other words, there is a recipient for the
outcomes of all activities in the work flow.
   Activities may or may not correspond to functional departments in
organizations, and their linkage into the overall work flow of the

organizationIMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL139
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 4.2 PROCESS HIERARCHY
Almost everything we do or are involved in is a process. 
– From themacroview, processes are the key activities required to manage and/or

run an organization. New-product definition is a good example of a

macroprocess. 
– A macroprocess can be subdivided into subprocesses
that are logically related, sequential activities that contribute to the mission

of the macroprocess. 
– Every macroprocess or subprocess is made up of
a number of activities. 
– Activities are things that go on within all
processes. As the name implies, they are the actions required to produce

a particular result. 
– Each activity is made up of a number of tasks. 
–Normally, tasks are performed by an individual or by small teams. They

make up the very smallest microview of the process.
SOURCE: Harrington, H.J. 1991. 
Strategy for Total Quality,
Productivity, and Competitiveness,
 McGraw-Hill, New York.
   may or may not correspond to reporting structures on an organizational
chart. Activities may span external organizational boundaries on either

the input or output side (or both).
   To the extent that activities form relatively complete segments of a
work flow (starting with an input and ending with an output to a

client), they lend themselves to many forms of measurement (e.g.,

throughput time, client satisfaction). Activities are often the target of

investments in IT, which are undertaken as projects to support changes

in relatively self-contained processes.
These characteristics of activities underlie the utility of activity level
analysis for understanding service sector performance and the potential effects

of IT. Most important is the built-in customer orientation: the customer's

expectations and value system can be used to set the standard against which the

service activity is judged.6 And it is at the activity level that it is possible to
assess whether the customer may be better served even if measured productivity

declines. For example, IT is being applied to a growing range of complex

medical diagnostic procedures (such as magnetic resonance imaging or genetic

testing) without apparent improvements in productivity in terms of cost but with

other benefits to customers.
The independence of activities from functional and organizational
boundaries is critical, since clients, whether internal or external, do not care

about formal organizational boundaries nearly as much as they care about

results. The measures of value added by activities (such as time to produce,

time toIMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL140
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.delivery, cost, and the quality of an activity's output) enable analysts to track
changes in the performance of an activity over time and to compare or

"benchmark" against similar activities within the same enterprise or in other

companies. (The latter measures are especially important complements to

internal measures of client satisfaction in cases where performance that satisfies

the short-term needs of recipients in the organization's work flow may be
relatively unsatisfactory from the perspective of the ultimate customer or the
firm as a whole.)
SOME OBSERVATIONS ABOUT SERVICE ACTIVITIES
The pervasiveness of service activities, their growing importance in
generating value, and their generic nature make activities a critical level of

analysis for understanding the impact of IT on service sector performance.
Service Activities Are Everywhere
Service activities occur in all enterprises, not just those in so-called service
industries; this is the essence of the service economy. Even within a

manufacturing company, these activities often account for 60 to 75 percent of

all nonmaterial costs. In fact, within most enterprises
Šwhether in the
manufacturing, services, government, or nonprofit sectors
Ša majority of all
employment (well over 80 percent) is in service activities. Service activities

thus provide units of analysis that are directly comparable between
manufacturing and service firms.Table 4.1 summarizes the employment distribution from the most recent
Bureau of Labor Statistics projections.
7 Total U.S. employment is projected to
grow by about 20 percent from 1990 to 2005. During this period, all blue-collar

categories (agricultural workers, production and craft workers, and operators

and laborers) will grow at rates substantially below the average, whereas most

white-collar categories and service occupations
8 will grow substantially faster
than average. These projections are fully consistent with a continuing shift of

labor to service activities as applications of IT lead to organizational
restructuring and job redefinition.
Service Activities Are Increasingly Important
Not only are service activities present in all enterprises, but they also now
contribute most of the value added within both manufacturing and service firms.

Their elevated role is especially striking in manufacturing, where more value

added now derives from or intellectual activities than from physical production

activities. For example, research and clinical activities (rather than chemical

processing, pill punching, and
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL141
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.packaging) create the major value in pharmaceuticals; sophisticated customer
understanding and software concepts (rather than building circuit boards and

boxes) create the predominant value in computers; understanding flavorings,

customer preferences, and product texturing creates value in prepared foods;

and so on.TABLE 4.1 Employment Projections
ŠEmployment by Major Occupational Group,
1990 and Projected 2005 (Moderate Alternative Projection)
Number Employed (thousands)Percent Change
Major OccupationalGroup199020051975-1990
1990-2005
Total, all occupations122,573147,19137.420.1

Executive,
administrative,managerial12,45115,86683.127.4
Professionalspecialty15,80020,90759.932.3
Technicians, related
support4,2045,75475.736.9
Marketing, sales14,08817,48955.124.1
Administrative
support, including
clerical21,95124,83533.913.1
Service19,20424,80636.129.2
Agricultural,forestry, fishing, and
related occupations3,5063,665-9.94.5
Precisionproduction, craft,
repair14,12415,90928.912.6
Operators,fabricators, laborers17,24517,9616.74.2NOTE: The data on employment for 1990 and 2005 and the projected percentage of change from
1990 to 2005 are derived from the industry-occupation employment matrixes for each year. The
data on the percentage of change from 1975 to 1990 were derived from the Current Population

Survey (CPS), because a comparable industry-occupation matrix for 1975 is not available.
SOURCE: Adapted from Silvestri, G., and J. Lukasiewicz. 1991. "Occupational Employment
Projections," 
Monthly Labor Review
 114(November), Table 1, p. 65.
Service Activities Are Generic and Elemental
Service activities have two features that make them amenable to IT-based
change. The first is that many service activities have a generic quality. That is,

service activities within a given enterprise may be fundamentally similar to
those performed in other, quite different enterprises. For instance, most large
firms have departments that are responsible for accounting
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL142
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.payroll processing, legal services, and so on. Commonalities may prevail even
among firms in entirely different lines of business, and so it is not surprising

that Xerox (a durable-goods manufacturer) opted to compare its distribution

activity against that of L.L. Bean (a catalog retailer) despite the differences in

products and industries. Similarities between activities in different

organizations may reflect the influence of common bodies of law, professional
standards, or general practitioner knowledge.
9The fact that activities operate on relatively well-defined inputs and
generate specific products for their customers makes activities elemental. That

is, they are subject to separation from each other and to recombination; they are

modular components of a business or enterprise. Thus linkages between

activities can be restructured, limited only by the technology and management
infrastructure available to support interconnections.
The elemental and generic nature of service activities is the foundation for
attempts to improve activity performance by the use of IT. If the activities that

compose an organization's work flow are relatively complete components

whose inputs and outputs can be received from other sources and transmitted to

customers via IT-based links (and perhaps largely performed via IT as well), the
IT infrastructure opens up new possibilities for designing or reorganizing
processes and entire firms; even industries may be restructured as a

consequence. The conceptual independence of activities from organizational

boundaries assumes increasing significance given the growing perception that

organizational and functional boundaries often stand in the way of opportunities

for improvement.ROLES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN THE
EVOLUTION OF ACTIVITIES
The use of IT has been an important contributor to the prominence of
service activities. For example, computer-assisted design has helped

manufacturers deliver more sophisticated goods (from automobiles to integrated

chips) in less time. For such goods, service activities become the vehicles for

customization and differentiation
Šwhether upstream (through design), or
downstream (through marketing and post-sales service). Similarly, service

products (such as loans and insurance policies) can be tailored to the needs of

particular clients directly using IT; data on customers are more easily collected
and analyzed; forms are more easily modified; change orders are more easily
developed and communicated; and so on. As one executive in a service firm put

it, "There's a sense in which we never sell the same product twice." In other

words, "mass customization" is increasingly the order of the day; service firms

would ideally deliver
Što every customer
Šservice products that are
customized to his or her own individual needs.
10IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL143
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In general, IT is being used to play an important role in the flexible and
rapid adaptation of outputs to suit the needs and expectations of clients.

According to executives interviewed by the committee, new and anticipated

applications rely heavily on databases, client-server systems, and local- and

wide-area networking generally; as the scale and scope of databases grow and

as sophisticated modeling becomes more practical, high performance systems,
such as massively parallel technology, are being contemplated. Noted a senior
vice president of a major supermarket chain,
In the 1970s and 1980s, 90 percent of the weighting given by decision makers
on IT has been on hard savings, 10 percent on soft. I think the future is going
to be very much oriented toward "soft savings," and it might even go to 60 to
40 on that side. The important thing is the credibility and accuracy of the
information coming out of the front end. 
– In the past the drive was on the
hard savings, productivity end of IT. In the future it will be in the utilization
for merchandising and marketing of all that wonderful data that's coming off.
In addition, the demographic information from a customer standpoint is
something we're just getting into now. If the customer walks in with a
magnetic-strip-reader card and identifies herself as customer 
X, we can track
every single thing she buys and do all kinds of wonderful things with that
information. 
– We can have frequent-purchaser programs, and so on.
New Tools and Tasks
As process technology, IT enables changes in the ways that the tasks that
make up an activity are undertaken. Applied to information-intensive services,

the use of IT can change the nature of what is delivered to clients (such as

highly customized business or financial services) as well as the processes of its

production. Examples of both sorts of changes abound, such as the shift from

keying in data to optical scanning for data entry, the use of telephone-computer
system combinations to solicit new business in lieu of "cold-call" field visits,
and the use of on-line databases instead of paper files and reports to deliver

customer financial data. For example, Larry Bacon, senior vice president,

Information Systems Department at the Travelers Companies, described the

impact of putting policy information on-line.
If you look back a few years, our personal lines operation, for example, had 80
to 100 field offices. And all of the policies 
– were in tub files and desks in
those offices. So if you wanted to see all the policies you would have to go to
90 offices and read through 2 million policies in tubs and desks. Then all of a
sudden a person could just issue a few commands to the computer and we'd zip

through it for him. That's a huge change.
Bacon went on to enumerate such benefits as accurate and consistent
calculation of premiums. Another example is provided by Merrill Lynch &
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL144
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Company, which was able to substantially reduce its printing requirements by
shifting to electronic delivery of information. Explained Howard Sorgen, senior

vice president and chief technology officer,
During the three-year period from 1989 through 1991, we reduced our annual
output of computer-generated print from 1.3 billion to about 400 million pages.
And that's not because the information provided wasn't needed by our internal

and external clients. What we did was to change the way we provide that
information, by shifting to downloading print files electronically to client
desktops and providing the ability to view information directly from computer
screens.IT has been used to reduce the number of tasks involved in an activity, to
change the nature and sequence of tasks, to change the total time involved in an

activity, and so on (
Box 4.3
). By supporting changes in what tasks are done, as
well as when, where, and how they are done, IT opens up new options for

designing and structuring service activities.
11For example, according to Larry Bacon at the Travelers Companies, a
computer-based system containing essential and optional pieces of text enables

insurance sales representatives to construct group insurance policy

documentation with the customer and deliver laser-printed copy the next day, in

contrast to the previous approach of repeated iteration among representative,

client, company lawyers, and others over a period of 3 to 9 months.
BOX 4.3 ACCOUNTS PAYABLE AT THE FORD MOTOR
COMPANYPrior to reengineering its accounts-payable process, Ford Motor
Company employed more than 500 people. The process involved a labor-

intensive matching of three documents: the purchase order (from the
ordering department), the receiving document (from the materials control
department), and the invoice (from the vendor). When these documents
matched, payment was issued. As a result of reengineering, the ordering
department now places information about the order into an on-line

database. When goods are received in materials control, the database is
checked to see if they correspond to an outstanding purchase order. If so,
they are accepted, their receipt is logged into the database, and a check
is automatically issued. Invoices are eliminated because Ford asks
vendors not to send them.
The result? A reduction by 75 percent in the accounts payable work
force.SOURCE: Hammer, Michael. 1990. "Reengineering Work: Don't
Automate, Obliterate." 
Harvard Business Review
, July-August, pp.
104-112.IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL145
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A more elaborate example is provided by Josh Weston, chairman and chief
executive officer of ADP, who described the evolution of his company's payroll

processing service.
The original ADP payroll system had a lot of little vehicles going out on routes
every morning, where drivers picked up paper from our clients having all the
necessary information to do a payroll. Then we went into data entry
Šin those
days it was called keypunch
Šand took over from there. And when everything
was all done, the vehicles went back and delivered all that paper to the clients.
In today's mode, just to take a few aspects of contrast, the vast bulk of our
payroll input is coming from client-site PCs, where PCs dial directly into our
mainframes with no people in between. And because the data is coming
through a client-site PC, it's been edited and error checked before it ever gets
to us, which eliminates a whole round of recycling that often used to happen.

And when our mainframes are done, in a good number of cases our
mainframes talk right back to those PCs, without people, communicating
certain information to the client-site PCs
Šwhich they can then massage as
they see fit. 
– Also, 
– previously you'd have to have hundreds of preprinted
checks that had to be preregistered before you could print the checks for Client

X, and then you had to change the paper for Client 
Y. Thanks to laser
technology, now, in one single pass, the mainframes drive laser printers that
absorb blank sheets on the way in, and not only does a paycheck come out with
all the logos in the background and so on, but the laser printer also ''signs" the
checks. It makes life much simpler.
As Weston's example illustrates, the movement from relatively distinct
instances of automation
Šsuch as the original ADP processing systems and the
original client systems that generated the paper printout used by ADP
Što far
more integrated systems that involve direct computer-to-computer

communication can provide a much greater degree of streamlining and other

performance benefits. This movement toward greater integration over the past

few years is expected by many technologists to increase the contributions of IT
12Šin ways that can be best understood by examining changes at the activity level.
One consequence of such IT-related changes in tasks is that there are many
new ways to substitute goods and services for each other, enabling

organizations to provide what a customer really wants by different means. For

example, as discussed in 
Chapter 3
, companies can invest in IT that allows them
to use less of their own labor and invoke more labor effort by the customer
Šallthe while providing more convenience and possibly lower costs to customers.
13This concept is fundamental to many instances of do-it-yourself "services"

provided by businesses (e.g., credit card gas pumps, long-distance dialing,
machine-operated parking facilities, automated teller machines, corporate
treasury systems). Further, a product itself may embody trade-offs between

using goods and services to meet customer needs;
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL146
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for example, software such as income tax preparation packages and will-writing
packages may represent a good that has service built into it as part of its

"functionality."BOX 4.4 THE COSMOS TRACKING SYSTEM OF FEDERAL
EXPRESSFederal Express provides guaranteed delivery of high-priority
packages. However, much of its success is based on the fact that

information about the status of packages in transit is often as important to
the senders and receivers of those packages as the actual delivery of the
package. Federal Express developed the Cosmos system to locate and
track packages anywhere within the Federal Express network. This
capability is based on a bar code attached to every package that is read

at every package transfer point (e.g., from truck to airplane). Customers
that provide a package-tracking number can thus inquire about where the
package is and when it is likely to arrive; it is also possible to order
rerouting of packages in transit should that be necessary.
NOTE: For a good discussion of Cosmos, see Nehls, Carl, 1988, "Custodial Package
Tracking at Federal Express," pp. 57-81 in 
Managing Innovation: Cases from the
Services Industries
, Bruce R. Guile and James Brian Quinn (eds.), National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C.
Another consequence of IT-related changes in tasks has to do with the time
value of information. Because IT can be used to make more fine-grained

information available, and provide it more rapidly, new attitudes may emerge

about the importance of different kinds of information at different points in

business processes. These new attitudes can, in turn, lead to new services. For

example, major package-delivery companies offer the service of informing

people about exactly where a package in transit may be, permitting changing its
destination as well as forecasting the delivery with great precision (
Box 4.4
).While the initial (and still major) use of IT is the automation of routine
tasks such as accounting, inventory management, handling of personnel data,

and the like, IT is increasingly being applied to support knowledge-based

activities (e.g., domain modeling, decision making). For example, the product

management and engineering vice president of a major communications

company observed that its new credit card business "was really launched out of

an understanding developed through the analysis of data that's been

accumulated over a number of years 
– from both internal operations as well as
other, demographic databases which are commercially
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL147
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.available and integrated with the information that the company captured
routinely." The production of value in most fields now increasingly depends on

the management of the knowledge that creates such new services and the

coordination of these intellectual processes toward something of particular

value to customers. This pattern cuts across industries, further blurring the

traditional distinctions between manufacturing and service industries.
14The implications of tapping such uses of IT are far-reaching. For example,
instead of simply providing a way to replace human effort with IT, some of the

newer uses of IT are not so much replacing employees as enhancing knowledge

workers. This type of application is becoming more common in finance. For

example, Howard Sorgen of Merrill Lynch explained that
in our business, the really large profits come from products and services which
are heavily dependent on analysis and computation. The speed with which a
particular firm can respond to a new opportunity for, say, a new derivative
product depends directly on the sophistication and processing capability of the
analytic software provided to the knowledge worker. Even though the

technology is complex, the costs to exploit this technology are low compared
to the potential gain. A good example would be the use of RISC [reduced
instruction set computer]-based multiprocessors to perform the calculations
necessary for derivative products such as interest rate or foreign exchange
swaps or mortgage-backed securities. This is in sharp contrast to the high-

volume, commodity type of technology application such as check processing
Šwhere the expenditure for equipment and staff is high relative to the
profitability of the product being supported. In the latter example,
enhancements to technology (better and faster check sorters) are deployed to
reduce dependence on human labor, not to enhance the job of the laborer.
Further, the greater use of systems to complement knowledge workers
implies a need to change the skill set that employees usually bring to their jobs.

Employees must know how to construct queries, analyze data, interpret

information, and draw conclusions
Šand do all of this using computers.
Expected changes in skill demands related to new kinds of tasks, in turn,
present significant challenges for an organization's human resources, as a

section below, "Consequences for Employees," describes.
New Linkages and Transformations in Firms
Given that a company's activities can be linked to each other in many
different ways, how should they be linked to produce the best value for the

company? Prior to the advent of IT, the answer was driven by issues such
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL148
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as ease of management and physical proximity. However, in addition to the
direct incorporation of electronic tools into many service tasks, IT provides the

capability to link activities in many different ways, and it creates the basis for

new organizational forms, such as cross-functional teams or processes and even

cross-firm systems of linked activities.
New linkages have resulted chiefly from improvements in the variety,
nature, cost, and quality of communications technologies, plus enhancements in

user interfaces, database systems, and other elements of computing technology

that generate and process information prepared or shared through

communications links. Advances in "groupware" are expected to boost this

trend by facilitating group preparation of, for instance, planning documents,

project proposals, or activity reports. To date, however, most improvements of
this type have come about through electronic mail (e-mail), computer
networking, and related enhancements. For example, leading retailers such as

Federated Department Stores have been installing and upgrading

communications systems linking branches to headquarters to more quickly

monitor and analyze sales data, permitting more timely changes in ordering and

marketing strategies.
15 The spread of e-mail generally has been credited with
increasing the pace of decision making and the scope of interactions in an

enterprise, since it facilitates communication unconstrained by hierarchies.

Also, as noted by Craig Goldman, senior vice president and chief information

officer at Chase Manhattan Bank, e-mail tends to cut short the cycles of

iteration associated with generating more formal, "letter-perfect," paper-based

correspondence or memoranda. Cryptic and often poorly punctuated
correspondence has become totally acceptable in the world of personal e-mail
communications.Larry Bacon of the Travelers Companies discussed the many ways that
better telecommunications has fostered improvements:
It's the ability to communicate instantly and cheaply that allows me to put
workstations and people wherever they need to be but let them think that
they're working with someone that is right next door, whereas they could be
anywhere they need to be. So we can have a service center that's very good at
doing service center-type things; it's very efficient. At a service center you

have an 800 number, you have good management, you have the optimal
number of people that have wonderful voices and are highly service oriented,
in whatever location in the country you need to be at to get that kind of labor
force and that kind of good communications economics. And they're doing
their thing wherever they are. Meanwhile, we may need to have a salesman on
every street corner of America or we may need to have doctors or nurses that
are experts in certain fields, wherever they need to be. But we only need these

people at certain times on certain pieces of business. The problem is, how do
they get into the loop? Communications makes them all able to work together.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL149
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Within a firm, the potential for linking activities in different ways has an
important effect on management choices regarding how centralized or

decentralized activities should be. Conventional wisdom suggests that enhanced

communications options are associated with greater decentralization, and recent

empirical research has supported that inference. For example, distributed and,

increasingly, mobile computer systems that can communicate with an office or
headquarters as well as with one another will support a variety of marketing,
sales, service, and analytical activities (such as order entry, market data

collection, insurance policy terms and formats). Explained Roger Ferkenhoff,

formerly vice president, Information Services at Sears Merchandise Group, and

now retired,
At Sears, any individual, based on authorization, can access anything he or she
needs at any Sears location. 
– Our district folks are constantly on the road and
on their way to the next store. They all have portable terminals. As soon as
they walk into a store
Šwe say their office is "next store, next terminal"
Štheyhave full access to any information they need. So it really has enabled us to

change the structure rather dramatically.
Distributed systems obviate the necessity for all tasks to flow through an
office or headquarters. In fact, continuing to route many processes through a

centralized office may vitiate the speed and flexibility potentially afforded by
reliance on electronic networked systems. For example, Pacific Bell has reaped
benefits from a mobile terminal system developed by Bell Communications

Research to support service technicians. Jack Hancock, executive vice

president, Product and Technology Support, explained that
the Technician Access Network, or TAN, 
– is a hand-held device that all
technicians have. 
– [W]hereas before when technicians went out on service
calls, they had to get access to a telephone pair, plug into the pair, and then call
back to the maintenance center to order tests, and so forth, now the TAN
device permits them to plug in directly because it is a hand-held device, a
telephone. In addition it has a display so they can conduct their tests with this

single handset. They can also get instructions for the next job that way, and so
it has automated much of what the technician does.
Despite the many benefits being discovered for distributed systems, the
advent of microcomputers has not led to the demise of centralized information
systems functions. Rather, there have been changes in their size, tasks, and
knowledge requirements while technical responsibilities of their client

departments have grown. The kinds of distributed systems mentioned above can

have significant costs for internal support services. In addition, some

applications may require at least some centralization. For example, Pacific

Bell's Hancock argued that telephone central office inventory systems, which

track millions of items relating to the ability to establish or act on

telecommunications service to a particular location, are too vast to be

decentralizedŠalthoughIMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL150
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.distributed access to the systems is possible. Similarly, e-mail directory services
require firm-level coordination.
Thus IT-based structural change has not been in a single direction.
Instances of both centralization and decentralization may be found even within

the same organization. Some organizations that have already made a shift from

centralization to decentralization are now considering the recentralization of

selected activities (
Box 4.5
). The activities targeted for (re)centralization can
still be dispersed, but greater central control and standardization may be

asserted through links to common, central systems. The result could be called
the virtually centralized (or decentralized) organization. Both kinds of choices
Šmoves toward decentralization and moves toward virtual centralization
Šaremade possible by advances in IT, coupled with declining telecommunications

costs.Other linkages that contribute to performance are those between firms. IT
can be used to link value chains across firms and shift work involved in various

functions between organizations. Marshall Carter, currently chairman and chief

executive officer of State Street Bank, provided an example relating to the

processing of financial information:
Mutual fund companies each year have to do an annual report for the
regulators and for other people. Prior to 1991 they prepared this report on their
own with plenty of typing and all kinds of gathering of data. We've devised a
way to print the report
Šready for the cameras and the printing presses
Šwithinformation that's stored in our databases just by pulling up the right
information and arraying it, calculating exactly. It saves the mutual companies
an enormous amount of money and time. But what we're doing there is adding

value to the information; we're really changing the data into value added
information for the client, and he's willing to pay for that.
BOX 4.5 RECENTRALIZATION OF PREVIOUSLY
DECENTRALIZED ACTIVITY
Local-area networks (LANs) are often installed on a departmental
basis within an organization. As such, they are oriented toward specific

needs of departments, which may not be uniform across all departments
within the organization. However, data and information residing on
departmental networks may have value to the entire organization, and
maintenance of departmentally based LANs may be costly and distract
the department from focusing on its core tasks. As a result, some

organizations are beginning to recentralize control over their many
distributed LANs.
SOURCE: Dostert, Michele. 1992. "LAN Control Falling to IS,"
Computerworld , December 21, p. 37.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL151
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.He went on to describe how, building on technology, his business had
shifted from a focus on transaction-processing
Šproviding information for the
clientŠto a focus on strategic alliances and doing things with the client.
Considering interfirm links on a broader scale, electronic data interchange
(EDI) connects companies to their suppliers, buyers, and even to their banks.

Providing a shared body of information and a common set of standardized

forms, EDI transforms the ordering, invoicing, shipping, tracking, and customer

service functions, among others, for a growing number of enterprises.
Interfirm connectivity can both affect existing activities and at the same
time make new businesses possible. For example, organizations with a well-

developed in-house service activity and excess capacity may decide not only to

perform the work for themselves but also to take on external clients for the

service. This is what American and United Airlines have done with their

computerized reservation systems, which are now dominant in the airline

industry. In these cases, the technology has become the basis for a new line of
business.A different type of reconfiguration is the new business that results from an
IT-based integration of complementary service activities. For example,

American Airlines and CSX, a rail transport company, have developed a joint

venture, Encompass, for global logistics that relies on IT. Travel agencies rely

today on the availability of information concerning airlines, auto rentals, hotel

reservations, and other information in comprehensive information systems. By

linking these systems, customers will be able to obtain "one-stop" shopping for

their travel needs.
Finally, enhanced abilities to link physically separate activities create the
potential for their geographic independence (such as the remote computer-aided

dispatching described for Pacific Bell above or the teleservice center described

above for the Travelers Companies). Dependence on regular and reliable

communication has always been fundamental to large organizations with

distributed establishments. But IT is being used to support ever greater

geographic dispersion of personnel, as cheaper and easier-to-use

communications technology encourages more organizations to experiment with

telecommuting or other modes of long-distance work for some staff. For
example, companies such as insurance agencies and airlines engage in extensive
telephone interactions with their customers; these companies can use

nationwide toll-free numbers to route customer service calls to personnel

physically located in low-wage areas, perhaps even outside the country, while

networking and data communications between these customer service agents

and corporate databases enable the prompt servicing of customer requests.
16Multinational enterprises are not new, and companies have for many
decades set up operations in other countries to make use of unique facilities
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL152
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.or capabilities, to benefit from lower-cost production labor, or to satisfy local
content laws or regulations associated with selling in foreign markets. Today,

however, there are signs that the global division of labor is extending to such

white-collar service activities as research (Switzerland), software coding and

development (programming in India), data entry (Korea), and insurance claims

processing (Ireland). Among the several reasons for this pattern is IT, which can
be used to connect remote parties more easily, less expensively, and very
quickly. The prospect of greater globalization in turn raises questions relevant

to public policy about potential reductions in local employment opportunities

and changes in work force skills.
The broad distribution of capabilities to access information, solve
problems, take action, and communicate has motivated new theories of

organization, challenging conventional wisdom on, for example, the need for

hierarchically structured bureaucracies for the coordination of complex

multiperson tasks. The movement toward flatter organizations, in many
instances, provides testbeds for new ideas on organization. For example, a vice
president of a major communications company describes how they moved

toward a more matrix-like organization because of options made possible by IT.
IT has enabled decision making to be driven lower in the organization. It has
been an aid in helping to reduce layers of management within the organization.
As information becomes more readily available from the customer facing

people, it has allowed us to reduce layers because we have speed of decision
making and we have information that has 
– been developed by those
intervening layers of the organization. 
– Thirdly, it has begun to increase the
flexibility with which we can change the character of the organization. We're
tending to work in more of a matrix, rather than a hierarchical, form with more
teams. 
–New and imaginative metaphors for technologically transformed
organizations are beginning to appear, including the organization as network or
web (versus discrete units), as jelly fish (versus dinosaur), and as intellectual

holding company for electronically linked activities. It is important to note, of

course, that while IT enables such forms, they are still in experimental stages in

most companies, and the full capabilities of IT have not yet been fully exploited

for these purposes. Thus new organizational forms should, at present, be treated

essentially as possibilities. New models will ultimately be needed, or earlier

paradigms for understanding organizations revised, to better understand how

activities might be reorganized to exploit IT for better (or higher) performance.
Outsourcing and Industry Transformation
Perhaps the greatest impact of increased flexibility in configuring
component activities is seen in a company's decision to provide a necessary
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL153
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.service activity internally or to buy it from an outsider
Šthe decision about
whether to "outsource." The ease with which different IT operations can be

coupled across institutional boundaries (e.g., through standardized electronic

data interchange and networking protocols) and the external specialty service

firms that are enabled by such coupling increase the range of options for

redesigning overall work flow. Activities that are highly generic in nature (such
as payroll) are most susceptible to being provided by external service
specialists, even when rapid turnaround is required. In fact, the development of

IT-service industries (contract software development and maintenance, third-

party network-based services, systems integration, computing facilities

management services, and so on) reflects in part a long-term trend toward

outsourcing service activities (from legal work to accounting to data processing)

to firms that specialize in them. To obtain faster cycle times and lower

investment costs and risks, high-technology companies often outsource many

specialized activities, from component design and product styling to distribution

and field warehousing.
Outsourcing a given service activity may make particularly good sense
when that activity involves what might be called "economies of knowledge

scale." Typically, the competent provision of a service subject to economies of

knowledge scale requires highly specialized (and thus costly) information tools

as well as the specialized expertise required to use these tools effectively, for
example, some specialized databases or knowledge systems. An individual firm
that needs such a service may not find it worthwhile to use its resources to

develop or provide this service in-house at truly competitive levels of cost or

quality. However, an external unit might launch that activity as its core

business, taking advantage of its ability to spread costs over a large number of

external users and to develop specialized expertise that enables it to perform

that activity particularly well. In this way, IT-enabled specialization is

especially valuable for entrepreneurs seeking to focus an entire business on a

given activity or set of activities.
Decisions to outsource a critical service activity can have negative
consequences as well. Outsourcing may require a company to expend much

more effort in establishing and maintaining stable, reliable, and high-quality

interactions with external providers of services, since outsiders are by definition

not conversant with the relevant corporate culture. Opportunities for synergy

may be lost, since outsiders may be less motivated to look for ways to improve
a client's operations, less knowledgeable about a client's operations, and less
likely to seek frequent interactions between themselves and the client

organization. Further, employees at the outsourcing company may lose jobs,

although other jobs will be created in supplier companies.
Perhaps more serious for managers is the potential of losing control over a
critical aspect of a company's operation. Reliance on external service providers

may well lead to the loss of specialized skills (indeed, reducing
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL154
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.personnel costs may have been a major reason for turning to an external
provider), making it difficult for the client company to audit the quality and cost

of the services being provided. Asking for changes in the nature of the services

being provided may become more difficult if the external provider is large

relative to the buyer
Šor if the company's dependence on the external service
provider increases for other reasons. Unless the company has available
substitute suppliers, external service providers can raise the prices they charge
for their services as the cost to the client of switching to an alternative service

provider increases.
IT may influence the perceived costs and benefits of a decision to
outsource. The capacity to coordinate large programs has undoubtedly led to a

greater number of strategic and operational alliances in recent years. Whether

management decides to undertake an activity internally or to have it done by an

outside source depends on many factors
Šsuch as the number of suppliers
available and the criticality of the activity to the core business (this may be
illuminated by value-chain analysis); an activity's synergy with or
complementarity to other, critical activities; the relative costs of conducting or

buying the activity; the extent to which economies of scale and scope are

present; the firm's capacity to manage outsourcing; and so on.
CONSEQUENCES FOR EMPLOYEES
IT is associated with a number of direct and indirect effects on people
working within organizations that use IT. Most directly, the introduction of IT

can trigger redesign of jobs, restructuring of work flows, or changes in the

physical location of work. These effects arise because of the nature of IT; IT

consists of tools that affect what people do and how they do it. Less directly,
applications in one part of an organization can alter the work and working
conditions elsewhere: management systems can be used to craft reorganizations,

database and communication systems that supply information at top and bottom

levels can eliminate the need for certain middle levels, and so on.
The activity level is where the first effects of change will be experienced
by employees, effects that will then influence performance at the firm and

industry levels. Users are important stakeholders in the introduction of new

information tools. Employee expectations that the benefits as well as the

burdens of continued technological advance will be equitably shared may be a
key factor in the successful implementation of IT. Further, although employee
satisfaction with new job designs often depends upon choices that may be made

for reasons unrelated to satisfying worker interests, accommodating employee

concerns by explicitly dealing with them during the design phase frequently

results in both improved task design and employee acceptance. Obtaining the

maximum return from investments in
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL155
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT may hinge on providing avenues for employees to exercise their knowledge
and skills, and it is possible to design and implement IT systems that encourage

and reward extra effort and ability on the part of users.
For many employees, a first concern, naturally enough, is fear of job loss.
The inherent capabilities of IT, combined with job and organization redesign

permitted by the technologies, can result in substantial reduction in the demand

for, or outright elimination of, particular activities. For example, a top executive

of a major supermarket chain described the reduction in labor requirements

associated with supermarket scanning systems.
A large supermarket will carry 30,000 to 60,000 items. Every day, every
week, there's a dynamic system of price changing and updating and deals with
everything that is happening in the marketplace across all those tens of

thousands of items. A typical store has some kind of pricing activity on 1500
to 2000 to 3000 of those items depending upon what inflationary, deflationary,
or other outside environments it is exposed to. In the past, that meant that
somebody
Ša person
Šphysically had to go out there, erase every price off
every one of those items, stamp a new price on it, put a new tag on it, and 
– to
do that in a store took about 100 to 150 hours a week.
Thus the relative growth in jobs associated with service activities, as
indicated in 
Table 4.1
, does not guarantee substantial job growth in absolute
terms. The one white-collar category showing much less than average growth is

administrative support occupations, including clerical workers; this is also
consistent with the observation that PCs and other office technologies are
enabling professional and managerial workers to bring more of their work to

completion with less need for administrative assistance. For example, Larry

Bacon of the Travelers Companies described a major shift in the insurance

industry from clerical to professional personnel, with workstations being

manned by professional customer service representatives, underwriters, claims

specialists, and nurses, for example. In addition, changes in professional,

technical, and managerial jobs that are evident at the activity level suggest that

growth rates in these job categories will slow (and are indeed beginning to do

so).17 Since service sector job growth has been concentrated in industries with
relatively low efficiency, the potential for those industries to streamline their

processes using IT or other means suggests further constraints on service job

growth, other things being equal.
18 Nevertheless, merely installing IT-based
systems does not guarantee job reductions. For example, as an executive of a
major diversified service firm observed, the use of IT in a lean company does

not necessarily result in less staff in front-of-the-house activities: the check-in

line may be shorter and the service faster and more accurate, but the number of

clerks may stay the same.
Nonetheless, fears of job loss in the work force as a whole can strongly
affect the ability of an organization to adopt new tools and systems in a
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL156
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.timely and cost-effective manner. Moreover, these fears may arise even when
management adopts IT for reasons other than staff reduction. This issue should

be addressed directly and dealt with to the greatest extent possible through the

adoption of such actions as expansion of internal retraining programs, shifts of

affected personnel to other activities within the organization, sweetening of

early-retirement packages, and when necessary, provision of substantial
outplacement services. These measures can help foster a positive attitude about
change.Applications of IT also affect career prospects more generally, including
professional development, pay and promotion opportunities, the ability to stay

in a given geographic area, and reporting relationships and requirements. This

broad complex of changes in the content of jobs will affect job satisfaction and

the quality of working life. Both the levels and the extent of supervision may

change with new applications of IT. As organizations become flatter and more

decentralized, the line between staff and line functions will continue to blur.
One executive at a major communications company described the changing role
of managers:
The whole character of the relationship between a manager and employees
changes. Teams are empowered, which means that the role of the manager
switches from being a director of activities to a facilitator, a coach, and a
thought leader.Line managers may not only decrease in numbers, as suggested by flatter
organizations, but are also likely to need new substantive and managerial skills.
Even when job loss is not perceived as a potential result of the introduction
of IT, employees may resist change because they do not understand what is

being imposed on them. Smooth transitions depend on employee acceptance,

and a major factor in obtaining that acceptance is the extent of employee

participation in planning. Moreover, early and genuine employee involvement

in system planning also enables the resulting system to incorporate and

complement employees' domain knowledge and process skills. For these

reasons, employees and their representatives should be involved as early as

possible in technology-related decision making and implementation processes.
IT applications alter the knowledge and skill requirements of personnel.
They are likely to increase the intellectual demands on knowledge workers
Štheworkers who are responsible for interpreting, analyzing, and taking action on

the basis of information received throughout the company. For example, access

to previously unavailable data enabled by the use of IT (e.g., hour-by-hour sales

in a retail establishment), and the potential of such data to lead to competitive

advantage, create a requirement for knowledge workers to develop appropriate

analytical skills, both to interpret relevant
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL157
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.data and to disregard irrelevant data. In addition, the cooperative work that IT
enables among dispersed workers means that these workers must now know

how to cooperate and share information with each other in order to use

groupware (collaboration technology) and shared information resources to the

best advantage.Substantially redesigned activities (e.g., complete redesign of insurance
claims-processing procedures) generally require much more extensive

education and training programs. For example, the product management and

engineering vice president of a major communications company noted,
We're expecting people to be able to be more than just technically able. We're
expecting them to have the capacity to make decisions. That's what we're
trying to do. Our objective is to move decision making lower so we're asking

people to be able to acquire skills to do that, and, of course, working in team
kinds of arrangements people, by necessity, have to have much, much stronger
interpersonal skills.On the one hand, as indicated by Larry Bacon of the Travelers Companies,
the resulting jobs may be more professional than the original ones. On the other
hand, some applications of IT may require less cognitive effort on the part of
employees (as in the case of IT-based systems that can provide real-time

guidance or advice to users, or even IT-based cash registers and bar-coding that

eliminate the need for cashiers to do arithmetic).
19Combined changes in organization, job content, tools, and infrastructure
will make it necessary for managers to develop new skills and new hiring
strategies; they may also change demand for retraining.
20 The new skills go far
beyond those traditionally associated with ''retraining" or IT, such as the skills

needed to use spreadsheets or word processors. In many cases, specific training

related to new IT applications may need to be supplemented with broader

education in a variety of areas
Še.g., supervising a different kind of work force,
integrating a variety of separate activities into team processes, making better

use of enhanced communications capabilities, leading technological change,

and so on.Questions about who will train whom, how, when, and where, need to be
answered before any hardware or software changes are instituted.
21 Further,
given the anticipated rate of technological change in the decades to come, (re)

training can be expected to be a continuing rather than a one-time or infrequent

need. Depending on how it is implemented, IT affects learning curves for both

individuals and organizations overall.
Individuals at all levels of the organization may be affected as the use of IT
permeates a company's activities. Many may have increased responsibilities, in
part because using IT may make it possible for each individual to do more.

Employees may feel more empowered or have a greater sense of ownership of

work, although not necessarily as a result of intentional
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL158
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.organizational redesign. For example, high-level managers can use IT to
exercise a greater degree of control over their work, even when assistants would

be available to perform such work. Such ownership may lead to the reduction or

elimination of intermediate rungs in the corporate hierarchy (a job-loss issue),

but as importantly it may also lead to a more finely tuned match between the

ultimate work product and the understanding and insights of senior
management. At the same time, greater ownership may tempt managers to
appropriate the benefits of using IT more for themselves than for their

enterprises; specifically, some managers may try to decrease their personal risks

of error by uneconomically increasing the amount of data they seek before

making decisions.
22 Such changes in organization and management are often
not anticipated initially by companies embarking on new applications of IT but

emerge as the use of IT diffuses through the company. Companies that do not

pay deliberate management attention to organizational issues often find that

previously existing roles and relationships reassert themselves in ways that put

a ceiling on how much benefit can be achieved with the new technology and/or

subvert and undermine the changes that the new technology has enabled,

thereby pushing the organization back in the direction of the status quo.
IT-enabled decentralization is often associated with changes in job content
and hierarchies.
23 Specifically, IT can be used to combine multiple tasks within
jobs and to support cross-functional teams. Customer service affords an

example: telephone and computer systems provide tools for a single individual

to receive and handle a variety of inquiries. Cross-functional jobs and teams

imply more comprehensive knowledge and the ability to manage flexible and
loosely coupled staff resources. For example, one communications company
vice president described the movement toward cross-functional jobs as a trend

toward "caseworkers"
24 for applications in customer service, provisioning, and
network configuration activities, suggesting that database and expert-system

technology made such jobs possible. This approach to reengineering has

reduced time requirements by a factor of 10 and costs by a factor of 3 to 4.
Similarly, IT can be used to support the flattening of hierarchies, as fewer
people and fewer jobs are needed to relay and concentrate information when

electronic databases and communications provide some of those functions.

Middle managers, as well as technical and administrative staff in service

activities, thus face special challenges in their work and careers. As currently

deployed, IT systems handle particularly well activities that require complex
collections of repetitive and routine tasks, including such things as data
collection, information transfer, reproduction, monitoring, scheduling, and the

like. For example, Roger Ferkenhoff described a recent restructuring of Sears'

vertical business groups (automotive, home appliances, and so on) where the

elimination of a layer of management was made
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL159
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.possible by company-wide access to computing and communications systems.
Both elimination or simplification of some jobs and enhancement of others are

possible.Finally, IT-based systems may also be a necessary part of a work
environment that is on the cutting edge of expanding business frontiers. The

leaders of an industry seek the best talent available, and such people are most

often attracted by the challenge of working on state-of-the-art business

problems. Craig Goldman of Chase Manhattan, for example, pointed to the

value of investing in good desktop technology to reduce attrition of technical
staff. To the extent that exploitation of IT is a necessary component of a
successful approach to such problems, firms that hope to lead an industry

cannot afford to scrimp on the technology needed to stay at the cutting edge.
CONCLUSIONSIntense domestic and international competition, a lackluster economy, and
other business pressures are leading companies to look beyond incremental

change. They are redefining their purposes, goals, and images, redesigning

work processes in fundamental ways, making major changes in both

management structures and work locations, and reconstituting their employee

work forces. Such changes will continue throughout the coming decade, and
many analysts feel this circumstance will become the norm for the foreseeable
future.25Although it is not possible, in a general sense, to say that a "right way for
firms to use IT" has emerged, IT can be used by firms to develop a vast new

array of alternatives for organizing activities. Some of that opportunity for

choice can be seen in the different approaches (in terms of technologies and

processes overall) that companies in a given industry have taken to carry out the

same fundamental activity. However, IT can also be used with homogenizing

results. For example, producers of a wide range of products may be
interconnected by the same EDI system, a system that imposes a common
process for order-related activities. The trend toward interconnectivity and the

possibility of a national information infrastructure suggest that, to at least some

extent, technical standards will increase commonalities for IT-related tasks

across organizations.The chief conclusion to be drawn from the committee's activity level
inquiry is that use of IT has so greatly increased the opportunities for designing

service activities to meet a variety of performance goals that new perspectives

are required for organizational learning, understanding, and assessment. Neither

researchers nor decision makers have a base of empirical evidence or well-

established precedents on which to rely in understanding how IT can be used

most effectively to support work flows within and across enterprises. Further, as
discussed in other chapters, the actual outcomes
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL160
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of such efforts are influenced by a number of factors in addition to IT (such as
competition, employee skill base, and especially managerial capability in

organizational and activity design). 
IT alone does not create impacts; its
effects reflect a host of decisions made and actions takenŠwisely or notŠ

by a range of stakeholders including senior managers, technical

professionals, and users.Because the rapid pace of IT change does not appear to be slowing, new
possibilities for designing activities, restructuring them within firms, and

linking them across firms will continue to emerge. And because continuous

change is to be expected, today's right answer is perhaps tomorrow's wrong

solution. Moreover, as suggested by Merrill Lynch's Howard Sorgen, what is a

right answer today is not always clear.
What we are going to suffer through, I believe, for the next 3 years in the
application of information technology is a significant number of false starts, as
technology organizations attempt to deploy workstation-based solutions for

large-scale problems. Since many of these organizations lack the management
experience and technical maturity to make the proper choices in hardware and
software, some of their experiments will fail
Šdue not only to their own lack
of appreciation of the requirements of a robust "production-ready" operation,
but also because the support tools available for many years for the mainframe
environment are simply not mature enough to support high-volume,
transaction-processing applications on a workstation-based technical platform.
At the same time, smarter decisions can be made today about how to use
investments introduced some time ago. This observation was made by Larry

Bacon of the Travelers Companies:
One of the things we've seen has been enormous cost reduction over the last 2
or 3 years in our industry, and a great deal of that has been that people have
reached down and really gone and taken advantage of the things they
automated years ago. So if they automated something and they could eliminate

200 positions, maybe they reduced 150 initially. Now they go back and they
not only get the other 50 they should have, but they say, "Now that we're doing
business this way, I can do this and I can do that, and I can do these things
better, and maybe I can close these 6 offices because now I can do it with this
number of offices." They have made much bolder strokes. But that's a

recognition of where they are today rather than a premeditated, "We're going to
automate and do this."
The volatility in the application of IT and the restructuring of activities
entails an organizational need for flexibility, an ability to change quickly, and
the capacity to experiment regularly
Šwith the expectation of some successes
and some failures. The cost of continued experimentation
Šand the likelihood
of both successful and unsuccessful trials
Šshould be considered explicitly in
firms' strategic planning for technological change. Moreover
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL161
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.within organizations "training" will, in consequence, become an everyday issue.
However, it has been observed that within firms the pace of implementation of

new technologies has slowed; technology push is being weighed against

organizational needs, available resources, and capabilities for assimilation. This

more cautious approach to the use of innovative IT may result in better

planning, evaluation, and implementation.
How to value or assess the performance of service activities is an issue that
calls for more data and analytical models than are currently available.

Repetitive activities are much easier to measure than others, and service

performance metrics in the past have usually been based on what is easy to

measure.26 Since it is difficult to measure the more complex and nonroutine
things that organizations do, it is inherently problematic to determine whether
the acquisition of new IT has made their performance better. This conclusion
underscores the need for new activity level metrics.
The availability of such metrics would have important policy
consequences. The capacity of both service enterprises and service activities

within manufacturing and other enterprises to create value added for customers

and to increase their own real productivity is important to the levels of wealth

created by the nation. With 77 percent of all U.S. employment in service

industries and another (approximately) 10 to 12 percent in service activities

within goods-producing companies, increasing the productivity of service
activitiesŠwhether within a company or in a separate service company
Šseriously affects the nation's capacity to increase real wages over time.
One of the more important conclusions that emerges from the study of the
impact of IT on service performance at the activity level is the profound effect it

will have on employees. Use of IT is an important factor in helping to increase

the value added, and hence the wage potentials, of service jobs at all levels from

the high-paying professional and managerial levels to the low-paying entry

level. Because service jobs provide the entry- and early developmental-level

jobs for the country
Šand many of these depend on extensive use of IT to create
high value added
Šeffective deployment and implementation of IT in services
are critical to developing the output potentials of recent entrants into the nation's

work force. Moreover, as companies redesign their processes and structures,

their needs for particular skills and numbers of employees in their work forces

will undergo major shifts. These changes call for preparations and responses by

individuals, employers, and government at all levels.
The IT-enabled ability to relink activities in a myriad of configurations
will profoundly influence the structure of U.S. industry, the organization of

companies, and the nature and location of future jobs. How firms and industries

restructure themselves will have major policy implications for job design,

changes in occupational mix, and education and training. The outcome of such

restructurings will have profound effects on productivity
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL162
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in all industries, the competitiveness of U.S. companies and industries in
international markets, the number and nature of employment opportunities, and

the effectiveness of huge and ongoing investments in IT.
NOTES AND REFERENCES
1. It should be noted that process innovation is not a new construct. However, unlike product
innovation, process innovation has not been widely recognized until relatively recently as a potential

source of significant organizational performance improvements. For further discussion of this point,

see, for example, Tornatzky, L., T. Solomon, T.K. Bikson, and others, 1982, "Contributions of

Social Science to Innovation and Productivity," 
American Psychologist 37(7):737-746; Tornatzky,
L., W. Hetzner, J.D. Eveland, and others, 1983, 
The Process of Technological Innovation:
Reviewing the Literature
, National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.; and Tornatzky, L., and
M. Fleischer, 1990, 
The Processes of Technological Innovation,
 Lexington Books, Lexington, Mass.
2. Kiesler, Sara, and Lee Sproull. 1992. "Group Decision Making and Communications
Technology," Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes
 52(1):96-123.
3. Recent changes in services at the department and process levels of organizations have spawned

new families of measures, but the committee believes that most of these efforts are still narrowly

defined (see 
The Master Measurement Model of Employee Performance.
 n.d. The Society of
Incentive Travel Executives Foundation, New York). An activity level analysis can help broaden the

viewpoint and open the way to making revolutionary changes.

4. When the use of new technologies and approaches leads to new combinations of previously

separate activities, for instance, traditional measures of performance are problematic at best
Šandperhaps outright misleading or useless.

5. The committee also examined the work of several prominent European scholars on the impact of

information technology on work in service industries. However, since these individuals tend to

study non-U.S. institutions, and institutional and national differences between the United States and

Europe (e.g., the German apprenticeship system, government funding of industry) are often

profound, it is very hard to compare macroeconomic-level issues such as productivity. In addition,
the work of these people focuses on levels of analysis that are fine-grained than even the activity
level, with no particular ties to economic performance. Thus, such work was considered relatively

peripheral to the issues the committee was addressing.
6. A good treatment of the use in measurement of data indicating customer satisfaction can be found
in Zeithaml, Valarie A., A. Parasuraman, and Leonard L. Berry, 1990, 
Delivering Quality Service:
Balancing Customer Perceptions and Expectations
, Free Press, New York.
7. Bureau of Labor Statistics employment projections are developed using a detailed input-output

model and a variety of economic and demographic data. In addition, analysts determine factors that

have previously exerted a strong influence on the behavior of important projection results, and then

make assumptions, based on past experience and professional judgment about future trends in
specific industries and occupations, about their influence in the future. This exercise includes
evaluation of particular technologies in specific jobs or industries. The entire process is repeated

every 2 years.
8. Service occupations include cleaning and building service occupations, food preparation and
service occupations, health service occupations, personal service occupations (such as barbers and

child care workers), private household workers, and protective service occupations.

9. This is not to deny the existence of activities that are relatively industry-specific, such as patient

care activities in the health care industry. Billing, an activity that is relatively generic across many
industries, is handled in a unique way within the telecommunications industry due to industry-
unique regulatory requirements.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL163
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10. See Boynton, A.C., B. Victor, and B.J. Pine II. 1993. "New Competitive Strategies: Challenges
to Organizations and Information Technology," 
IBM Systems Journal
 32(1):40-64.
11. The close intermingling of properties of new technologies with properties of technology-

dependent tasks is not a new outcome; indeed, such reciprocal effects have long been described by

sociotechnical systems theory. Still, that theory has typically been applied to help explain

relationships between new manufacturing tools and tasks involving the production of goods; IT

bears a similar relationship to information-intensive service activities in both manufacturing and

service firms.

12. Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1991. 
Keepingthe U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Systems Integration
, National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.

13. The increase in convenience can be contrasted with the notion of "quality service" defined as a

high level of service. Thus in some instances IT and other tools are helping to provide more

personalized service, while in other instances, IT is helping customers be served more quickly by

diminishing interactions with service-provider personnel.

14. Camp, Robert C. 1989. 
Benchmarking: The Search for Industry Best Practices That Lead to
Superior Performance, Quality Press, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
15. Strom, Stephanie. 1992. "Computerized Record-Keeping for Retailers," 
New York Times
, May
20, p. D-6.

16. See, for example, Carey, Susan. 1992. "Airlines Seek to Cut Back-Office Costs by Establishing

Off-Shore Operations," Wall Street Journal
, November 30, p. B-6D.
17. See Prokesch, Steven. 1993. "Service Jobs Fall as Business Gains," 
New York Times
, April 18,
p. 1.

18. Baumol, William J., Sue Anne Batey Blackman, and Edward N. Wolff. 1989. 
Productivity and
American Leadership: The Long View
, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
19. A good discussion of this issue can be found in Bulkeley, William, 1992, "Computer Use by

Illiterates Grows at Work," 
Wall Street Journal
 , June 9, p. B1.
20. However, when an activity remains substantially unchanged (e.g., typing reports on a word

processor rather than a typewriter), specific task training may be all that is necessary.

21. Note that some needs for new skills can be met by the use of IT, both through IT-based training

systems (satellite classes, computer-aided instruction systems, and so on) and through the

incorporation of knowledge and reference information into production systems (help functions,

knowledge-based systems, and so on).

22. Doorley, T., A. Gregg, and C. Gagnon. 1988. "Professional Service Firms and Information

Technology: Ongoing Search for Sustained Competitive Advantage," 
Managing Innovation
,National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.

23. For more discussion of this point, see Zuboff, Shoshana, 1988, 
In the Age of the Smart Machine:
The Future of Work and Power
, Basic Books, New York.
24. This term is attributed to business analyst Michael Hammer, who has written and consulted

widely on reengineering.

25. Davenport, Thomas H., 1993, 
Process Innovation: Reengineering Work Through Information
Technology, Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, Mass.; Davenport, Thomas H., and James
E. Short, 1990, "The New Industrial Engineering: Information Technology and the Business Process

Redesign," Sloan Management Review
, Summer, pp. 11-17; and Hammer, Michael, 1990,
"Reengineering Work: Don't Automate, Obliterate," 
Harvard Business Review
, July-August, pp.
104-112.
26. In addition to the reference provided in Note 3, see also Thor, Carl, 1986, "Using Nominal

Group Technique to Establish a White-Collar Productivity Measurement System," 
ProductivityBrief, No. 51, American Productivity Center, Houston, Texas; and Thor, Carl, 1991, "Performance
Measurement in a Research Organization," 
National Productivity Review
 , Autumn, pp. 499-507.
IMPACTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AT THE ACTIVITY LEVEL164
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Improving Decision Making About
Information Technology
Analyses at the macroeconomic, industry, firm, and activity levels have
attempted to assess the impact of using IT at those levels. At the enterprise level
a number of studies and articles have indicated (1) shortcomings in how some
companies have managed IT, particularly when they first began investing in IT,

and (2) a lack of correlation between the amount a company invests in IT and

its return on assets, returns to shareholders, or profits per employee.
To understand more thoroughly why companies have had such variable
experience with their investments in IT, the committee asked experienced
executives a series of structured questions (see 
Appendix D
). The questions
were intended to probe for any important problems executives had encountered

in implementing IT systems, how they had attacked those problems, and what

issues remained. While often admitting previous
Šand current
Šmanagementproblems, many executives indicated they had made significant improvements

in their management practices and were currently modifying their processes to

achieve further effectiveness. This chapter summarizes some of the interesting

problems and solutions encountered.Paul Strassmann, a former executive of the Xerox Corporation and director
of defense information at the U.S. Department of Defense, analyzed the
inconsistent relationship between investment in IT and service firm

performance between 1977 and 1987 (
Figure 5.1
). He concluded, "A computer
is only worth what it can fetch at an auction. IT has value only if surrounded by

appropriate policy, strategy, methods for measuring results,
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY165
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY166
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 5.1 Investment in information technology and service performance:
an inconsistent relationship.
SOURCE: Reproduced with permission from Strassmann, Paul. 1990.
The Business Value of Computers
, Information Economics Press, New Canaan,
Conn., p. xviii.Copyright 1990 by Information Economics Press.
project controls, talented and committed people, sound organizational
relationships, and well-designed information systems. 
– The productivity of
management is the decisive element in whether a computer helps or hurts."
1The committee concurs in this assessment. 
Box 5.1
 provides a further
illustration from software applications development. As 
Figure 5.1
 suggests,
standard measures of output make it appear that some companies' investments

in IT have paid off well, whereas those of other companies with comparable

opportunities have not. More often than not, good management has made the

difference. Generally problems with obtaining a payoff from investment in IT,
when they exist, lie not in the capacity of the technology but in the planning and
implementation of systems. Good management can overcome many

technological deficiencies, while poor management can prevent returns from

otherwise productive technologies. The latter has often happened, for example,

when corporate managers have left decisions to technical experts who were not

knowledgeable about the strategic factors, operating variables, or organizational

dynamics involved in implementation. A variety of studies (listed in

Appendix A
) have set forth many of the common shortcomings in the
management of IT.
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY167
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 5.1 THE IMPACT OF CASE TOOLS ON PRODUCTIVITY
Experience drawn from software engineering highlights the
importance of management. Computer-aided software engineering
(CASE) tools such as programming environments and debuggers were
originally sold and marketed as tools that could increase the productivity
of programmers by an order of magnitude. However, a variety of studies
indicate that the use of CASE tools makes far less difference to
programmer productivity than does the choice of the particular individuals

to do the programming job; when CASE tools are not used, programmers
are unproductive, but the use of CASE tools is not a guarantee that
programmers will be productive. It turns out that when a programming
project is competently managed, the impact of CASE tools is more easily
observed.SOURCE: Bill Curtis, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, Pa.
COMMON PROBLEM AREAS IN THE MANAGEMENT OF
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
The following section addresses some of the identified problem areas in
the management of IT and summarizes observations about them made during

the committee's interviews.
Lack of Competition
One claim is that service companies have been protected by regulations
and geography from domestic and foreign competition more than their

manufacturing counterparts.
2 Hence they have not been forced to compete and
respond to changes as quickly. However, this explanation is incomplete.

Interviews verified that these two factors might have slowed potential changes

in regulated airlines, health care, banking, and communications companies. Yet
no professional service, retail, wholesale, entertainment, or international
banking company mentioned these factors as relevant. Still, there is no question

that more recent instances of restructuring in service industries have coincided

with increased deregulation, cross-border trade, foreign direct trade, and

depressed domestic markets.
These factors may help to explain previous slow responses to change in
some types of companies but as a full explanation seem inconsistent with the

facts that (1) U.S. service companies have consistently been among the first to

adopt new technologies, (2) other countries (particularly in Europe, and Japan)

have been even more sheltered in key service industries like communications,

transportation, distribution, and finance, and (3) U.S. service
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY168
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.companies' performance in most areas has compared very favorably with that of
the companies of other industrial countries. (See 
Chapter 1
.)Inadequate Planning and Follow-up
Inadequate planning and follow-up have undoubtedly been significant
problems in implementing IT projects for many service sector firms. Although

at the time of the committee's interviews many respondents indicated that their

procedures for planning deployments of IT were comparable to those used for

investments in other technology, they often candidly admitted that they had

experienced earlier problems. Early investments were often pursued to acquire

short-term savings in labor
Šby merely automating existing practices
Šratherthan to generate longer-term gains or strategic potentials. Investments in
duplicative or incompatible programs sometimes occurred.
In many instances, the costs associated with development and ongoing
support required for major new information systems were underestimated. This

was especially true for the maintenance, the updating of software, and the

retraining costs associated with such systems. As was noted in Chapters 
3 and
4, introduction of IT frequently leads to a variety of job changes that may have
far-reaching implications across an entire company. Often, the nature and scale

of these implications have not been fully explored as part of planning for IT. As
a result, job changes were made less smoothly, and changes in performance
evaluation and reward systems unnecessarily lagged deployment of IT systems.
Some respondents cited problems of underestimating incremental usage
created by new systems that quickly exceeded acceptable utilization ratios in

data centers
Šlater leading to unexpected costs for further central processing
power. Unanticipated costs for support and additional computing power

increased both total investments and the bureaucracies to operate data centers
Šand thus lowered long-term returns. As Roger Ballou, president, Travel Related

Services Group (USA), American Express, noted,
One place an awful lot of people get into trouble is by not looking at the fully
loaded costs of technology investment. If you analyze the costs of just bringing
up the system and its ability to offset existing paper reporting, it can look very

effective. But when you look at the full ramifications in terms of CPU [central
processing unit] utilization on an ongoing basis, staffing support to provide
help-desk functions for it, and so on, it can change both the cost and seeming
returns on the investment. We recently built an on-line reporting system using
existing software. We did have to pay a few hundred thousand dollars for disk
drives and things like that. With programming, the total investment was
probably several million. However, the ongoing operating costs of this system

are probably running at $300,000 to $500,000 a month. If you are not careful,
you also keep using available CPU time incrementally, and all at once you
have to buy a large new chunk of CPU capacity for the next project.
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY169
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Resistance and Inefficiencies in Work Practices
As noted in 
Chapter 3
, the mere fact of access to desktop computing does
not necessarily improve the effectiveness with which knowledge workers (i.e.,

the individuals in an organization who are responsible for interpreting and

analyzing raw data and information and converting them to useful knowledge)

can pursue their jobs. In many cases, knowledge workers have used IT to do

more busy work without necessarily enhancing output
Šspreadsheets can be
recalculated, presentations fine-tuned, or manuscripts revised more frequently
with little noticeable benefit. In a related realm, respondents often questioned

whether they had achieved sought-after communications benefits from more

powerful desktop tools. Many said they had not yet found effective ways to

stimulate or measure better communications through electronic mail or other

computer communications systems.
A serious challenge
Šunderestimated by several of the companies
interviewedŠcomes from the long time that it takes to change traditional work
practices and corporate cultures. When personnel are uncomfortable with a new

work environment and lack clear direction, they often attempt to maintain their

old procedures in parallel. Such employees often feel that their basic skills and

organizational worth are being undermined. Knowledge workers, in particular,
often seek new grounds to justify their presence and search out other things to
do as work is removed from their queue.
J. Raymond Caron, president of CIGNA Systems, illustrated these
concerns when he noted,
When we began to automate some of our agents' activities, we thought we
would have less work coming into our central offices for the underwriters to do
and there would be a shift in the workload. That didn't happen, primarily
because we underestimated the amount of work required to change traditional
underwriting practice. And without a design change in the overall process, we

didn't really achieve our goals. We now also have hundreds of financial types
who are wizards at spreadsheet work. You have to ask the question, ''How
many times do you have to display this kind of data and who cares?"
Corporate policies that consciously promote continuity in employment and
job security may work against achieving institutional changes, although they do

help address some of the employee concerns discussed in 
Chapter 4
. As Daniel
Schutzer, vice president, Citibank, said,
As a nation we have had a population boom and a need for full employment.
We have had a reluctance until recently to lay people off, in part because we
didn't have global competition until then. Now we're seeing a terrific
downsizing as a result of the technology introductions of the past decade or
two. This is a permanent restructuring. We'll never see those jobs come back

again.IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY170
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Excessive Project ScopeFor many years, IT vendors and popular journals overemphasized the
importance of large-scale "system solutions." Managers too often responded by

seeking to install mega-projects with high visibility. Such projects generally

have multiple objectives that must be reconciled and integrated across several

divisions. Mega-projects tend to become very complex. And they often take

inordinate amounts of time, investment risk, and political compromises to bring
into being. As a result, even companies with well-established track records for
innovative uses of IT have experienced difficulties with large-scale IT projects

Šas the examples of Federal Express (successful with Cosmos II, unsuccessful
with Zap-mail) and American Airlines (successful with SABRE, unsuccessful

with CONFIRM) testify. Citibank's Schutzer underscored these difficulties:
When something becomes a big magnet project, everybody becomes focused
on it. They throw in everything but the kitchen sink that they think about but
might or might not really need. The business people don't necessarily know
how easy or hard something is to do, and they are encouraged to be more
elaborate by programmers or by technical project engineers. Before you know

it, you're designing for many more functions than you can possibly deliver or
need. The technical guys in an effort to promote the project have usually given
unrealistic schedules, which the business people may believe because they
don't know enough about the technology, or delve deeply enough into the
details. Then one of three things happens: (1) Everything just gets so

complicated it blows up, and you get major business reverses. (2) People just
get tired and kill it quietly. Or (3) you announce a premature success and
switch the thing over too soon without adequate testing. In any one of these
scenarios, the result is a disaster and the hero whose ego is on the line usually
dies.Respondents explained why such mega-projects had been major sources of
corporate IT investment inefficiency. First, because of their complexity, such

projects cost more in time and investment terms. Second, by the time they were

implemented, competitors might also have come out with similar systems, often
at lower costs because of cheaper technologies developed during the innovator's
prolonged development time. Third, because of delays, large programs also ran

a much higher risk of not being matched to corporate or customer needs by the

time they were implemented. When queried, most respondents said they now

broke large-scale programs into a series of smaller projects and implemented

these incrementally. (For details, see section below, "Compressing Project

Scope and Payback Time.")
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY171
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Technology-driven Investments in IT
Respondents reported that in earlier years, many purchases of IT were
technology- or vendor-driven, rather than being determined by business needs

or opportunities. At that time, many service firms had relatively little

experience with advanced technologies and often lacked the expertise to

articulate precisely their needs for IT or to challenge IT solutions proposed by

vendors. Because of rapid advances in equipment, vendors usually could
promise much greater technical capacity and flexibility at lower cost. Not
wanting to lose competitiveness, top managers in service enterprises might

agree to equipment purchases based on optimistic projections by lower-level

technology champions and vendors. Frequently, important support systems
Šlike software, optical scanning, labeling, or materials-handling systems
Šwereinadequate, making it difficult to use the computers' full capabilities.
For example, many retail firms experienced major problems in using
electronic scanning systems as a source of data for marketing, profitability

analyses, customer micromarketing, and other service features at the customer

interface. Existing software was too expensive to implement on mainframe

computers; scanning equipment was not sufficiently accurate; bar-coding

labeling was not as comprehensive or readable as retail applications required.
Only as needed subsystems became available
Šespecially vendor-generated
labeling and decentralized microcomputing power
Šwas full implementation
possible.Substantial improvements in IT, falling costs of IT, increasing
customization of IT to meet user needs, diffusion of IT expertise throughout the

ranks of senior management, and a much broader base of experience with IT

have increased user sophistication substantially in recent years.
Difficulties in Software Development
Given the widespread availability of IT hardware and "shrink-wrapped"
software, the only significant technological advantage that most innovators can

keep as proprietary is software developed in-house. As critical as software is,

however, software engineering is often very difficult to discipline. For a variety

of reasons, software developers are often reluctant to take advantage of
structured computer-assisted software engineering tools or macro programs
(like METHOD 1,2) that would help to ensure the accuracy, completeness, and

speed of their work. Meaningful metrics for tracking the output of software

development have been particularly difficult to devise. Commonly used

measures such as lines of code completed per day generally do not reflect either

the complexity of a problem or the quality of the code, while function point

systems are difficult to implement. As an
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY172
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.example of the problem, Jon d'Alessio, then staff vice president and chief
information officer, McKesson Corporation, stated,
We don't have any formal measures of our own internal systems development
productivity. We don't do function points or lines, or anything like that. There
has been a great reluctance to do it by our systems staff. We have had major
debates on what to measure, how to measure it. Basically, in the past we have
had a culture of very creative people who were artists in building systems.

We're trying to move it toward an engineering, disciplined approach. But
artists don't like to be measured, and I'm not sure the engineers do either.
Difficulties in software development and engineering are not unique to the
business community; software engineering remains a major challenge at the

research frontiers of computer science.
3 The biggest problem today in software
development is the inability to produce software on a large-scale. Software

development managers have treated software too much like an art form whose

process of creation cannot be improved through the application of sound design

and engineering principles. However, developments in the 1980s suggest that

understanding of how to build large software systems efficiently and well is

improving, and companies are beginning to achieve significant returns on

investments devoted to software development. To some extent, the knowledge

being developed has been codified.
4Some companies like AT&T, Arthur Andersen, and Marriott have
systematized particular aspects of software development. But respondents to the

committee's interviews said that new techniques and metrics for ensuring

quality and productivity in software development are still required. The need for

better standards and diffusion of software management capabilities will

intensify as user systems become larger and more interactive. These may be the

crucial bottlenecks to future IT progress.
CRITICAL ISSUES IN THE MANAGEMENT OF
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Other issues critical to the management of IT were identified in the
committee's interviews and in its own deliberations. Many of the basic themes

are not new, but the emphasis needed within each has changed. The most

pervasive themes for improving the use of IT relate to (1) developing genuine

information and IT strategies focused on achieving competitive advantage, (2)

implementing cross-functional reengineering and restructuring of processes and

organizations, (3) actively involving users and customers throughout the

processes of design and implementation of IT projects, (4) developing customer-

driven measures of quality, (5) compressing the scope and payback time of

projects, (6) improving postproject audits, (7)
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY173
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.carefully benchmarking processes and performance against those of outside
sources, and (8) installing performance-evaluation and reward systems that are

customer-driven and that develop intellectual capital.
Information and IT Strategy Seeking Competitive Advantage
Most interviewed executives acknowledged the importance of having an
IT strategy. However, the committee found that a majority of the firms

contacted described their IT strategies as primarily components or extensions of

divisional strategies. For the most part, programs were evaluated and prioritized

as a part of divisional planning processes and subsequent procedures for

allocating capital. Information technologies were regarded by a majority of the
interviewed companies primarily as enablers for other desired divisional or
corporate goals (e.g., cost reduction, new-product development, quality

improvement). These companies' "IT strategies" were more long-range plans for

investment in and installation of IT than explicit plans for integrating IT as part

of a competitive positioning strategy. Some companies also had a separate

corporate platform integration strategy with its own priorities. Further, some

companies reported having a special information systems committee at the

corporate level to review and coordinate individual strategic programs. Time

horizons for IT plans varied considerably, but 80 percent of respondents

operated on either a 3- or 5-year time horizon
Šupdated annually through
capital budgets and specific operational plans keyed in at 6-month to 1-year

intervals. (See Question Box 1
 in 
Appendix D
.)CIGNA Systems provides an interesting summary example of such
practices. J. Raymond Caron noted,
We have eleven businesses within CIGNA, and we have a strategy for each.
Division by division is the way we put the plans together. In essence each
division first puts down its wants and needs. Then the divisions prune this list
by setting priorities in terms of capital availability and payoff. They draw a
line in terms of what they agree to do and what they take off the table. In

addition there is a corporate "platform integration" strategy. This is a kind of
umbrella for all twelve systems in terms of data centers, computer platforms,
communications, and applications. This largely has to do with CIGNA-Link,
which is our PC LAN communications interconnection facility for all our
businesses worldwide. Decisions about those are made at the corporate level,

and we set overall guidance and direction at that level. As each division puts
its strategies, plans, and budgets together, it is incumbent upon them to use
those directions. The central infrastructure is budgeted and evaluated
separately as a corporate investment, with a charge-back system based upon
the amount of use that each area makes of a service.
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY174
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A long-term plan for investing in IT and installing IT is an important
beginning point, but a more strategic view (as has also been generated by

CIGNA) is desirable. Many interviewed companies said that they had hired at

top levels professionally trained IT managers familiar with the business. But

with only a few exceptions, neither top managers nor the new IT managers

described genuine information strategies that (1) would lead to distinctiveness
or competitive preeminence for their companies or (2) provided specific
quantitative targets to ensure that the set objectives were met. The committee

believes that any information or IT plan is most likely to be successful when it

is part of a well-integrated strategic plan that contains such elements. As

applications of IT move from an emphasis on traditional cost-cutting toward

more strategic concerns, a well-defined strategic process for integrating IT and

customer needs becomes particularly important. Edward Hanway, president of

CIGNA Worldwide, described his company's approach:
We are using a team-oriented approach and a lot of new software technologies
that allow a "try it, test it, fix it" type of development effort
Šas opposed to our
historic approach, which was a long, involved, planning and document
preparation process. We've been adamant in motivating these multifunctional
teams, pushing them to realize that the challenge is not simply to save money.

Efficiency is important, but the big issue is how successful we are with a
customer or in the market.
Another critical component of any comprehensive information and IT
strategy is engagement in that strategy by all levels of the organization. The

mere involvement of chief executive officers, chief operating officers, and chief

financial officers in developing the company's information strategy is not

sufficient; true understanding and commitment are essential. To exploit the

potential of IT in facilitating strategic change requires consistent long-term

support across all divisions. Only top management can provide the patience,

consistency, and reward structures that make it possible to execute forward-

looking strategies despite urgent operating pressures. These are complex tasks

requiring top-level finance, human resource, and operating champions to lead

needed changes. For many companies, ensuring such leadership may require
making major changes in the selection and promotion criteria used for top
managers themselves.
Cross-Functional Reengineering and Reorganization
Successful installation of IT increasingly requires that both information
technologists and user groups look beyond their old functional boundaries. Both

applications-specific expertise and familiarity with the latest IT are critical.

Ensuring continuous integration between technologists and users
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY175
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.throughout planning and implementation both improves results and shortens
design cycles. In the words of Edward Hanway,
By closely integrating the people who do the IS [information systems] work
into the management structure of the business units, we have gotten terrific
results in a much quicker time frame than we ever would have hoped for
previously. Attitudinally, there has been a major change. Now, there is none of
that age-old "we versus they," or "throw the requirements over the wall and

expect us to deliver" mentality. 
– The productivity of IS people has increased
dramatically as a result.
Changing interfunctional processes usually requires readjusting
organizational structures across those functions. Major restructuring, in turn,

involves significant risk and takes time to accomplish smoothly. As a result,

large organizations often implement such changes incrementally. To reduce

risks they frequently run a series of smaller trials or experiments with potential

new organizational modes, develop coaches for these modes, create systematic

ways to learn from their experiments, and then attempt to diffuse this learning

throughout the firm. All this takes time and continuous management attention.
To exploit IT effectively in such cases, the committee thought it helpful for
managers to develop an explicit transition plan involving certain key steps.

Critical among these is how to "reskill" the organization for its new roles
Šparticularly for the flexible, multiskilled, team-oriented structures that seem to

be emerging. Neither public education nor company training programs have

been particularly attentive in the past to meeting the needs for new skills. Many

companies lack experience with new organizational and operating modes and

may need to seek the necessary expertise outside their own boundaries. As part

of the process of change, companies often need new methods for evaluating the

contributions of individuals and teams. Important among these are measures

and incentives for their line managers to develop people (and systems) as

"knowledge-based assets" (a topic discussed below in the section "Customer-
and Knowledge-driven Performance Evaluation and Reward Systems").
Many respondents commented that the first performance gains from IT's
use were often obtained by merely automating existing activities. But over 70

percent of respondents said that in today's environment, careful process analysis

and reengineering are key to improving benefits from the use of IT. In its

classic form, reengineering involves a series of rather well-understood steps:
1. Analyze the total process to determine whether it should be done at
all, that is, whether its value added exceeds its costs;
2. Analyze each major step within the process to determine its value
added versus its cost and whether it can be eliminated, simplified,

or consolidated with another step;
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY176
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3. At each major step, analyze each component activity, eliminating,
consolidating, or simplifying those that remain;
4. Map the remaining component activities into a new system and
analyze to see where further steps may be eliminated, consolidated,

or simplified;
5. Install new organizational structures and systems specifically
designed to implement the remaining activities as efficiently and

effectively as possible; and
6. Follow-up to ensure that the new process is operating as intended.
When ineffective processes are not reengineered, the application of IT to
those processes simply results in performing ineffective processes more rapidly.

Respondents often noted that important contributions to productivity and

effectiveness through the use of IT frequently came less from the

computerization of existing activities than from the transformation of a process
itself.5 Successful automation is often targeted first toward those steps that are
most onerous, complex, boring, or time consuming. By defining and analyzing

the steps and outputs of these processes down to their smallest repeatable

microelements, IT-based systems can be introduced that operate at lowest cost,

yet still maximize flexibility, control quality, and capture essential information

for future use. When these steps were carefully undertaken with user and

customer participation, startling results were often reported. Roger Ballou of

American Express described that company's process and gains as follows:
If you don't reengineer the work flow to take advantage of the technology,
you're just doing the same inappropriate things quicker. People have a
tendency not to think about what the technology will let them do once it's in;
they just do what they're doing today. In a simple example, our business travel
operations historically had something like 31 manual checks done to ensure
accuracy, lowest fare, and things like that. In two stages we automated about
75 percent of those quality assurance checks. To do this right we had to
reengineer the whole work flow of the reservation process and ticketing

functions in our offices.
If we had just put the automation in, because of the 25 percent of checks that
still have to be done manually, we probably would not have generated any
substantial savings. But by designing a statistically valid sampling technique

that could ensure accuracy levels above 98 percent on this manual 25 percent,
we have been able to generate tremendous savings. We have a department of
process engineering that provides the technical expertise for these tasks, but
they do it in and with the offices affected. We call the process "brown paper
reviews," because when they go into the offices they use big sheets of brown

paper to lay out the process engineering work flows of all steps, working with
counselors and with office personnel to get ownership of the solution.
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY177
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A cross-functional and strategic orientation to process development is
critical. Without it functional groups are likely to introduce IT on an internal ad

hoc basis without considering performance gains that might be obtained by

looking outside their traditional organizational boundaries. Such an approach

often has led to major suboptimizations. Because most organizations tend to

grow initially around specialized functional expertise, over time a number of
steps may be built into business processes merely to accommodate functional
decision making and the power politics associated with functional structures.

Appropriate reengineering can break down these structures and substitute cross-

functional processes and team decision making, offering new opportunities and

payoffs. Increasingly, improved communications and capabilities for data

exchange enhance and enable these opportunities.
At CIGNA Corporation, Melvin Ollestad, senior vice president, Claims,
Employee Benefits Division, described how his corporation's cross-functional

reengineering is specifically matched to customer needs:
The company has a Systems Development Methodology (SDM) for cross-
functional design. In our division, first of all we now try to decide how we
want to run the business, what is the best way to serve customers. We try to

understand exactly what that means and to reengineer how we want to deliver
each specific service. Then we put in place the technology to support us in
doing that. We had become functionalized within the offices so that we had
one group of people opening the mail, a second doing basic inputs to record a
claim, a third group to do data entry, another group for the adjudication
process, other specialists on various kinds of claims for reference purposes,
and still another group that generally answered questions, phone calls, and so

on.The idea of putting together teams of people and dedicating them with
appropriate IT support to customers appeared to be a good way to get a needed

transformation. It has had the benefit of aligning us much better and more
deeply with our customers. The customers like it a lot. The employees feel
better about having control, being able to make decisions, and being heard. We
also find that we need fewer management supervisory people, and the ones we
do have are in a facilitating mode, which is more rewarding to them as people
get used to the process.
Interviewed companies repeatedly reported that, when cross-functional
reengineering is focused on specific problems, total processing times could drop

from days or weeks to a few hours or minutes. 
Box 5.2
 presents an example
from the literature. From the customer's viewpoint, cross-functional structures

also often prove to be much more effective with respect to quality, improving

both efficiency and responsiveness to customers' needs.
J. Raymond Caron of CIGNA Systems described that company's approach
to cross-functional reengineering and the benefits received from that approach:
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY178
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 5.2 REDUCTION OF APPLICATION PROCESSING TIME
AT THE IBM CREDIT CORPORATION
The IBM Credit Corporation provides financing for potential
customers of IBM computers, software, and services. Prior to

reengineering of operations, a typical credit request took approximately 6
days from submission to approval. Several people handled each request:
order takers, credit checkers, pricers, and the like. However, managers
discovered that the actual processing time for the typical credit request
was 90 minutes: for most of the 6 days, the credit request sat on
someone's desk. The company reengineered its operations, replacing
specialists in the different departments with a single generalist
Ša "deal
structurer"Šwho processed an entire credit request from beginning to
end. For difficult applications that might require more expertise for proper
processing, the deal structurer calls on a small pool of specialists. IBM
Credit Corporation cut its average turnaround time from 6 days to 4 hours;
in addition, it now processes 100 times as many deals as before with a

slightly smaller work force.
SOURCE: Hammer, Michael, and James Champy. 1993.
Reengineering the Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution
,Harper Collins, New York, May.
We now have two kinds of reengineering. We have functional reengineering
and what we have termed 
strategic reengineering
. In a functional
reengineering setting, we work with a claims department, an underwriting
department, or a marketing department, looking at the processes within the
function. The more powerful and difficult approach is strategic reengineering.
Strategic reengineering looks at the way a business is performed from the

customer's viewpoint, and slices it across our very strong functions. This
approach clears things up very quickly in terms of what adds value, what does
not add value, what gets in the way of meeting customer needs, and what the
cost is of providing products and services. We try wherever possible to include
in the effort customers, distributors, and all of the organizations within the

business that are involved with the value chain, as well as suppliers. This type
of reengineering takes a lot of effort to do because of our strong historical
functional organization bias. But we find it yields the most results.
At BankAmerica, Martin Stein, vice chairman, noted,
One of the effects of IT is that we now have really two types of organizations.

We have our traditional hierarchical, vertical organization, where we tend to
centralize things like back-office functions. But IT has also
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY179
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.created a real operating organization which goes the other way, and that's
based on cross-functional teams. Our COIN [Customer On-line Information
Network] system has worked because people formed a cross-functional design
team to match this process where you couldn't tell users from technology
people. The projects that succeed on a large-scale appear to have those

characteristics; the ones that fail don't. We're at the point now where if we
don't see that type of informal cross-functional work team organization, we
won't do the project.
Carefully implemented, cross-functional process mapping and
reengineeringŠalong with use of self-directed teams
Šcan result in the
elimination of numerous steps and often two or three organizational layers

involved in managing interfunctional processes. For companies interviewed by

the committee, such approaches frequently resulted in real-time (computer-

based) interactions and much-enhanced (personnel-based) responses to

customers. For example, self-directed ''800 number" teams supported by new IT
systems often consolidated various order-processing, customer-inquiry,
customer-response, field-dispatching, and trouble-shooting activities that had

built up huge functional bureaucracies in the past. Such interfunctional

applications were among the highest "quick-payoff" applications of IT reported

in interviews.Traditional hierarchical management structures are difficult to reconcile
with the needs of cross-functional teams. Successfully reengineered business

processes often result in very flat, network, team, cluster, inverted, or other new

organizational modes.
6 Indeed, the full realization of benefits from using IT
generally requires not just extensive investments in hardware but a complete

overhaul of the firm's traditional organizations, systems, practices, and culture.

Very few respondents said that they had an explicitly stated goal of flattening
an enterprise's organizational structure by using IT. Such goals, announced
publicly, might generate considerable resistance to change. However, the

potential payoff is high enough to warrant conscious consideration
ŠandplanningŠfor organizational restructuring in any proposed process change. In
fact, a majority (60 percent to 80 percent) of companies interviewed by the

committee found that the use of IT had had an impact on their organizational

structure (e.g., changing spans of control, facilitating organizational flattening,

or encouraging use of self-directed teams). But very few had made a full

transition to supporting their new organizational structures with both new

customer-oriented measures of performance and new reward systems. Many

said that they were experimenting with such changes now. Companies reported

both increased centralization (usually in data centers or databases) and

increased decentralization (usually in operations) resulting from their use of IT.
(See Question Box 5
 in Appendix D.)IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY180
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Continuous User and Customer Involvement
Direct and intimate user involvement in the specification, design, and
implementation of IT systems was a strong contributing condition for success in

the vast majority (over 85 percent) of the companies interviewed by the

committee. (See 
Question Box 6
 in 
Appendix D
.) This is not surprising, since
the applications-specific knowledge needed for effective implementation is far

more likely to reside in the minds of users (whose job it is to understand the
application) than in the minds of information technologists (whose job it is to
understand the technology).
Many of the companies interviewed by the committee found that external
customers also have a valuable role to play during the planning and installation

of IT-based systems. Unfortunately, relatively few companies directly involved

such customers beyond early specification stages
Ši.e., in system design or
implementation. Because customer needs ultimately define the nature and

success of many applications, direct input and feedback from external

customers can be very helpful in creating effective IT systems. As IT
applications become more strategic, involving external customers may become
even more important. Modern software and improved development practices

can facilitate the kind of highly interactive prototyping that greatly increases

both the quantity and quality of user input. The most effective user and

customer involvement occurs when:
   Users and customers participate interactively
. Since user and customer
needs are often difficult to conceptualize and articulate, close user

interaction with information technologists, or still better, interaction

with possible prototypes, can help uncover hidden but real needs.

Focus groups and experimental facilities for testing consumers'

responses are important ways to obtain input, but observing users
interacting with a prototype can add important new insights. A vice
president of a major airline described that company's approach:
We have consumer inputs for our system designs from the airports where we
have implemented test systems. In addition, we have user inputs from the
people who are actually working at the counter. For them, we use a
prototyping technique where we actually are coding and developing right along
with the users. As we put in a feature, they will recommend changes, redesign

it, implement it, continually modify it, until we have reached something we all
feel is satisfactory.   Users and customers are involved continuously
. Because many factors
critically affecting usability are decided not in original specifications,

but in design and implementation stages, many companies have found

it very helpful to involve users and customers throughout

implementation. As BankAmerica's Martin Stein stated:
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY181
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.If we can't get user commitment, no matter how important the system is, we
won't do it. We try to do reengineering with each process change. But it is not
a complete reengineering before installing the technology. It's almost an
existential process. We reengineer it as we go along. One of the things we
discovered is that if we are really smart, we get the benefits we say, but often it

turns out that we don't get them from the places we thought we would. If you
have a situation where there is a clear general idea of what the payoffs are and
there are compelling economics, as you go along you get more perfect
knowledge of where the gains are and can guide the process in those
directions. Each reengineering iteration seems to refine it. We use

interfunctional teams to let us design within these dynamics.
   Groupware technology facilitates collaboration
. Collaboration among
technologists, users, and customers located in geographically separated

sites can be cumbersome and can make rapid changes and iterations

difficult. Moreover, maintaining multiple versions of a large

development system can become a logistics nightmare. Technology

that provides computer support for cooperative work, called

"groupware," can reduce the impact of physical dispersion, as well as

provide for managing a system with multiple developers or multiple

users. At Chase Manhattan, Craig Goldman, senior vice president and

chief information officer, reported,
Using Lotus Notes my developers, working with customers, can develop
applications in hours and days that once took months and years. These are very
user-friendly applications, with a high degree of rapid prototyping. Now our
customers can actually see the development taking place before their eyes.
What this has done is to make them believers that things can be done. They
have wound up spending more time than they ever would have in the past
working with the developers, interfacing with them, and actually developing

the technology. We have come up with better input and better ideas from the
key people using the technology, and also better products coming out the back
end because there was greater involvement on the part of customers. In some
of our areas, this involvement extends to surveys that go right out to our
external customers.Customer-driven Measures of Quality
One of the more important trends in managing IT is the attempt to develop
better metrics to measure and manage quality from the customer's viewpoint. As

in manufacturing, companies' financial measures of revenues or returns may

provide poor gauges of the quality of output, especially in the short run. Several

respondent companies had developed elaborate formal nonfinancial measures of

service quality. The most straightforward of these involved internal engineering

metrics. Since service quality is often produced in the same moment that the

service is consumed, many
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY182
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.respondents had installed on-line (real-time) IT systems to ensure the delivery
of crucial elements of quality that could not be achieved otherwise.
Thus when financial service representatives pull up the file on a new
product, they are constrained by numerous rules, limits, and procedures
Šbuiltinto the software
Što ensure that all relevant data are checked and that no
impermissible commitments are made. The customer is served faster and more

accurately, yet the costs of internal processing and errors are reduced. Fast-food

operations' electronic systems ensure that inventories do not go stale, staffing

levels are maintained, cooking temperatures and cycles are correct, customer
bills are properly itemized and added, and so on. Such systems allow relatively
untrained people to perform tasks accurately that they previously could have

performed only imperfectly, if at all. For more sophisticated professional

activities, such as design or maintenance operations, architectural management,

legal work, accounting audits, bioassays, real-estate evaluations, and investment

banking, on-line IT systems have been implemented to ensure a thoroughness,

consistency, and quality never before possible.
However, despite their utility, engineering metrics and IT systems that
monitor the performance of internal operations can ensure only that internal

operations are proceeding as designed, not that those internal operations are

providing the customer with real value. Moreover, what the company regards as

higher-quality output (more customized service, or a faster response) may not in

fact be perceived by customers as more desirable, especially if they must pay

more for it. Companies have often found upon checking that customers cared

far more about reliability in delivery or pleasant personalities in contact people
than about fast response times. They can discover this only by interviewing
customers.As a result, sophisticated companies are beginning to pay substantial
attention to measures of quality that are customer-based. A surprising number

(43 percent) of the companies interviewed by the committee had instituted such

measures.7 Although companies try to collect as much data as possible through
automated means, a complete evaluation procedure should also normally

include some random visits, customer sampling, and personal observations as

assessment tools. These are especially important in understanding certain
significant dimensions of point-of-contact service performance
Šlikecheerfulness, creativeness, responsiveness, professionalism, or other key

characteristics of personal service.
Service companies in particular have taken a leadership role in developing
customer-oriented measures of quality. Quality in services often requires

extensive interaction at the point of customer contact, is of prime importance to

the customer, and has a high potential impact on future sales. As in

manufacturing, there tends to be a strong positive correlation between service

quality and lower cost. The elimination of errors in producing a
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY183
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.service decreases the costs of coordination and rework, customer service costs,
and customer complaints (to say nothing of the unmeasured and possibly

greater costs of losses of goodwill at the customer level). Two examples suggest

the kinds of approaches companies take to improve levels of customer service

while decreasing costs:
   McKesson has defined 42 "customer satisfactors" that it surveys
externally and measures internally on a routine basis. A seven-page

questionnaire goes to over 1000 customers every year, and updates are

made quarterly on a smaller set of factors considered to be the most

important. McKesson is now trying to link these "satisfactors" to its

compensation-incentive systems. At the strategic level, McKesson also
emphasizes five themes for competitiveness: customer-supplier
satisfaction, people development, market positioning, relative net

delivered cost, and innovation. For all of these factors, McKesson uses

internal and external metrics to track its own and competitors' positions

as perceived by customers.
   MCI, in addition to using on-line measures of technical quality, does in-
depth customer surveys about twice a year and uses the results of other

customer questionnaires administered at a lower level of detail (10

questions) monthly. In addition it makes extensive use of focus groups

and other techniques to check its general image. Every customer with

more than approximately $30,000 a month in billings is surveyed in

detail once a year, either informally or through in-depth interviews.
The in-depth interviews are done by an outside company. MCI does its
own statistical analysis of the surveys that come in from the samples

for residential customers. It also uses focus groups to get a more

personalized feel for how those customers are responding to particular

services. MCI uses formal measures of loss rates, geographically, by

customer service center. In its business communications division, MCI

measures these quality factors by branch office at 132 branches. It also

measures loss rates by customer segment and does an extensive

employee satisfaction survey every 18 months, considering that to be

an important factor in customer service.
Respondents reported on a number of other experiments aimed at
measuring service quality at the customer level. Nevertheless, interviews

indicated little direct use of customer-driven metrics in measuring the

performance of specific departments. There was an even greater gap in
converting such measures into performance incentives for contact groups. And
at the time of the interviews, no companies had converted either the results of

customer surveys of quality or data on customers' observations into useful

financial measures of service performance. These are important areas for future

management attention.
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY184
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Compressing Project Scope and Payback Time
Increasingly, companies face the dichotomy that while they seek to
increase paybacks from IT through more strategic (usually more complex and

longer-range) programs, the life cycle of each generation of technology is

becoming shorter. To manage this anomaly, many interviewed companies said

that they now proceed incrementally on large IT projects.
These companies said that they consciously seek to break such projects
down into smaller, more discrete segments
Šeach of which can (1) be justified
individually and (2) be integrated incrementally into an agreed-upon system

architecture. The broad goals of the overall project and its general costs and

benefits are analyzed. Then the output and input characteristics of each major

module (and its needed interface standards) are established. These are used to

discipline all subsidiary project designs. Then the program is broken down into
definable smaller projects, each with finite timing and payoffs. As early projects
are successfully implemented, they help to reduce the real and perceived risk on

the total project. Early paybacks lower the present value of the total investment.

Initial feedback from early projects can be used to guide those that come later in

the sequence. Overall project management is simplified and more focused. And

there is less political resistance to large-scale projects as early successes ease

concerns.To implement changes in large systems incrementally, companies
indicated that they often developed and tested individual modules on a small

scale or in a single operating division. As these projects proved their viability,

they might then be integrated for testing with other successful projects on a

local scale or be rolled out as discrete projects across various divisions. As a

result of such practices, companies could achieve faster paybacks (by not

having to wait for the entire program to be completed), and risks were reduced.
Despite the rapid rate of improvement and turnover that abbreviates the
life cycle of much IT equipment, only a minority (30 percent) of the

interviewed companies said that they had a special "hurdle rate" for IT

investments vis-
à-vis other investments. (See 
Question Box 1
 in 
Appendix D
.)Instead, they adjusted for the relatively quick obsolescence of IT equipment by

introducing faster depreciation rates into their calculations.
As a prioritizing device, some companies sought 6- to 9-month payoffs on
IT projects. Others noted that among successfully implemented projects, the

time to actual payoffs rarely exceeded 3 years. For example, Chase Manhattan's

Craig Goldman said, "In the data center arena, you have to pay project

investments back in the year you make the investment. We are planning on

reducing our absolute costs over the next 3 years, every year while we enjoy a

25 percent volume growth; there's a program to support it." At CIGNA
Corporation, James Stewart, executive vice president and
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY185
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.chief financial officer, stated: "Increasingly we are shortening the planning time
frame. We are focused on shorter-term paybacks rather than building galactic

systems. The planning time frame has shortened from the traditional galactic 2

to 3 years down to 6 months."
Planning for payback within shorter periods helps manage technological
risks. Fast and effective implementation can also have strong strategic

significance. As McKesson's Jon d'Alessio said,
On the application side, you get the possibility of a competitive edge for a
while. But the lead time for your corporation is not very long; you clearly don't
get a sustainable edge because competitors can respond so quickly. How

efficiently you implement, how effectively you do it, and how quickly and well
you translate concepts into better customer service
Šthose are the things that
differentiate companies.Many companies interviewed by the committee had further improved
control by (1) demanding that divisional systems follow corporate-wide
interface and software standards for compatibility and interoperability, (2)

employing corporate-level allocation and follow-up processes for

interdivisional strategic and infrastructure projects, and (3) using more

systematic preproject analyses and postproject audits than in earlier years.
Postproject Audits
The committee found that virtually all interviewed companies reported
using formal evaluation procedures for IT projects (which lent themselves to
such analyses) before investments were made. (See 
Question Box 2
 in
Appendix D
.) But postproject evaluations were less universally pursued. A
majority (64 to 68 percent) did attempt audits on certain types of projects,

notably cost-reduction and new-product programs. Audits for other types of

projects were less frequent. (See 
Question Box 3
 in 
Appendix D
.) Postproject
audits were often said to be erratic or spotty. This was of some concern to both

the committee and to many respondents, despite the fact that a large majority of

respondent companies that had undertaken overall assessments claimed

acceptable to high payoffs on their IT investments. Some examples illustrate

various viewpoints:
   At the Travelers Companies, Larry Bacon, senior vice president,
commented,Do we do post investment audits consistently across the board? No,
it's very spotty. Our decentralized style dictates that the divisions run
their own businesses. Some divisions do audits very rigorously; others

don't. On each project, however, we try to make sure that we do

capture the intended benefits.
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY186
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   At SuperValue, H.S. Smith, vice president, said,
We do cost-benefit analyses prior to the execution of each project.
In the past we haven't really been very religious about auditing after

the fact. We have audited our capital appropriations, but we don't

capitalize software, so we have not audited the results of that.
   At Citibank, Daniel Schutzer said,
I think we are probably equally guilty with everyone else as far as
keeping records and checking how well we succeeded on projects and

whether we really did achieve expected benefits. We constantly check

the milestones for the development itself: whether we delivered in 2

years for the $5 million proposed or whether we slipped and overran.

But we don't really systematically ask: Is the project increasing
revenue the way we thought? Is it reducing costs or personnel?
Sometimes, if there is an immediate reduction of personnel, that

measurement may be taken. But for some of the other kinds of

incidental benefits
Šrevenue increases, expense savings
Šit's not clear
to me that we do a good job of following up.
Many had installed more rigorous procedures in the last few years. They
thought that installing such procedures would undoubtedly force operating and

information systems managers to concentrate more on specifying and achieving

planned gains, and that this presumably would improve future measured

performance gains from using IT. However, in the committee's interviews very

few companies mentioned going to the next high-payoff step of systematically
analyzing postproject audits to ascertain and catalog those success or failure
patterns that could assist in selecting and managing future IT programs. There

was little evidence that formal post hoc evaluations were directly used to guide

future capital or program budgeting allocations. Further, such appraisals were

seldom used to evaluate line managers' performance or to set metrics for

incentive plans. All these seem worthy considerations in improving future

program management.
Benchmarking Against Specialized Outside Providers
Benchmarking examines how one's own performance of an activity
compares to that of others performing the same activity. Benchmarking studies

generally provide better information about business processes than about

specific costs. Definitions of data and what is included in various cost

categories vary widely among companies. These definitional problems are
compounded by all of the usual problems about measuring service output.
Consequently, comparisons of best-practice processes generally are more

productive. Companies can make significant gains (1) by evaluating and

modifying "best practices" observed externally and (2) by deploying their own

best practices more widely internally. In addition to improving
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY187
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.many processes directly, comparisons with outsiders can also send signals to
groups within the company being benchmarked that their performance can be

checked against that of outside service groups and that they must keep up with

competitive practices.
The committee found that benchmarking had generally been undertaken
only relatively recently. Most interviewed companies benchmarked primarily

against other competing peer firms. Only a few (less than 30 percent)

mentioned benchmarking against internal "best-in-class" activities in their own

firms or in noncompeting external firms. Fewer still benchmarked against
specialized external service providers
Šlike ADP Services, EDS, or
ServiceMasterŠwhich have widespread reputations for efficiency. Although
outsourcing of data centers has become a $7 billion to $10 billion industry in

the United States and Japan,
8 few interviewed companies mentioned
outsourcing as a direct result of their benchmarking studies. More often they

updated, consolidated, or modified their internal processes themselves. A major

exception was MCI. Richard Liebhaber noted:
Where I get my view of 5- or 10-year technology is by visiting vendors. People
ask me how many development engineers I have working for MCI. I say I have
19,000Šbut they don't work for me
Šthey work for 74 vendors. I view all
those vendor engineering people as working for me. So, we go out into their
laboratories, find out what they are doing, and influence what they are doing.
A particularly useful type of benchmarking can result when groups of
companies voluntarily pool their own information and agree jointly to sponsor a

consulting firm to undertake a detailed study of comparative practices. Data on

relative performance are then fed back to individual firms. Each firm's own data

are specified for its internal use, but the identity of the remaining participants is
disguised by normalizing size (or other distinguishing features) and identifying
competing companies only as A, B, or C. For the companies interviewed, such

practices offered useful relative calibrations, although not specific financial

standards for service performance. For example,
   CIGNA Corporation used outside consultants to compare unit costs of
its back-office and data centers versus competitors' unit costs for such

services (in terms of tape drives, databases, CPUs, and so on). This

engineering cost-driven study did not address returns on investment or
make specific comparisons with specialized outsiders such as EDS.
   BankAmerica compared its IT performance against that of other
competitive institutions in terms of certain key measurements of

effectiveness on an anonymous basis. It also used noncompeting peer

groups (such as the member companies of the Research Board) for

similar comparisons, but it had not specifically evaluated its overall
investments in IT with respect to paybacks.
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY188
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The following quotes summarize how some other successful companies
approached benchmarking:   At Chase Manhattan, Craig Goldman said,
We have done some very specific studies both internally and with
the help of external sources to peg us vis-
à-vis competition in a
number of key areas. In one, we hired Nolan Norton. They took our

data from five or six major facilities and compared them to a cross-

section of other companies. There was a second study done by Price-
Waterhouse that said on an individual basis, each of those data centers
were efficient
Šand significantly more cost-effective than if we
outsourced them. Overall we found we are close to being as efficient as

we could get from an outsourcing contract today. By doing further

consolidations, we will be more efficient. In addition, we hired Booz

Allen to look at our major competitors and to give us some

comparative data both on efficiency levels and relative performance

trends. We have also made major strides in migrating to common

platforms and systems, looked around the network, and picked up the

modules from each sector that made the most sense.
   NationsBank's Patrick Campbell, senior vice president, Technology
Planning, described that company's approach:
In Dallas, we have a very strong IT user community. For example
we have J.C. Penney's, Frito-Lay, American Airlines, Southwest

Airlines, and so on. We have begun dialogues with representatives of

these firms in "user communities" or "user groups." By exchanging

information with noncompetitors, we can take pages out of their book

just about every day and not have to reinvent the wheel. This
benchmarking group is very selective about who can join. One of the
rules is that the prospects need to be Dallas-based so we have close

proximity. Basically, participants must be at the corporate office level

and hold the position of senior technology planner on the company

team. None of the companies can compete directly with one another.
We also benchmark our internal operations against established
outsourcing suppliers on a continuing basis. We do "best-in-class"

analyses of their processes as well. We try to position ourselves

between the outside vendor community, like AT&T or IBM, and our

customers. One of the benchmarks to which we compare ourselves is

the ability to provide IT services to our internal and external users at a

competitive price. In other words, if AT&T can perform a service for
12 cents a minute, our gauge is to be 
less than 12 cents per minute. If
we can do that, we are basically in a sound business position; we are

not a net overhead cost the way many organizations are.
Benchmarking has received widespread attention only in recent years.
Even so, the most common type of benchmarking appears to be a comparison of

a firm's performance in a given activity to that of other peer companies.
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY189
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Comparisons to specialized service providers, to smaller firms, and to
firms not in the same industry are much rarer. Since activities are relatively

generic (as noted in 
Chapter 4
), it should not matter to the benchmarking
company whether the best-practice provider of a given activity is a peer

company or an external specialized service provider. Including specialized

external service providers in the comparison group can be especially useful,
because such companies make their living by concentrating on an activity and
providing it more efficiently or effectively than others.
Customer- and Knowledge-driven Performance Evaluation
and Reward Systems
A company's prosperity in the long run is intimately linked to the way in
which its reward structures are aligned with its corporate goals. The committee

discussed in depth the question of whether in corporations of the future, the

management of intellect (or intellectual processes) and the capital embodied in

knowledge-based assets will be the primary bases on which they compete. Even

today, knowledge-based service activities such as research, design, product or

process development, buying, trading, marketing, advertising, systems

integration, software development, and logistics management contribute most of

the value added in manufacturing enterprises. Whole service industries like
consulting, accounting, financial services, the law, health care, entertainment,
and many aspects of the communications field also depend on the value added

by intellectual processes.
The most valuable assets of firms in these industries typically lie in their
technological and professional know-how, their flexible response and

innovation structures, and their knowledge about customers and markets. These

assets reside in the minds of individual staff members, in software programs, in

information and management systems, and in the databases of the companies.

Indeed the management of intellectual capital may well be a major factor in

determining who survives and who does not in the coming years. To quote

Walter B. Wriston from 
The Twilight of Sovereignty
, ''Information, in the words
of Leon Martel, is 'rapidly replacing energy as society's main transforming
resource.'"9Some studies have suggested that the management-evaluation and
incentive infrastructures of companies have not yet been adjusted to take full

advantage of the opportunities that the use of IT offers.
10 The committee's
interviews support these contentions as they pertain to performance evaluation

and reward structures. If a firm's competitive edge rests on its knowledge-based

assets and its superior customer service, reward systems need to be able to

measure such assets, to recognize individuals and teams whose work

contributes to superior customer service, and to reward these people
accordingly (
Box 5.3 gives an example).
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY190
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 5.3 A KNOWLEDGE-BASED REWARD SYSTEM
In 1992, Salomon Brothers was planning to install an employee
compensation system based on the knowledge that people bring to their
work. A new employee with no knowledge about the financial business
receives a certain level of base pay. Employees are organized into teams
that specialize in various products such as corporate bonds. To earn a
raise, the employee must complete an assignment on a certain set of
skills; as the employee masters a wider and wider variety of skills through

progressively more difficult assignments, his or her compensation will
increase.Salomon Brothers expects that employees trained under this new
arrangement will complete transactions more quickly. But it expects its

biggest payoffs from how decisions about new products and evaluations
of new business are made.
SOURCE: Gabor, Andrea. 1992. "After the Pay Revolution, Job Titles
Won't Matter," 
New York Times
, May 17, Business Section, p. 5.
However, few respondents reported direct connections between (1) their
customer-based measures of performance and quality and the incentives offered

to those handling contacts with end customers (although many said they were

currently experimenting with such arrangements) or (2) improvements in

knowledge-based assets and rewards given to managers. It is ironic that

financial markets often reflect the value of intellectual assets (through a

company's "Q value," i.e., its market value versus the replacement value of its

physical assets) but that the company's own books and performance-evaluation

systems rarely do. The value of such assets does not appear in published

financial data or in the "asset" accounts used for internal controls. The omission

of such factors in performance evaluation and reward systems could pose major

long-term problems for service companies competing in a customer-driven,
information-intensive era.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Although a large percentage of interviewed companies felt they had
received adequate to high payoffs from using IT, there were a number of areas

in which the committee thought managers could seek greater performance

advantages. Principal among these were (1) developing and obtaining top

management commitment to genuine information and IT strategies focused on

gaining strategic advantage, (2) more extensive cross-functional reengineering

and reorganization of processes affected by IT, (3) expanded
IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY191
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.user and customer involvement in all aspects of the design and implementation
of IT projects, (4) improved customer-driven measures of quality installed and

in use, (5) an increased focus on shorter-term payoffs for IT investments within

a long-term strategic framework, (6) better-developed postproject audits, (7)

more external benchmarking and increased consideration of "best-practice"

processes from outside specialist service groups, and (8) expanded use of
customer- and knowledge-driven performance measurement and reward
systems throughout the firm. Even the committee's sample of sophisticated

respondent companies often needed improvement in these areas. Most of the

problems respondents reported in achieving payoffs from investment in IT
Šwhen such problems existed
Šcame not from overinvesting in IT, but from
management inadequacies in planning and implementing IT systems. Both

Chapters 
3 and 
5 have highlighted some of the more interesting ways
experienced managers have found to improve their success in using IT's

potentials. Nevertheless, there is room for further improvement.
NOTES AND REFERENCES
1. Strassmann, P. 1990. 
The Business Value of Computers
, Information Economics Press, New
Canaan, Conn.

2. Roach, S. 1989. "Pitfalls of a New Assembly Line: Can Services Learn from Manufacturing?,"

Morgan Stanley, New York. Also, Roach, Stephen S. 1991. "Services Under Siege: The

Restructuring Imperative," 
Harvard Business Review
, September-October, pp. 82-91.
3. Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1992. 
Computingthe Future
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. Also, Computer Science and Technology
Board, National Research Council. 1989. 
Scaling Up: A Research Agenda for Software
Engineering , National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
4. Humphrey, Watts S. 1989. 
Managing the Software Development Process
 , Addison-Wesley,
Reading, Mass.

5. In these cases, IT itself is not irrelevant. IT often provides a key element in the new process.

6. A discussion of these organizational modes can be found in Quinn, James Brian, 1992, 
IntelligentEnterprise, Free Press, New York, Chapters 
4 and 
5.7. Other studies indicate that many service institutions lack such formal feedback techniques for

measuring the quality of services. For example, one study found that 70 to 90 percent of all banks

were in this category. See Giesler, E., and A. Rubenstein. 1988. "Measurement of Efficiency and

Effectiveness in the Selection, Usage, and Evaluation of Information Technology in the Services

Industries," Joint Meeting of Institute for Illinois and Industry Information Council, August 31.

8. The National Academy of Engineering is currently studying some important aspects of

outsourcing that will be discussed in a forthcoming National Academy of Engineering report,

Preparing a Global Economy: A New Mission for U.S. Technology
.9. Wriston, Walter B. 1992. 
The Twilight of Sovereignty
, Scribners, New York.
10. McKensie, R., and R. Walton. 1988. "Implementation of Information Technology: Human

Resource Issues," MIT, Sloan School of Management, Management in the 1990s Program,
Cambridge, Mass.IMPROVING DECISION MAKING ABOUT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY192
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6Information Technology In Services:
Implications for Public Policy
Information technology (IT) has contributed to the growing economic
importance of services, and that contribution is expected to increase
substantially. This report has documented, for example, the dramatic growth in
electronic transactions, yet the fact that most business transactions still involve

direct cash or paper checks suggests that what has been seen to date is only the

beginning of a long-term transition in the conduct of services. Continued

advances in computing and communications technologies, development of new

features and applications, and increases in their affordability and ease of use

will drive the further integration of IT into services.
1 Pacing that integration will
be growth in the understanding of how best to select, introduce, support, and

manage IT. Inasmuch as people learn from early successes and failures, future

applications are expected to be more successful on average than those of the

past. Experimentation will continue; there will still be failures as well as

successes in the use of IT in services.
The spread of IT to date owes much to market forces
Šthere has been no
explicit national policy aimed at promoting the use of IT in services. As

discussed in 
Chapter 2
, conditions in different industries have motivated
different types and rates of IT application; as discussed in 
Chapter 3
, specificapplications arise from conditions, options, and approaches perceived by

individual management teams. The accumulated experience with IT in services

now raises questions about potential market inefficiencies and implications for

social welfare, concerns that may argue for public policy
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY193
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.intervention. How rapidly and smoothly can adjustments be made to take place?
How can the benefits and costs be widely and fairly distributed? How can

positive impacts be facilitated and negative impacts ameliorated? How can

policy-makers better track and anticipate relevant trends? This chapter first

discusses some important policy issues and then introduces some specific policy

options related primarily to (1) employment shifts associated with the use of IT,
(2) investment in IT, and (3) research relating to the application of IT and the
changing structure of the economy that the committee believes should be

seriously considered. The emphasis is on identifying areas of need rather than

detailed specification of recommended actions. Implications for management

action are discussed in 
Chapter 5
.IMPLICATIONS FOR MACROECONOMIC AND FISCAL
POLICYAs this report is being written, the slow economic recovery is motivating
public policy interest in economic growth. One important contributor to

economic growth is investment, and one vehicle often suggested for stimulating

investment is tax incentives.
2 However, this study indicates that there is no
evidence that significant lack of investment in IT has slowed growth in

productivity, while there is evidence that a number of (sometimes measurable)

benefits have accrued in several industries. Moreover, continuing improvements

in IT's functionality and affordability suggest that IT will be used to help lower

entry barriers in some markets as well as open possibilities for new kinds of
business.3 Any investment stimulus enacted by government should not
discriminate against investment in IT (software and support as well as

hardware). The market should decide how to allocate investment dollars

among alternative uses of capital.
The findings of this study also suggest that the benefits of investment in IT
within the U.S. will not all be captured domestically. IT is being used to

facilitate the globalization of business, enabling enterprises to manage

effectively over a wider geographical area and to shift some activities and

associated employment overseas. Greater availability of capital overseas and the

worldwide integration of markets and capital resources through IT are other

factors promoting globalization. Thus, in the absence of mechanisms to reward

local spending, there is no guarantee that policies designed to encourage
investment or demand will necessarily increase jobs within the United States.
Because of its collateral effects, investment overseas is not necessarily a

macroeconomic problem, but it may create problems for local communities in

which job losses may occur. Local job creation may require incentives for local

investment.One type of IT-related investment with many local benefits is investment
in the domestic telecommunications and information infrastructure.
4INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY194
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The proliferation of IT to date has relied in part on a strong national
telecommunications network (specifically, a complex of local and national

networks). Large enterprises have built their own, private networking

capabilities to contain costs, secure advanced capabilities, and gain competitive

advantages, but smaller enterprises, in particular, depend on the public

infrastructure that is provided by telecommunications service companies.
5A second arena likely to benefit from a powerful telecommunications and
information infrastructure is the private home. Widespread access to networked

IT in private homes is likely to lead to the creation of large home-based markets

for new products (e.g., devices or services based on or enabled by multimedia

technology). Consistent with the pass-through-of-benefits phenomenon

discussed in 
Chapter 3
, these new markets will in all likelihood generate public
or private financial gains that far exceed those realized by the first companies
entering these new markets.The increasing integration of computing and communications, the
assimilation of IT as part of the infrastructure of an enterprise, and the growing

dependence of enterprises on IT all indicate that advanced information

infrastructure will be important to achieving the benefits of IT in service

activities. Information infrastructure can also assist in the delivery of training,

as recommended above; there is growing interest at all levels in the use of

electronic networks to deliver educational services.
To date, market forces have generally worked well in providing access to
IT benefits. But in some geographical areas, selectively stimulating the growth

of information infrastructure
Šparticularly for small business, educational
institutions, medical care systems, and the home
Šcould enhance interactions
among all these units, promote expansion in both the number and types of jobs

in the service sector, and possibly lead to the creation of entirely new service
industries. Given the potentially broad impacts, information infrastructure
Šincluding investment in relevant research and development
Šdeservesspecial consideration in public policy.
6 However, wherever possible, the
United States should allow the market to optimize the allocation of resources.

The country has an opportunity to expand on the relative advantage it currently

has in many areas of telecommunications. A number of countries (e.g., newly

industrializing and central European nations) have obviously weak

infrastructures; but virtually all countries have targeted information

infrastructure for improvement as a vehicle for economic development and

growth.7BACKGROUND ON EMPLOYMENT ISSUES RAISED BY
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYIN SERVICES
It is impossible to isolate the effects of IT on employment from the many
other factors that affect it. In general, the application of new technology
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY195
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.may initially give rise to job displacement and job change because by definition
new technology changes the way output is produced as well as the output itself.

Historically, the evidence indicates that the displacement effects have been

temporary: over the long-term, new technology and production processes tend

to promote productivity, competitiveness, and economic growth, all of which

contribute to job growth over time.
8 MIT's Robert Solow and others have
estimated that 70 to 90 percent of economic growth has depended on the
application of new technologies and technological innovations. Thus, although

job opportunities diminished in agriculture and more recently in manufacturing

due to automation and other factors, the number of people employed overall

grew, particularly in service industries. Lower prices and the introduction of

new products contributed to growth in employment, particularly in services;

service-occupation employment, for example, experienced substantial growth

between 1980 and 1990.
9 It is precisely this history that troubles some analysts:
Will the combined strengthening and slimming of services now trigger (or

accompany) new economic growth somewhere, or does the diffusion of IT and

other technologies from agriculture through manufacturing to services imply

that there is nowhere left for sufficient growth in jobs to occur? In addressing
this question, several issues must be considered.
As discussed in the macroeconomic analysis of 
Chapter 1
, IT applications
in services particularly affect white-collar jobs. Bureau of Labor Statistics

forecasts, executives interviewed by the committee, committee members, and a

number of studies all anticipate slower growth in some white-collar occupations

in the near future, resulting (in part) from increased use of information
technologies. The first to be affected have been lower-level, administrative and
clerical occupations; more recently, the number of paraprofessional and

technician occupations has been contracting in some industries. IT is also

enabling the ongoing reductions in middle-management positions, and it is

expected to diminish growth in sales positions as sales-related applications

proliferate.10 For example, the increased use of IT is likely to have contributed
to the higher displacement rates evident in retail trade and "other services,"

compared to manufacturing, during the 1980s.
11Although the executives interviewed for this study were asked primarily
about strategic and technical issues related to the introduction of new IT

systems, many indicated that reductions had occurred in the size of their

company's work force. For example, Larry Bacon of the Travelers Companies
described the elimination of 200 positions following the introduction of
automation systems (
Chapter 4
); at McKesson, the use of PCs by customers has
resulted in large cuts in the number of order takers, salespeople, buyers, and

functional managers (
Chapter 3
); Ford reduced its accounts payable staff by 75
percent through implementing IT systems (
Chapter 4). Certainly
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY196
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in the short-term, and in particular job categories, firms, or industries,
introduction of new IT can have significant effects on employment that may not

be fully offset by growth elsewhere.
Some of the observed displacement may reflect subtle and indirect shifts of
labor effort, including the shifts to efforts on the part of customers mentioned in

Chapter 3 and 
4. Such shifts reflect not only managers' decisions about how to
reorganize work within an organization, but also changing levels of expertise

and changing preferences within the general population.
12 Increased use of IT-
based systems may also have fostered the recent growth in part-time and
temporary employment, some of which may be among people who would prefer
full-time employment (and are therefore underemployed).
At least some observed and anticipated displacement reflects slow
modernization of relatively low-technology industries. Service job growth in the

past decades was concentrated in industries that have lagged in their (overall)

use of computing and communications (e.g., health care, legal services, and

retail).13 The comparative inefficiency of these industries casts doubt on the
notion that they will continue to support significant job growth.
Complicating the problem of assessing changes in employment levels is
the fact that IT is used to facilitate the relocation of jobs at all levels, both

within the country and between countries. Even if the absolute amount of work

or jobs remains constant, people do not tend to move with jobs, and so job

movement can have the effect of (local) job displacement.
14 Companies with
heavy data-entry requirements (e.g., airlines, insurance companies, and some

database service providers) have used foreign clerical workers for several years
to reduce costs.
15 More recently there has been growth in the use of foreign
professionals for software development, especially for lower-level coding but

increasingly for higher-level work.
16 While evidence of these trends is largely
anecdotal, that evidence suggests growth in the use of lower-wage foreign labor

in service activities over the past 5 years.
Thus, while the absolute fraction and number of white-collar jobs
transferred to foreign citizens is still small, the trend raises questions about both

the number and quality or distribution of job opportunities that will remain

available to U.S. citizens over time. Entry-level jobs are the first to go offshore,

but higher-level jobs are also moving. On the other hand, jobs are created in the

United States by foreign-owned (as well as U.S.-owned) enterprises. All of

these trends are facilitated by improvements in communications technologies,
and all are part of a pattern that has led some economists to posit an emerging
global division of labor and economic activity.
17It is difficult to forecast where new jobs will be created, which leads some
analysts to predict a rise in unemployment or a job shortage. However, overall,

job growth is reasonable to predict. The past decade alone
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY197
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.witnessed growth in opportunities in such areas as health care, environmental
services, and, particularly relevant, IT-related services (software development,

network-based services, training in the use of IT, systems integration, remote IT

facilities management, and so on). Although job creation has been concentrated

in small, entrepreneurial firms (across all industries), these firms and their

employment patterns are relatively difficult to track.
18The most obvious trends suggest principally that job growth (and job
levels) among traditional large employers will be depressed in the near term.

However, the implications for overall employment levels are not clear.

Although large firms continue to be large and important employers, the

percentage of the working population that larger firms employ has been

falling19 and the identity of the largest firms has changed over time.
Simultaneously, new companies and the new jobs associated with them have
been growing. The enabling effects of using IT in these new enterprises have

not been measured.
An added problem lies in labeling: the conventional division of the
economy into agriculture (plus mining and forestry), manufacturing, and

services suggests that we have run out of sectors. But the service sector is so

heterogeneous that only a more fine-grained identification of subsectors or new

sectors is likely to illuminate underlying changes in employment patterns. It is

possible that new kinds of businesses will emerge from both the manufacturing
and service sectors that would give rise to yet another kind of sector. However,
it is unlikely that such developments will be recognized quickly, given the

difficulty of detecting them in economic data.
Whether or not there is a temporary rise in unemployment, the content of
jobs is changing. IT-based systems have been associated with a shift toward

intellectual activities, manipulation of information about things or people (as

opposed to manipulation of physical materials), and increased attention to the

information content or corollaries of products (e.g., airline reservations and

frequent-flyer services as well as air transport, customization of insurance
policies, and so on). With computer systems focused on the mechanics of
collecting, storing, processing, and retrieving information, people have more

time to do what computers do not do as well
Špeople-to-people interaction,
creating new ideas, and so on
Šmaking use of information delivered by
technology. In addition, as the technology delivers more and more data, people

will be called on to use and work with it, in some cases to be more analytical.

These are the changes in most jobs that lie behind observations about the rise of

the "knowledge worker." Ironically, the rise of the knowledge worker is

associated with renewed attention to process engineering: the essence of

reengineering is the gathering of information and the conduct of analysis to help

improve "production" processes (food preparation and delivery, transport of

people and cargo, and so on).The average complexity of service jobs appears to have risen; by varying
definitions, there are more knowledge workers, and higher levels of
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY198
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.education are required for entry-level jobs. Flatter organizations and the
popularity of team organizations, both enabled by the use of IT, imply that the

work force of the future will need better communication and coordination skills.

These changes in jobs are evident in many industries; they are occurring more

rapidly and extensively in some industries (e.g., financial services) than in

others (e.g., retailing). Other changes in skill requirements are predicted by
management analysts
Šthe need for a broader set of skills and more problem-
solving ability to meet a wider set of responsibilities
Šbut it is not clear how
broadly these changes are taking hold in practice.
THE NEED FOR POLICY INTERVENTION TO EASE
EMPLOYMENT TRANSITIONS
Although this report has concentrated on impacts in companies and
industries that use IT, its positive benefits at these levels may be accompanied

by negative side effects, most notably impacts on the labor force. Employment

impacts may be direct or indirect, depending on how, where, and when IT is

used. As discussed in Chapters 
3 and 
4, IT is used as a tool by managers to
systematize or reorganize production processes and enterprises, effect

transitions from old to new lines of business, and shift activities within and

between enterprises, locations, and time periods. Layers are being eliminated
from the job structures of enterprises, implying broader job definitions, while
the mix of activities within firms is often becoming more focused, implying a

narrower band of functions for personnel in such enterprises. All of these

changes are occurring in the context of limited economic growth and structural

changes in service industries, as discussed in 
Chapter 2
, plus domestic and
international competitive pressures that motivate businesses to seek greater

efficiency.20The trends listed above raise the specter of 
job displacement
 (the
elimination of specific jobs or the reduction in growth for such jobs compared

to what would have been under the original conditions) and 
job change
(changes in the nature and mix of tasks that make up jobs). These changes are

likely to continue, because computer-based technologies and their applications

are often reconfigured over time and because people learn over time how to use

these technologies better.
It is beyond the scope of this report to quantify potential displacements
associated with IT in services or their duration. Broad trends and the difficulty

of interpreting them are outlined above. 
Based on those trends, the committee
concludes that some displacement, including significant loss of current

types of jobs, is inevitable, although new and different jobs are likely to be

created. As with past technology-induced displacements, public policy

intervention may be necessary to ameliorate impacts on communities and
individuals.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY199
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The changes in service activities addressed in this report are part of a
larger pattern of changes in employment opportunities that has been

characterized in 
Workforce 2000
21 and other studies; the inferences from this
report are in harmony with other, more broadly based analyses that create an

expectation for a more volatile job market. This study reinforces and amplifies

concerns about the transitions in employment that are likely to take place over
the next 5 to 10 years.
A central concern for public policy is how to ease worker dislocation,
reducing negative social impacts (such as unemployment, underemployment,

and reduction in household income) and facilitating the economic transition.

The current economic system is characterized by short-term notification of

displacement, loss of health insurance and pension plans with job loss, limited
outplacement assistance, and limited unemployment insurance and employment
service programs. Absent change (such as movement toward portable, universal

health insurance), the conditions described in this report suggest that a growing

number of people may be faced with loss of insurance benefits as well as loss of

income. Such programs as advance notice, retraining, employment search

assistance, portability of benefits, and temporary income support during job

search have been suggested as appropriate by various parties. These measures

imply interdependent but separate roles for employers, government, and

individuals. This committee did not take a specific position on the relative

merits of these proposals.
As has been noted by others, measures (such as training, retraining, and
other types of adjustment assistance) will probably be needed;
22 the challenge is
to develop innovative and effective approaches. Also important will be

encouragement of job creation through economic growth, including the

investment in new, entrepreneurial businesses and information infrastructure
(see ''Implications for Macroeconomic and Fiscal Policy" above). Calibrating
policy measures will require closer monitoring and analysis of trends (see "The

Need for Additional Research to Guide Policy Making" below), to permit

timely if not proactive responses.
Reinforcing conclusions developed by other studies, the committee
believes that there is a clear need for increased training of many types. Both

retraining for existing members of the labor force (in anticipation of new jobs

and a new mix of jobs) and education and training to make prospective entrants

to the labor force more versatile (in anticipation of ongoing change in jobs and
careers and periodic retraining) will be needed. Especially important, given
changes observed in service activities (see 
Chapter 4
), will be the development
of skills relating to the handling and use of information, including a solid

foundation of basic skills ranging from reading, writing, and mathematics to

problem-solving skills. Developing such skills for individuals already in the

labor force implies a departure from the job-specific, task-oriented training

typical of employer-based programs. In particular, it implies a need for

relatively frequent or ongoing training.
23INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY200
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.This study underscores the need for training at all levels within
organizations. In particular, job trends associated with the use of IT raise added

concern about training for the people at the bottom of the labor force, the people

with the least skills who would be suited for some of the jobs most likely to be

displaced or changed through the use of IT. Inequalities in the earnings

distribution have widened recently, reflecting greater growth at lower wage
levels and reductions in middle-level opportunities due in part to shifts in the
mix of jobs by occupation and industry.
24 Inasmuch as information-related and
problem-solving skills remain restricted to a small subset of the population,

further shifts toward "knowledge work" will make it more difficult for people

with limited or weak skills to obtain good jobs.
25 This study thus adds to
concerns raised by others about the quality of basic (K-12) education (and also

vocational education); the majority of the labor force consists of people who

have at most a high school diploma. Looking at the other end of the

employment spectrum, it should also be recognized that training will be needed

for professional and managerial personnel to facilitate their own use of IT,

prepare them to manage IT better, and convey new approaches to the

organization of work.
Questions arise as to the degrees of responsibility held by individuals,
employers, and government for training and retraining. Many of the changes

discussed in this report are beyond the ability of individual members of the

labor force to influence. A fundamental question is how to assist the employee

in making transitions, with help from the employer as well as support from

government (at all levels). As suggested above, portability of benefits illustrates
one mechanism for facilitating transitions. Since willingness as well as ability to
pay for these measures will affect what is done, incentives may be needed for

individuals and employers.
THE NEED FOR ADDITIONAL RESEARCH TO GUIDE
POLICY MAKING
A recurring theme in this report has been that limited data yield limited
understanding. Problems in collecting and aggregating data are significant

reasons why available macroeconomic data neither prove nor disprove claims

about the level of impact investment in IT has had on performance in services.
The conventional distinctions between manufacturing and services, which
underlie the collection, analysis, and presentation of publicly available data,

undermine useful analysis. Available data do not help to track the changes and

blurring of industry structures and identities resulting from shifts in who does

which activities, where, and when (e.g., the roles of both hospitals and

insurance companies in providing managed care, the retailer-like roles of

transportation service providers, and so on). And the data that are available
obscure the fact that production of goods and services involves
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY201
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.many comparable activities. For example, data regarding employment from
major companies that produce goods may be tallied only within manufacturing,

thus obscuring large volumes of service activity (such as research, marketing,

and training) also produced within those companies.
26Because each industry has different performance indicators, developing a
comprehensive body of measurements is a huge task that is far from being

accomplished.27 Even with perfect measures of output, it may still not be
possible to separate out the effects of various factors, including the use of IT,

that affect output and other dimensions of performance. In addition to
technology, those factors include changes in the skills of management, the
education and training of the work force, economies of scale and scope,

technology change in general, government regulations, collective bargaining,

and so on. 
Detailed microeconomic studies building on the kinds of issues
revealed by the committee's interviews, macroeconomic studies, and

organizational studies are necessary to better measure and understand the

contributions of multiple factors and how they interact.
Given the apparent significance of small firms to growth in the economy
and in employment, valuable insights could be gained from more research

specifically focused on how smaller enterprises use IT and with what effects.

Insights available through the literature and through interviews tend to be

limited to the experiences of large firms
Šresearchers tend to find it easier to
identify and work with larger firms, and that tendency may bias understanding.
28Although the committee did not have the resources to investigate smaller-
company practices systematically, members cited examples of individual

smaller companies that had developed extremely fast response capabilities,

strong cross-functional team-oriented cultures, team management and reward

systems, and very productive desktop IT systems for enhancing
communications. These enterprises already exhibit many of the characteristics
larger companies seek through more disaggregated organization and activity-

based competitive structures. Smaller enterprises also differ in other significant

ways. They can often rely on direct person-to-person communications and more

informal information systems. Because of the increasing importance of small

enterprises in creating jobs, introducing IT innovations, and utilizing IT in new

ways, special study of small enterprises' use of IT would seem a worthy goal for

future research.Finally, more systematic attempts to compare experiences with IT
internationally may be useful, in part to benefit from different perspectives on

elements of performance, concepts and measurements, and trade-offs in the use

of IT and in part to capitalize on the extensive tradition in other countries
(especially in Europe) of studying social and organizational impacts of
technology. 
Since use of IT will be a critical factor in international
competition, it would be prudent to systematically compare and monitor

progress and impacts in other countries.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY202
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Improving Federal Macroeconomic Data Gathering and
AnalysisThere is a need for improved statistics about existing activities and for
statistics that capture the development of new services. Policy-makers, in

particular, need better data to monitor and plan for changes in the economy.

Better statistics could provide a clearer picture of the economy, illuminating

shifts in investment, employment, products, productivity, and other dimensions

relevant to government and industry. In particular, there is a need for an

expansion in scope, i.e., data about more industries. As was noted, detailed data

are available for only a fraction of the service-oriented economy. Fundamental
to these is a need for a more refined classification of activities, firms, and
industries that would guide the collection and analysis of data. For example, it

would be useful to have more specific data on selected skill classifications and

occupations within each industry class. It would also be useful to separate out

significant service business components within firms that predominantly

produce goods. The complications and costs of obtaining more detailed data are

well recognized.
Broader and improved capture of changes in quality and measurement of
other factors that contribute value for customers could also help to put statistics

on productivity into perspective. Existing measures focus primarily on

industries whose outputs are captured by gross national product data. The

service sector interviews undertaken by the committee plus both anecdotal and

more formal evidence suggest that many of the performance gains in services
Šparticularly those associated with intangible improvements in quality or those

realized as cost savings, greater convenience, or increased flexibility or variety
Šmay not be captured by the industry producing the benefit.
29 At a gross level,
these shifts may be reflected in the financial performance of a company. But

where competition within an industry is heavy and financial gains are passed

through to customers or suppliers as savings, there may not be an obvious

correlation between benefits to customers and the firm's or industry's financial

performance.30 Progress in developing and using hedonic price indexes suggests
that there are some opportunities to develop better measurements of output

quality and customer benefits, although delivering against those opportunities

may take time and be difficult to realize.
The need for better economic statistics has been recognized for some time;
it is made more urgent by the cumulative impact of cutbacks in federal

statistical programs during the 1980s. A number of recommendations for

improving statistics on productivity and services were made in an earlier

National Research Council report (
Box 6.1
). Although progress has been
made in implementing several of the Rees Panel's recommendations, more

work is needed, and the committee therefore endorses those 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY203
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 6.1 REES PANEL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR BETTER
STATISTICSRecommendation 3:
 "The Panel recommends that the Bureau of
Labor Statistics and the Bureau of Economic Analysis explore methods for

estimating the implications of error reduction in component measures for
the 
reduction of overall error in productivity measures
 beyond that
corrected by routine revisions." (p. 7)
Recommendation 4:
 "The Panel recommends that the Bureau of
Economic Analysis (BEA) and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) seek
to improve their existing price indexes and to develop auxiliary measures
of price change. These new auxiliary measures should 
take into account 
more adequately the types of quality change that are not now
measured. –Among the adjustments that could be incorporated in the new
measures are 
adjustments – for changes in value to users resulting
from the introduction of improved products; estimates of the value
to users of improvements in performance that are achieved without
increases in real costs; and estimates of the present value of future
savings in operating efficiency made possible by design changes

and improvements.
 –" (p. 8)
Recommendation 6:
 "– the Panel does agree that for the study of
many important social problems
Šfor example, improvement of the health
status of the population
Šdefinitions of output and input that go well
beyond those currently used to measure productivity are required.
–" (p. 10)
Recommendation 14:
 ''The Panel endorses 
– calling for the Census
Bureau to collect, as an integral part of each economic census, 
data on
the purchases of intermediate services as well
 as materials by
establishments." (p. 13)
Recommendation 17:
 "The Panel recommends that government
agencies 
support research aimed at improving knowledge about the
sources of productivity change
. These agencies should be especially
attentive to research that focuses on measuring 
technical and
organizational change and new product and service innovation.
 –"(p. 15)
NOTE: Emphasis added.
SOURCE: National Research Council, Panel to Review Productivity Statistics. 
1979.Measurement and Interpretation of Productivity
, National Academy of Sciences,
Washington, D.C.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY204
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.recommendations. Specific proposals were also captured in the recent
Presidential Economic Statistics Initiative (the Boskin Initiative). That initiative

called for a 5-year, $230 million effort, a significant portion of which was

aimed at improving service industry statistics.
31 Such an initiative, if funded,
would help to ameliorate some of the problems of concern to the committee;

momentum in this area must not become a casualty of the transition. It is hoped
that the Clinton administration will enhance and build on these
recommendations with its own program. Note also that the need for better

statistical data is largely independent of issues related specifically to IT and

productivity.The committee urges the federal administration to promote a
significant upgrading of statistical programs.
 At a time when more and more
enterprises are recognizing the value of information to the performance and

expansion of their businesses, it behooves the government to collect and make

use of better information about the changing economy.
Improving Data and Accounting Principles Related to
Investments in Information Technology
Available data provide information on investments in computing and
communications hardware, which is treated for tax and national statistics

purposes as a capital investment. However, IT hardware represents only a

fraction of the investment needed to make IT effective. Committee members

(based on their experiences in developing, installing, operating, and maintaining

systems) and other analysts have noted that hardware may constitute only about

one-third of the total investment in a system (and that proportion has been

declining). Other components of IT system cost include, in particular, the cost
to develop, purchase, or maintain software plus associated training, support,
integration, upgrading, and other services. All of these costs are expenses under

current accounting principles and practices and are not captured in a firm's

capital accounts. Increases in the outsourcing of elements of information

technologyŠfrom telecommunications to databases to software development to
data center operations
Štend to further raise the percentage of IT costs that are
expensed rather than capitalized. A consequence of particular concern is that the

value of software in generating income is not obvious to management,

investors, or policy-makers
Ševen when a specialized software system, such as
a computerized reservation system, is critical to strategic advantage. Software

has become a major asset to corporations that is not reflected in their balance

sheets.32Improving the valuation of software will be difficult. There are different
and sometimes conflicting interests among analysts, investors and owners,

managers of organizations using software, managers of organizations
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY205
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.producing software, and tax authorities, among others. These different
perspectives have come out recently in the development of legislation that

would affect the tax accounting treatment of software, as one of several

"intangible assets";
33 similar issues arise concerning the treatment of research
and development spending. Discomfort with capitalizing software over a long

period of time arises from difficulties in predicting with reasonable precision
the value and life of a software system; there is concern that any piece of
software may have a relatively brief useful life, and it may be replaced or

upgraded through an ongoing process of "maintenance" that blurs the identity of

the software in question. 
The committee recommends that the Financial
Accounting Standards Board (FASB) and the Congress look at ways to

improve the usefulness and monitoring of accounting data on investments

in both purchased and internally developed IT systems (especially software 

and databases) to better support fiduciary management and performance 

measurement.34Increasing Awareness of and Investments in Research
Related to Information Technology in Services and Service
Quality Measurements
Committee interviews with executives suggest that corporate R&D on the
use of IT to develop new service products and processes is underappreciated,

underestimated, and probably underfunded.
35 Committee deliberations and
interviews with executives of large companies plus published materials reveal a

pattern of experimentation that takes place in service industries, in which

companies develop and try out new applications, software, and systems.
36 Such
projects or programs are not necessarily classified or analyzed as research by
the companies that undertake (and pay for) them, but they contribute to a larger
pattern of trial, error, and success that drives new applications of IT in services

and shapes the competitive landscape within industries.
The committee concluded from its assessment that more emphasis needs to
be placed on research and development relating to services, including the

applications of IT in services. This greater emphasis is needed across the board

Šin firms, institutions, and government. Such emphasis should include both
process and product innovation.
It is not possible to estimate how much relevant R&D takes place in or for
services, but there is anecdotal evidence that support from both corporate

budgets and federal programs for academic research for these efforts is limited.

This situation reflects a larger problem of limited support for R&D explicitly

focused on process or organizational issues. Academic analysts, including

committee members, have observed that it is difficult to get funding for such

research. Enterprises should not be discouraged by accounting
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY206
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.conventions from experimenting with these technologies, given their proven
contributions to competitiveness; rather, financial incentives for such

experimentation should be considered. Although R&D within an industry is

typically funded by the industry directly, broader, longer-term, or academic

research often presumes federal government support. This form of broad

stimulus would fall within the realm of macroeconomic and fiscal policy,
discussed above.
Another vehicle for motivating more innovation among service
industries may be an increased effort to apply the Baldrige Award to

services. According to literature describing the award, up to two awards
annually can be given in the three categories of manufacturing, services, and

small business. However, of the awards presented through 1992, ten went to
manufacturing companies, four to small businesses, and only three to service
firms; many consider the criteria for the award to be aimed largely at

manufacturing.37 Although the Baldrige Award program has generated some
controversy, it has increased attention to critical elements of performance,

especially quality. It has helped spread quality-oriented attitudes, terminology,

and measurements. The perceived availability of a special award in services

could facilitate experiments and more widespread measurement of quality at the

level of enterprises or firms.
OTHER POLICY ISSUES IDENTIFIED BY THIS STUDY
The increasing use of IT in services raises other concerns that should
motivate examination of existing public policies or consideration of new policy.

Those concerns relate to such issues as privacy, remote work, competition

policy, and intellectual property. Although detailed exploration of such issues
was beyond the scope of this report, the committee believed it important to
identify them, to increase awareness and to signal that further analysis would be

useful to determine where private actions may be insufficient to meet public

interests.One area where further policy action is already under debate is that of
protection of an individual's rights to limit access to personal data, building

on the base provided by the Privacy Act of 1974 (which was directed to the

public sector).
 Policy measures in this area will affect choices service and other
organizations can make in selecting and implementing information technology.
For example, as discussed in 
Chapter 3
, electronic databases are being used by
more and more organizations to store personal data to support customer service

operations, marketing, credit approvals, and other service activities. The

proliferation of applications, equipment, networks, and network

interconnections means that growing numbers of people have potential access to

kinds of data (such as health, income, and credit records) heretofore physically

less accessible.38 These circumstances
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY207
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.imply a greater risk of unauthorized access to or use of personal data. In
addition to these potentials for abuse, there are questions about the collection

and review of data by employers about their employees, a capability facilitated

by the use of IT, some of it in the context of electronic monitoring of employee

behavior. This practice has already raised concern among some employees,

unions, and privacy advocates as well as policy-makers.
Privacy is not the only consideration. The ability of service providers 
to assemble information regarding so many different aspects of an 

individual's life so as to provide better service also provides the capability

to deny service.
 For example, caller-identification telephone technology
enables a called telephone to display the number of the calling telephone. Such

technologies can be used to call up a customer profile based on telephone
numbers associated with previous orders, and it can also be used to ignore or
give lower priority to service requests that come, for example, from low-income

regions of a city. Insurance companies can use detailed information about an

individual to generate a customized insurance policy for that individual, but

they can also use that information as the basis for denying insurance policies

(e.g., for health care) to individuals deemed "high-risk" (e.g., those who test

HIV-positive).Another impact of the use of IT with social ramifications is the 
facilitation of remote work.
39 This effect can result in the shifting of work to
other countries.
40 It can also have more positive effects locally, in the context of
"telecommuting" and the movement of work to where people are rather than the

converse. Telecommuting
Šwhether via satellite offices, home offices, or other
field locations
Šwill change the social structure of organizations, the geography
of industries (domestically and internationally), the demand for office space,

and so on. Presumably, these practices will grow because they are perceived to

have performance benefits and because falling costs for IT will make them

increasingly affordable and easy to implement. There may also be

environmental, safety, and energy conservation benefits inasmuch as work-

related travel is diminished. The potential for more home-based work could

affect a wide range of people, including individuals who have difficulty getting

to or functioning in conventional work environments; such individuals would

include the disabled, people with dependent care responsibilities, and those

without access to adequate transportation.
41Shifts in activities among industries engendered by the use of IT raise
questions about laws and regulations aimed at constraining the competitive

behavior (e.g., pricing, collaborative ventures, mergers and acquisitions,

and so on) of firms.
 Developments within the service sector point to increased
competition across industries (and sectors), making it harder to target programs
to specific industries. Increases in outsourcing and in electronic linkages to

trading partners raise questions about the boundary
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY208
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.between cooperation and collusion. For example, recent government attention
to the use of computerized reservation systems as a possible mechanism for

collusion on pricing illustrates some of the disagreement about how information

technology can and should affect competitive conduct.
42 Since electronic
communication among businesses and across industries is expected to expand,

and since IT is expected to enable continued reorganization of businesses, it
may be that the goals of competition policies (such as antitrust policy) may be
better served by a focus on specific kinds of transactions rather than on

institutions. This is an issue that warrants further exploration by Congress and

appropriate executive branch agencies.
43Another area of business (and individual) behavior where current 
policy might need reexamination is intellectual property rights.
 Protection
of intellectual property will be a factor affecting the rate, nature, and ownership

of investments in information infrastructure, including information- and

network-based service businesses. Software has already given rise to both
uncertainty and assumptions regarding the existence or lack of intellectual
property protection.
44 Particularly relevant to services are the implications of
increased electronic networking for the protection of intellectual property

associated with materials made available electronically over networks. The

debate has just begun in this area.
Finally, IT could be better used to enhance the policy-making process 
itself. IT can be used to facilitate both the collection of highly refined data

by government and the use of that data for faster and better decision

making and therefore potentially better and more responsive services to
citizens. Such government activities as approval of eligibility for entitlement
and assistance programs could be made more responsive and accurate, drawing

on experiences elsewhere; indeed, ongoing federal agency efforts to modernize

their systems show that the potential is recognized. Improving government

effectiveness by better use of IT is an area of high potential payoff already

recognized by the Clinton administration.
45 It deserves special in-depth study.
46NOTES AND REFERENCES
1. IT will be present not only on its own, but also in the form of embedded components in a wide
variety of equipment and products that may themselves be linked to more conventional or obvious IT.

2. An option contemplated by the new administration is tax credits for incremental investments in

equipment. See Greenhouse, Steven. 1992. "Economists Back Clinton on Investment Tax Credits,"

New York Times
, November 16, pp. D1-D2. Also, see Landau, R. 1988. "U.S. Economic Growth,"
Scientific American
 258(June):44-52.
3. Birch, David L. 1989. "Statement by David L. Birch Before the U.S. House of Representatives

Small Business Committee," transcript of testimony, September.

4. It must be recognized that information infrastructure in any one locale is increasingly likely to be

linked to such infrastructure elsewhere, through regional, national, and international connections.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY209
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5. It should be noted that most private networking by large enterprises involves the use of "public"
network facilities. Through leasing of circuits and ports and through software, real or "virtual"

allocations of facilities are made. Virtual private networks, enabled by software to preempt access to

certain facilities, are expected to become more available to smaller users over time. Nevertheless,

conventional public infrastructure is expected to continue to provide a lifeline for smaller users who

need occasional access to trading partners and service providers.

6. Public policy attention to information infrastructure has already expanded considerably during the

Clinton administration, and both the 102d and 103d Congresses have introduced related legislation.

In addition, both the legislative and executive branches have taken steps to develop and implement a

national research and education network program (the NREN component of the High Performance

Computing and Communications program), which is expected to contribute to and interconnect with

a broader national information infrastructure. The HPCC program is premised in part on a

recognition that technology development and infrastructure are interrelated. A new fifth component

is called Information Infrastructure Technology and Applications.

7. National Telecommunications and Information Administration. 1991. 
The NTIA Infrastructure
Report: Telecommunications in the Age of Information
, NTIA Special Publication 91-26, U.S.
Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C., October.

8. Cyert, Richard M., and David C. Mowery (eds.). 1987. 
Technology and Employment: Innovation
and Growth in the U.S. Economy
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
9. Rosenthal, Neal. 1992. "Evaluating the 1990 Projections of Occupational Employment." 
MonthlyLabor Review
 115(8):32-48.
10. Note that one form of sales that is fundamentally a creation of IT capability and capacity,

telemarketing, appears to be growing. Meanwhile, the technology behind telemarketing (switches,

storage units, call distributors, and so on) is becoming more sophisticated.

11. Podgursky, Michael. 1992. "The Industrial Structure of Job Displacement, 1979-89." 
MonthlyLabor Review
 115(9):17-25.
12. The epitome of this phenomenon is the transformation of employment for telephone operators. It

is by now a cliche that, absent automation, two-thirds (or more) of the population might have to

work as telephone operators to sustain contemporary calling volume. But rather than simply

eliminate operator tasks, many were shifted to telephone company customers
Štelephone users are
operators, based on old definitions of operator jobs. Two developments made this shift possible.

One was, indeed, computerization of the telephone system, especially the installation of computer-

controlled switches, computer-based databases for customer and billing information, and so on. The

other was the slow but inexorable training of hundreds of millions of people to memorize huge
strings of digits for input to the telephone system through a crude terminal, the touch-tone
telephone. This training, or more specifically, the knowledge in the population of telephone

customers regarding how to make direct-dial calls, is a vital complement to the technology in the

displacement of operators.
13. Baumol, William, Sue Anne Batey Blackman, and Edward N. Wolff. 1989. 
Productivity and
American Leadership: The Long View
, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
14. An exception may apply for highly skilled occupations and individuals. There was reportedly

job growth, especially in IT-related occupations, among high-skilled immigrants during the late

1970s and early 1980s.

15. Carey, Susan. 1992. "Airlines Seek to Cut Back-Office Costs by Establishing Off-shore

Operations," Wall Street Journal
, November 30, p. B6D.
16. Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1993.

Computing Professionals: Changing Needs for the 1990s
 , National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.
17. Wolff, Edward N. 1991. "Productivity Growth, Capital Intensity, and Skill Levels in the U.S.

Insurance Industry, 1948-86," 
The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance
 16(59, April):173-190.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY210
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18. Although the diffusion of IT into smaller enterprises could slow job growth within small firms,
the launching of new businesses should continue to create new jobs both directly and indirectly. See

Birch, David L. 1989. "Statement by David L. Birch Before the U.S. House of Representatives

Small Business Committee," transcript of testimony, September.

19. Note that the Fortune 500 share of total nonfarm employment has been decreasing from a peak

of around 20 percent during the late 1960s and early 1970s. That share is now about 10 to 11

percent. See "Where the Jobs Aren't," 
Wall Street Journal
, August 10, 1992, table drawing on
Kemper Financial Services data.

20. The most recent employment conditions reflect a recession and slow recovery. The concern in

this discussion is with secular or long-term trends as opposed to the inevitable short-term shifts

associated with the business cycle.

21. Johnston, William B., and Arnold E. Packer. 1987. 
Workforce 2000ŠWork and Workers for the
21st Century, Hudson Institute, Indianapolis, Ind., June.
22. See Cyert and Mowery, 1987, 
Technology and Employment
.23. For further discussion of this point, see Zuboff, Shoshana, 1988, 
In the Age of the Smart
Machine: The Future of Work and Power
, Basic Books, New York.
24. For a discussion of how many factors contribute to the growth in earnings inequality, see Grubb,

W. Norton, and Robert H. Wilson, 1992, "Trends in Wage and Salary Inequality, 1967-1988,"

Monthly Labor Review
 115(6):23-37. Note that some of the trends associated with IT could entail
shrinkage in current low-wage jobs; this is already evident in forecasts for slower growth in clerical

jobs, for example. Questions arise about the types of jobs that may be available for the people who

would have taken such jobs.

25. Kutcher, Ronald E. 1988. "Growth of Services Employment in the United States," pp. 47-75 in

Technology in Services: Policies for Growth, Trade, and Employment
, Bruce R. Guile and James
Brian Quinn (eds.), National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.

26. What is tallied where depends on whether the services represent final, as opposed to

intermediate (component), output. Resources for final output are tallied directly; resources

associated with intermediate output are reflected in final goods and services. This practice supports

the objective of measuring trends in final goods and services, but it obscures intermediate-

production trends of interest for understanding qualitative changes in the structure of the economy.

27. An exhaustive body of data may neither be practical nor justify the expense. Also, note that even

if that body of measurements existed, one could not simply add industry-specific measures together

to generate an aggregate economy-wide measure. But more detail than is currently available is

needed to understand how activities, enterprises, industry, and the economy are changing.

28. Indeed, the relative growth in employment among smaller firms and, historically, smaller firms'

limited success with IT may be another factor explaining why measured service performance has

been weak.

29. Available data do not (and may never) capture adequately the contributions to standards of

living that IT may support. As measured, growth in productivity contributes to increases in the

standard of living, but it is only one element. The creation of whole new industries and the increased

flexibility and variety of products and services available are other elements.

30. For example, computerized reservation systems for airlines and automated teller systems for

banks provide greater customer convenience, but, although they could not provide competitive

service without these tools, even airlines and banks with leading CRS and ATM systems have had

financial difficulties over the past few years.

31. If funded, the Boskin Initiative would have emphasized Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)

programs (macroeconomic data on investment and output) and Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)

programs (employment and productivity measurement), as well as Bureau of the Census programs

that contribute to BEA and BLS statistics. Planned Census Bureau improvements,
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY211
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for example, are aimed at better measuring the output of industries that provide multiple services,
better measuring the purchases of services by manufacturing firms, and better estimation of the

emergence of new services.

32. The committee conducted many discussions on the shift from physical to intellectual capital.

Many factors obscure the value of software in the eyes of executives, investors, and policy-makers

more accustomed to and familiar with physical capital: software's intangibility and inscrutability to

the layperson, its character as intellectual capital, and the seeming lack of durability of software,

which is associated with its ease of duplication and potential to be quickly outmoded or bested by

rival products. The situation has been compounded by traditional perspectives in the accounting

community, which are oriented toward the cost and proceeds of physical property, plant, and

equipment and which reflect concern about the potential for misleading financial reporting as a

product of estimating the value of intangibles or making changes in financial metrics. All of these
concerns are valid, but all militate against a recognition of the shift from physical and money capital
to intellectual capital.
33. In the case of software acquired through business acquisitions, that legislation provides for
writing off the cost over 14 to 16 years. The software industry has objected that that long period will

raise costs and adversely affect international competitiveness, since the useful life of software is

only a few years at best.

34. According to FASB literature, "The mission of the Financial Accounting Standards Board is to

establish and improve standards of financial accounting and reporting for the guidance and

education of the public, including issuers, auditors, and users of financial information. 
– The FASB
develops broad accounting concepts as well as standards for financial reporting. It also provides

guidance on implementation of standards. 
–" FASB has come under some criticism lately, due in
part to its support for a proliferation of accounting standards, but it remains the logical entity to

study this issue.

35. Inasmuch as service innovation is associated with entrepreneurial firms while research funding

tends to be concentrated in larger firms and universities, there may be a systemic constraint on

service research funding.

36. For example, Kmart developed and tested a new system to track traffic in stores and relate

traffic patterns to purchase patterns. See Schwadel, Francine. 1991. "Kmart Testing Radar to Track

Shopper Traffic," Wall Street Journal
, September 24, pp. B1 and B5. On a larger scale, Federal
Express's pioneering attempt to introduce a fax network service and AT&T Bell Laboratories' early

attempts to introduce cellular telephony represented experiments in the application of IT.

37. Although no service awards were made in 1991, awards went to the Ritz-Carlton Hotel

Company and AT&T Universal Card Services in 1992 and to Federal Express in 1990.

38. The public uproar over the Equifax-Lotus proposal to distribute customer profile data and

controversy over the accuracy of and access to credit-agency records are but two indicators of

growing public concern about data, although in general the public may not fully understand how

much data about individuals is being collected and becoming available.

39. CSTB has launched a new study of technology for telecommuting.

40. Although some shifting from domestic to offshore employment may take place, that

phenomenon may convey positive benefits in the form of improvements in foreign standards of

living and diminution of immigration pressures. However, such benefits would be realized over a

much longer term than the employment shifts that produce them.

41. The Comprehensive National Energy Policy Act of 1992 (P.L. 102-486) directed the

Department of Energy to conduct an analysis of telecommuting and its social and environmental

impacts, impacts that would be fostered by IT.

42. Tolchin, Martin. 1992. "U.S. Sues 8 Airlines Over Fares," 
New York Times
, December 22, p. D1.
43. Those agencies would include the Office of Management and Budget, the Department of Justice,

and the Federal Trade Commission.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY212
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44. Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council. 1990.
Intellectual Property Issues in Software
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
45. Making government more efficient and more responsive, in part through the use of information

technology, is one of the priorities of the technology program introduced by the federal

administration in February 1993. See Clinton, William J., President, and Vice President Albert

Gore, Jr. 1993. "Technology for America's Economic Growth, a New Direction to Build Economic

Strength," February 22. IT use in government was given special consideration in Vice President

Albert Gore's 
National Performance Review
ŠFrom Red Tape to Results
, distributed electronically
over the Internet on September 7, 1993.

46. The potential for using IT to enhance government is not new to the federal government or lower

levels of government. However, the stream of reports issued by the General Accounting Office and

even by the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board attests to the significant opportunity

for improvements in the acquisition, use, and management of IT in government.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY213
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN SERVICES: IMPLICATIONS FOR PUBLIC POLICY214
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesAPPENDIXES215Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXES216Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
Selected Research on Economic and
Strategic Impacts of Information
TechnologyAPPENDIX A
217Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE A.1 Selected Research on Economic and Strategic Impacts of Information
TechnologyReferenceType of Research
Unit of Analysis
PerformanceConstruct andMeasure(s)Alpar and Kim

(1990)EconometricTime series Cross-

sectional (1979 to1986)Firm/smallbusiness unit

(759 banks)
Productivity(multifactor)Applegate et al.(1988)Theory,descriptionManagersProductivity
Flexibility
CreativityAttewell andRule (1984)
Review ofmanagementinformationsystems literatureIndividualManagementOrganizationNumber and qualityof jobs,
managementdecision making,

organizationaldealings with
clients and
customersBaily and
Chakrabarti(1988)Economicanalysis andsimulationCompanyWhite-collar
productivityBaily and
Gordon (1988)MethodologyreviewAggregateeconomy vs.
industryAverage labor
productivity andmultifactorproductivityBanker and

Kauffman
(1988)EconometricCross-sectionalFirm/smallbusiness unit

(508 branch
banks)Competitiveadvantage
(marginal bankbranch deposit
share as
contribution toreducing costs)Bender (1986)Correlational
Cross-sectional(1983)Firm (132 lifeinsurancecompanies)Operating cost
efficiencyBenjamin et al.
(1984)Case studies and
surveys;prescriptive24 companiesStrategic
opportunitiesBikson and
Eveland (1986)
Literature review,retrospectiveapplication ofsociotechnicalsystemsOrganization(diverse range)
''Successful"implementation(user, management
satisfaction)Blumenthal(1987)Theory reviewInternational
NationalProductivity and
impacts on industry

and employment
APPENDIX A
218Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
219Input Measure(s)Key Findings (Brynjolfsson and Bimber

Hypothesis Code)
aTotal information system expenses;

labor; capital; time deposits
10% increase in IT associated with a

1.9% decrease in total costs. IT

contributed to reduction in demand

deposit amount and an increase in time

deposits. IT is capital using and labor

saving.ITDiscusses present and future impacts of
computers on managers. Emphasizes

increased flexibility, new structures. (IE)
ComputingSignificant disagreement and/or
conflicting studies in every major

dimension examined. (IE)
Electronics innovationProposes 3 potential explanations for the
IT paradox in white-collar context:
mismeasurement, distributional rather

than productive effects, information

value problem: Price decreases in

technology lead to more technology

purchased rather than decreased cost;

also suggests may be just transitional

time lag. (IC)
Output per hour, multifactorUncovers large measurement errors but
finds that they explain at most 0.5% of

the 1.5% slowdown in aggregate

productivity. Key contributing errors are

undervaluing of variety, service quality,

and convenience. Adjustments applied to

the banking industry produce much

stronger productivity growth than do

government analysis/statistics of

productivity growth. (IA)
Presence of ATM at a branch.

Connection to regional shared ATM

networkUse of ATMs enables branch to protect

rather than grow market share. Bank

customers evidenced willingness to pay

for regional access to shared electronic

banking networks.
Total IT expensesHigher IT spending associated with
higher unit cost efficiency.
ITIT can help firms establish new markets
and redistribute profits in existing

markets. (IE)Process of introduction of new
technologyWhat is needed is an integrated view, in

which decisions about tools, uses, and

users are seen as essential properties of a

strategy that is iterative and emergent,

learning from its own successes and

failures over time and committed to

change as a continuous fact of life. (IIE)
Programmable automation
Confronts dilemma in the popular view:

increased use of programmable

automation leads to increased

competitiveness and other benefits to

industry while threatening job loss and

other negative consequences to workers.

(IIB)Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ReferenceType of ResearchUnit of AnalysisPerformanceConstruct and

Measure(s)Bresnahan
(1986)Econometricmethodology
Financial sectorSpillover to
customersdownstreamCecil and Hall
(1988)Prescriptive,descriptiveCompanyPerformance
Cron and Sobol(1983)CorrelationalCross-sectionalFirm (138 surgical
wholesalers)Profitability(return on assets;
profits/sales;return on net
worth).
Competitiveadvantage (5-
year sales growth)
Curley and
Pyburn (1982)
Case studies of 13
organizations,survey of
additional 33
46 manufacturing
and serviceindustriesImprovedproductivity(managerial,clerical,professional)Dertouzos
(1989)Descriptive,prescriptive,modelsEconomyProductivity
Feldman andMarch (1981)
Review ofliterature, theory
Organizations(wide range)
Use of
informationFranke (1987)Econometric
(1958 to 1983)Financial sector
(insurance andbanking)Productivity(average labor).Capital (ROI)Fudenberg and
Tirole (1985)Economic model
developmentFirmNet cash flow
Giesler and
Rubenstein(1988)Descriptive,survey of 20
banks and
interviewsBankCompetitive
performanceGraham (1976)FirmPerformance
Harris and Katz(1991)CorrelationalTime series (1983
to 1986)Firm (40 life
insurancecompanies)Operating cost
efficiency(operatingexpenses/
premium income)
Hirshleifer(1971)Economic modelsPrivate vs. social
Kraut et al.
(1989)Case with lagged,

time-series design
(methodology
emphasis)Company (one

public utility)Productivity,
quality of work,attitudes towardcomputersAPPENDIX A
220Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
221Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ReferenceType of ResearchUnit of AnalysisPerformanceConstruct and
Measure(s)Loveman
(1988)EconometricTime series Cross-
sectional (1978 to
1984)Firm/smallbusiness unit (60
manufacturingsmall business
units)Productivity(average labor)Malone et al.(1987)Conceptualframework and
prescriptionFirm and market
structuresCosts of
coordinationMark (1982)Methodology
reviewService industryLabor productivity
Nelson (1981)Critique and
economic model
developmentNoyelle (1990)CorrelationU.S. and French
retailing industry
Productivitymeasure and
employmentOECD (1988)Descriptive, socio-
economic analysis
Individual to
internationalEmployment,productivitygrowthOsterman(1986)Econometric time
series (1972 to
1987)Industry (40
service and
manufacturing
industries)Productivity(clericalemployment
volume/output;managerialemploymentvolume/output)
Parsons et al.(1990)ModelFirm (2 large banks)Multifactor
productivityPentland (1989)Survey (1988)Individual (1100
Internal RevenueService agents),

DepartmentProductivity(labor hours/
audit), Output

quality (clientreports)Porter and
Millar (1985)
Some case
examples,prescriptiveCompetitiveadvantageRoach (1991)Trend
comparisons(1950 to 1989)Service sectorProductivity
(employmentvolume/output)
Sassone and

Schwartz(1986)Method to
quantify benefits
Departments (4) of

large corporations(587 individuals)
Dollars saved by
restructuring work
activitiesAPPENDIX A
222Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Input Measure(s)Key Findings (Brynjolfsson andBimber Hypothesis Code)aTotal IT capital stockIncreases in shares of IT capital have
insignificant effects on productivity.

(IA)Electronic communications, electronic
brokerage, and electronic integration
IT reduces the costs of coordination
and thus leads to more coordination-

intensive organizational forms, such as
markets. (IE)LaborDescribes the problems in measuring
service productivity and attempts of the
Bureau of Labor Statistics to correct
them. (IA)

Emphasizes evolutionary models over
traditional economic theory of
productivity. (ID)Conventional productivitySevere measurement problems in
services.New technologiesPossible reasons for failure at
aggregate levels: (1) economy, (2) lags
in translating potential gains in
productivity into actual gains because

of problems of organizational and
institutional adaptation, (3)disequilibrating effects of technical
change in relation to internationaltrade. (IIE)
Aggregated number of mainframes;

number of central processing unitsEach 10% increase in computing stock
associated with 1.8% decrease in
clerical employment and 1.2% decrease
in managerial employment. Found

lagged effect; displacement partially
reversed after initial impact.
IT and operating dataIT coefficient in translog production
function small and often negative.
Laptop computer useNo discernible improvement in
productivity. Major discrepancybetween users' perceptions of improved
productivity and actual results.
ITIT affects competition in 3 ways: (1) it
alters industry/value-chain structure,
(2) it supports cost and differentiation
strategies, and (3) it spawns entirely

new businesses. (IE)Total IT capital stockLarge-scale increases in ratio of IT
capital stock to other shares of capital,
coupled with stagnant productivity,
suggest no payoff from IT investments.
(IID)Office automation
Reports on poor status of cost-
justification procedures, difficulty of
measuring the dollar value of

investments in new technology. (IIA)
APPENDIX A
223Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ReferenceType of Research
Unit of AnalysisPerformanceConstruct and
Measure(s)Strassmann (1990)CorrelationCompany (38
servicecompanies)Percent return to
shareholdersThurow (1987)Theory
ŠchallengeseconomicassumptionsPrescriptiveService sector
businessesProductivitygrowthVenkatraman and
Zaheer (1990)Quasi-experiment Timeseries (1985 to
1987)Individual (78insurance agents)
Productivity(number of
policies in force,number of new
policies)
Effectiveness(total premiums
and commissions)
Weitzendorf and
Wigand (1991)Model case study
Company (2)
PerformanceaCode gives elements of Brynjolfsson and Bimber hypotheses outlined below:
I. Economic Hypotheses

A. Measurement error:
 Outputs (and inputs) of information-using industries are not being properly
measured.B. Lags: Time lags in the payoffs fro information technology make analysis of current costs versus
current benefits misleading.
C. Redistribution: Information technology is especially likely to be used in redistributive activities
among firms, making it privately beneficial without adding to total output.
D. Mismanagement: The lack of explicit measures of the value of information make it particularly
vulnerable to misallocation and over consumption by managers.

E. 
Business transformation:
 Measures of gross output do not well capture the benefits that motivate
expenditures on information technology and information workers.
APPENDIX A
224Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Input Measure(s)Key Findings (Brynjolfsson and
Bimber Hypothesis Code)aVarious IT ratios, weighted differentlyNo correlations between various IT
ratios and performance measures.
Movement to bonus system, value added
maximization, delayed management fast
trackOur institutions, styles, and beliefs have
not adapted to realities of newtechnologies, leading to too many

managers and too much information
gathering. (ID)
Electronic integration with insurance

carriersNo improvement in operating
efficiency. No improvement in
effectiveness.ITInteractive model of information use.
II. Behavioral Hypotheses

A. Quantity of work: For the production of a fixed level of output by a firm, the
introduction of information technology increases rather than decreases the volume of
work required.B. Nature of productivity:
 Information technology increases the efficiency of individuals,
work groups, or departments in the performance of certain tasks without contributing to
the overall productivity of the firm.
C. Quality: Improvements in work quality from the use of information technology are
not affecting productivity.D. Purchase decision:
 The decision to purchase information technology is not made on
the basis of maximization of quantifiable productivity.

E. 
Organizational factors:
 Firms are failing to undertake the necessary organizational
adaptations to realize the potential productivity gains inherent in the information
technology that they have purchased.
F. 
Technology: Other problems are so strongly depressing service sector and white-collar
productivity that any small gains from new technology are not noticeable.
SOURCES: Derived from the literature reviews in papers by Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Bruce Bimber,
1991, "Information Technology and the `Productivity Paradox,'" Working Paper, Brookings
Institution, Washington, D.C., Feb. 7; Brynjolfsson, Erik, 1991, "The Productivity Paradox of

Information Technology: Review and Assessment," Center for Coordination Science Technical

Report #130, December; and Wilson, Diane D., 1992, "Assessing the Impact of Information

Technology on Organizational Performance,'' Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute

of Technology, (revised), May 1.
APPENDIX A
225Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCESAlpar, Paul, and Moshe Kim. 1990. "A Microeconomic Approach to the Measurement of
Information Technology Value," 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 2:55-69.
Applegate, Lynda M., James I. Cash, Jr., and D. Quinn Mills. 1988. "Information Technology and
Tomorrow's Manager," 
Harvard Business Review
, November-December, pp. 128-136.
Attewell, P., and J. Rule. 1984. "Computing and Organizations: What We Know and What We
Don't Know," 
Communications of the ACM
 27:1184-1192.
Baily, Martin, and Alok Chakrabarti. 1988. 
Innovation and the Productivity Crisis
. Chapter 5,
"Electronics and White-Collar Productivity," Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Baily, Martin Neill, and Robert J. Gordon. 1988. "The Productivity Slowdown: Measurement Issues
and the Explosion of Computer Power," pp. 347-431 in 
Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity
, William C. Brainard and George L. Perry (eds.), Brookings Institution,
Washington, D.C.
Banker, R.D., and R.J. Kauffman. 1988. "Strategic Contributions of Information Technology: An
Empirical Study of ATM Networks," in 
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Information Systems
, Minneapolis, Minn., December.
Bender, D.H. 1986. "Financial Impact of Information Processing," 
Journal of Management
Information Systems 3.
Benjamin, Robert I., John F. Rockart, Michael S. Scott Morton, and John Wyman. 1984.
"Information Technology: A Strategic Opportunity," 
Sloan Management Review
, Spring,
pp. 3-10.
Bikson, Tora K., and J.D. Eveland. 1986. 
New Office Technology: Planning for the People
. Work in
America Institute Studies in Productivity, #40, Pergamon Press, New York.
Blumenthal, Marjory S. 1987. "Economic Impacts of Automation," 
Oxford Surveys in Information
Technology 4.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. 1986. "Measuring the Spillovers from Technical Advance: Mainframe
Computers in Financial Services," 
American Economic Review
 76(34, September).
Cecil, John L., and Eugene A. Hall. 1988. "When IT Really Matters to Business Strategy,"
McKinsey Quarterly
, Autumn, p. 2.
Cron, W.L., and M.G. Sobol. 1983. "The Relationship Between Computerization and Performance:
A Strategy for Maximizing the Economic Benefits of Computerization," 
Information and
Management 6:171-181.
Curley, Kathleen Foley, and Philip J. Pyburn. 1982 "'Intellectual' Technologies: The Key to
Improving White-Collar Productivity," 
Sloan Management Review
, Fall, pp. 31-39.
Dertouzos, Michael L. 1989. "Computers and Productivity," LCS 25th Anniversary Volume,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Feldman, Martha S., and James G. March. 1981. "Information in Organizations as Signal and
Symbol," Administrative Science Quarterly
 26:171-186.
Franke, Richard H. 1987. "Technological Revolution and Productivity Decline: Computer
Introduction in the Financial Industry," 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change
31:143-154.Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole. 1985. "Preemption and Rent Equalization in the Adoption of
New Technology," Review of Economic Studies
 52:383-401.
Giesler, Eliezer, and Albert H. Rubenstein. 1988. "How Do Banks Evaluate Their Information
Technology?" Bank Administration
, November.
Graham, John. 1976. 
Making Computers Pay
, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Harris, Sidney E., and Joseph L. Katz. 1991. "Organizational Performance and Information
Technology Investment Intensity in the Insurance Industry," 
Organization Science
2:263-296.APPENDIX A
226Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Hirshleifer, Jack. 1971. "The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to Inventive
Activity," American Economic Review
, pp. 561-574.
Kraut, Robert, Susan Dumais, and Susan Koch. 1989. "Computerization, Productivity, and Quality
of Work Life," 
Communications of the ACM
 32(February).
Loveman, Gary. 1988. "An Assessment of the Productivity Impact of Information Technologies,"
MIT Management in the 1990's Program, 88-054, July.
Malone, Thomas W., Joanne Yates, and Robert I. Benjamin. 1987. "Electronic Markets and
Electronic Hierarchies," Communications of the ACM
 30(6, June).
Mark, Jerome A. 1982. "Measuring Productivity in the Service Sector," 
Monthly Labor Review
, June.
Nelson, Richard R. 1981. "Research on Productivity Growth and Productivity Differences: Dead
Ends and New Departures," 
Journal of Economic Literature
 29:1029-1064.
Noyelle, T., ed. 1990. 
Skills, Wages, and Productivity in the Service Sector
, Westview Press,
Boulder, Colo.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 1988. 
New Technologies in the
1990's: A Socio-economic Strategy
, OECD, Washington, D.C.
Osterman, Paul. 1986. "The Impact of Computers on the Employment of Clerks and Managers,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review
 39:175-186.
Parsons, D.J., C.C. Gotlieb, and M. Denny. 1990. 
Productivity and Computers in Canadian
Banking. University of Toronto, Department of Economics, Working Paper #9012, June.
Pentland, Brian. 1989. "Use and Productivity in Personal Computing," 
Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Information Systems
, Boston, Mass., December.
Porter, Michael E., and Victor E. Millar. 1985. "How Information Gives You Competitive
Advantage," 
Harvard Business Review
, July-August, pp. 149-160.
Roach, Stephen S. 1991. "Services Under Siege
ŠThe Restructuring Imperative," 
Harvard Business
Review, September-October, pp. 82-91.
Sassone, Peter G., and A. Perry Schwartz. 1986. "Cost-Justifying OA," 
Datamation, February 15.
Strassmann, P. 1990. 
The Business Value of Computers
, Information Economics Press, New
Canaan, Conn.
Thurow, L. 1987. "Economic Paradigms and Slow American Productivity Growth," 
EasternEconomic Journal
 13:333-343.
Venkatraman, N., and Akbar Zaheer. 1990. "Electronic Integration and Strategic Advantage: A
Quasi-Experimental Study in the Insurance Industry," 
Information Systems Research
1:377-393.Weitzendorf, T., and R. Wigand. 1991. 
Tasks and Decisions: A Suggested Model to Demonstrate
Benefits of Information Technology
, Working Paper, Institut f
ür Informationswissenschaft,
Graz, Austria.
APPENDIX A
227Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix BMethods for Deriving Bureau of Economic
Analysis Measures of Output
As part of the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) series, the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the Department of Commerce
publishes annual measures of gross product originating (GPO) by industry in
current and constant dollars to supplement the measures of gross national

product (GNP) for the U.S. economy as a whole. These data are useful for

understanding the diversity of movement in output among the various

component industries of the economy. However, for a variety of reasons,

principally data limitations, these measures do not have the same degree of

accuracy as the overall measures of GNP.
When requested, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), the federal
government agency that develops the government's measures of productivity,
does make available the productivity measures that could be derived by relating
these data on output to the corresponding data on labor input. Because of the

limitations in the data, however, the BLS does not publish these measures as

part of its regular set of productivity indexes.
In the framework of the national accounts, the relevant measure of output
for purposes of gauging productivity is the constant-dollar GPO. To derive this
measure the BEA uses three principal methods.
1 One is termed 
doubledeflation, another extrapolation, and the third 
direct deflation
. The method
chosen for each service industry usually depends on the availability of adequate

data.In the double-deflation method, constant-dollar GPO is derived as the
difference between current-dollar gross or final output divided by an
appropriate output price index, and the current-dollar intermediate input
(materials and purchased services) divided by an appropriate input price index. In
APPENDIX B
228Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the extrapolation method, constant-dollar GPO is derived by extrapolating the
base-year current-dollar GPO from some related series such as constant-dollar

gross (not net) output, employment, or the number of hours worked. In the

direct-deflation method, constant-dollar GPO is derived by dividing each year's

current-dollar GPO by either a gross output price index or an hourly earnings

index.Generally, the double-deflation method is used whenever possible, since it
is most consistent with the definition of GPO, namely, final output minus

intermediate input. For the other methods to be appropriate approximations,

certain assumptions are made. In the extrapolation method, the assumption is

that the change in constant-dollar gross output is the same as the change in

constant-dollar input. In the direct-deflation method, the assumption is that the
changes in the output price deflators and the input price deflators are the same.
In recent years there have been substantial improvements in the NIPA data,
and the number of industries for which double deflation is used has increased.

Table B.1
 shows the methods currently used to derive the constant-dollar GPO
for the various service industries. As can be seen, double deflation is used for a

substantial number of service industries.
However, the quality of the double-deflation estimates varies considerably.
Table B.2
 lists the various measures of output prices and other data and the
sources of data used to derive the constant-dollar gross output portion of GPO

as measured by the double-deflation method. These data come from both

government and private sources, and the definitions in many cases differ

considerably from those underlying the current-dollar estimates.
Although double-deflated gross output is generally calculated by dividing
the current-dollar output by an output price index, as shown in 
Table B.2
, insome cases, part of the constant-dollar gross output is deflated and part of it is

based on direct extrapolation of base-year quantitative output measures. This is

the case in local and interurban passenger transportation, where gross output for

taxicabs is based on revenues deflated by the consumer price index for taxi
fares; but gross output for intercity buses is based on base-year current-dollar
revenues adjusted by changes in total passenger-miles; gross output for other

local transit services is based on base-year revenues adjusted by changes in the

number of passenger trips; and gross output for school buses is based on base-

year revenues adjusted by changes in employment. Thus, measures for local and

interurban passenger transportation by definition cannot take into account

changes in productivity that may have taken place, and in some cases, the

output price indexes used to deflate output are not price indexes but cost

indexes. As such, deflated output measures cannot take into account changes in

productivity.In developing measures of constant-dollar input to subtract from measures
of constant-dollar gross output, changes in the composition of the
APPENDIX B
229Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE B.1 Methods for Estimating Constant-Dollar GPO for Various Service
IndustriesIndustryMethodTransportationRailroadsDouble deflation

Local passenger transitDouble deflation
Trucking and warehousingDouble deflation
Water transportationDouble deflation
Air transportationDouble deflation
PipelinesDouble deflation

Transportation servicesExtrapolation

CommunicationsTelephone and telegraphDouble deflation
Radio and television broadcastingDouble deflation

Electric, gas, and sanitary servicesDouble deflation
Retail tradeDouble deflation
Wholesale tradeDouble deflation
Finance, insurance, and real estate
BankingExtrapolation

Credit agenciesExtrapolation

Security and commodity brokersDouble deflation
Insurance carriersDouble deflation
Business and personal services

Hotels and other lodging placesDouble deflation
Personal servicesDouble deflation
Business servicesExtrapolation
Auto repair services and garagesDouble deflation
Miscellaneous repair servicesDouble deflation

Motion picturesDirect deflation

Amusements and recreationDouble deflation
Health servicesDouble deflation
Legal servicesDouble deflation

Educational servicesDouble deflation
Social servicesDirect deflation
Miscellaneous professional servicesDirect deflation
Private household servicesDirect deflation
Government
General governmentExtrapolation

Government enterprises
ExtrapolationSOURCE: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1991. 
Survey of Current
Business, January.
APPENDIX B
230Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE B.2 Sources of Data for Output Price or Other measures Used in Deriving
Double Deflation GPO Measures for Various Service Industries
IndustryPrice or Other Measure
aTransportationRailroadsIPD from revenue ton-miles and passenger-
miles from AMTRAK data
Local passenger transit
TaxicabsCPI for taxi fares
Intercity busesPassenger-miles from ABA
School busesEmployment from BLS

Local transitPassenger trips from APTA

Trucking and warehousingTon-miles from DOT
Water transportationIndex of ton-miles for deep sea from BEA, ton-
miles for other water transportation from DOD,
and ton-miles of marine cargo from DOD
Air transportationSeparate revenue passenger-miles for domestic
and international travel and freight ton-miles
by DOTPipelinesTon-miles from AOP

Communications
Telephone and telegraphPPIs for local telephone and toll telephone
services and direct advertising
Radio and television broadcastingIndex based on cost per 1000-member audience

Electric, gas, and sanitary services
Electric utilitiesKilowatt-hours from EEI
Gas utilitiesBTUs of gas for resale and BTUs of gas utility
sales from AGA
Sanitary servicesCPI for water and sewage maintenance

Retail trade
Eating and drinking placesCPIs
OtherBase-year margin times sales deflated by CPIs
Wholesale trade

Merchant wholesalers1982 gross margin rate-weighted sales deflated
by PPIsManufacturers' sales officesFor equipment rental, IPD from BEA capital
stock data; for rest, PPIs
Agents and brokersPPIs

Finance, insurance, and real estate

Security brokers and services
CommissionsNumber of public securities orders from SEC
and NYSEMutual fundsIPD for securities commissions
UnderwritingNew securities registrations from SEC
Trading gainsIPD for GNP
Commodity brokersIPD for GNP
Insurance brokers and agenciesInsurance carrier deflators weighted by
commissions from A.M. Best Co.
Real estate servicesIPD for PCE
Business and Personal Services
Hotels, rooming housesLaventhol & Horwath room-rate index

Laundries and dry cleanersCPIs from BLS
Shoe repair shops
CPIs from BLS
APPENDIX B
231Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IndustryPrice or Other Measure
aPhotographic studiosCPIs from BLS
Beauty shopsCPIs from BLS
Barber shopsCPIs from BLS
Funeral servicesCPIs from BLS
Automotive rentalCPIs from BLS
Automotive repair servicesCPIs from BLS

Electric repair shopsCPIs from BLS

Watch and jewelry repairCPIs from BLS
Furniture repairCPIs from BLS
Miscellaneous repair shopsAverage earnings from BLS

Amusement and recreational services
Dance studios and schoolsCPIs from BLS
Theatrical producers and entertainersCPIs from BLS
Bowling alleys and pool hallsCPIs from BLS
Commercial sportsCPIs from BLS

Health services

Physicians and dentistsCPIs from BLS
Nursing and personal care facilitiesHCFA input price index
HospitalsComposite deflator of hospital room
CPI and HCFA input prices
Medical and dental laboratoriesCPIs from BLS

Outpatient care facilitiesCPIs from BLS
Health and allied services, not otherwise
classifiedCPIs from BLS
Legal servicesCPIs from BLS
Education services
Private schools and librariesPCE deflators
Private education housing and meals
PCE deflators
aAbbreviations:ABA American Bus Association
EEI Edison Electric Institute
AGA American Gas Association

FCC Federal Communications Commission
AOP Association of Oil Pipelines
GNP Gross national product
APTA American Public Transit Association
HCFA Health Care Financing Administration

BEA Bureau of Economic Analysis
IPD Implicit price deflator
BLS Bureau of Labor Statistics

M-E McCann-Erickson Co.
BTU British thermal unit
NYSE New York Stock Exchange
CPI Consumer price index
PCE Personal consumption expenditures

DOD U.S. Department of Defense
PPI Producer price index
DOT U.S. Department of Transportation
SEC Securities Exchange Commission
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
APPENDIX B
232Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE B.3 Sources of Data for GPO Series Based on Extrapolation and Direct
DeflationIndustryMethodSource of DataTransportation servicesExtrapolationBEA employment
BankingExtrapolationBEA employment

Credit agenciesExtrapolationBEA employment
Real estateDirect deflationTrade source rent index for office
buildingsHolding companiesExtrapolationBEA employment
Business servicesExtrapolationBLS employment weighted by
Census Bureau receiptsMotion picturesDirect deflationBLS prices and earnings
Social servicesDirect deflationBEA average wages and salaries
Miscellaneous professionalDirect deflationBEA average wages and salaries

Private householdsDirect deflationBLS prices
GovernmentGeneralExtrapolationBEA hours worked weighted by
measures of experience
Government enterprises
ExtrapolationBEA and Census Bureau

employment and BLS output
indexesSOURCE: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1991. 
Survey of Current
Business, January.
material and other input have to be taken into account in deriving the
appropriate input price indexes. To do this an input-output table, which

measures in some detail the purchases from one industry by another, is used.

The last fully developed input-output table is for 1977. To update this

information for the current measures, changes in the composition were

estimated by assuming that both constant-dollar gross output and input have

changed at the same rate since 1977.
Table B.3
 provides information on the sources of data used to develop
GPO measures in those industries for which the double-deflation method is not

used. In many of these cases, and particularly for financial institutions,

extrapolation was used, and the base-year revenues were adjusted by changes in

employment or wages and salaries. In such cases, measures of output do not

reflect changes in productivity that have taken place.
NOTE1. For a detailed description of the estimating methods used for the measures of constant-dollar
GPO, see De Leeuw, Frank, Michael Mohr, and Robert P. Parker, 1991, "Gross Product by Industry,

1977-88: A Progress Report on Improving the Estimates," 
Survey of Current Business
, January, pp.
23-37.APPENDIX B
233Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C
Procedures for Deriving Bureau of Labor
Statistics Measures of Productivity for
Service Industries
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) measures of productivity are in the
form of indexes of output per unit of labor input derived from dividing an index
of output for an industry by the corresponding index of labor input.
INDUSTRY LEVEL MEASUREMENT OF OUTPUT
Table C.1
 describes the procedures used by the BLS to derive the indexes
of output for each of the service industries for which it publishes productivity
measures. A summary of those methods follows. 
Table C.1
 also provides
Standard Industrial Classification code information to clarify industry

definitions as they are used by the BLS.
TransportationThe BLS publishes indexes of productivity for five transportation
industries: railroads, intercity buses, intercity trucking, air transportation, and

petroleum pipelines. These measures cover 35 percent of transportation
employment.NOTE: This appendix updates and expands on previous work presented in Mark,
Jerome A., 1986, "Measuring Productivity in Services Industries," pp. 139-159 in
Technology in Services: Policies for Growth, Trade, and Employment
, Bruce R. Guile
and James Brian Quinn (eds.), National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
APPENDIX C
234Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
235Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
236Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
237Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conceptually, the measures for the transportation industries are easier to
develop than those for other service industries because transportation industry

outputŠthe movement of goods or passengers over distances
Šis more easily
quantified. Units of output in transportation have two dimensions, quantities

and distance, that reflect how much has been transported how far. As such, ton-

miles, passenger-miles, barrel-miles, and so forth are the primary indicators of
output for these series of indexes.
For the most part, historically, these data have been available from the
regulatory agency of the particular transportation industry, such as the Interstate

Commerce Commission (ICC) or the Civil Aeronautics Board. In many cases,

however, there are data gaps that place certain limitations on the measures. For

example, it is sometimes impossible to adjust the measures of output adequately
for changes in the average length of haul. The labor requirements associated
with the movement of freight and passengers are usually greater for short hauls

than for long hauls. Therefore, a shift from a long haul to a series of short-haul

trips or vice-versa could be interpreted as a change in productivity, although

only the mix of trips has changed.
For the two major freight-carrying industries, railroads and trucking,
undifferentiated data on ton-miles are reported for various classes of freight

operations. In trucking, the ton-mile data are reported separately for general

freight, specialized carriers, and carriers of household goods. But the measures
of output should reflect the kinds of commodities handled and the average
distance they are moved, since they represent separate types of services. The

preferred way to develop such measures would be to combine the tonnage and

average haul of each commodity with its respective requirements for labor input

and then aggregate the results for all commodities transported. Unfortunately,

this cannot be done with currently available data.
However, for the railroad industry, information on tonnage for separate
commodities is available from the ICC for about 170 commodity lines, ranging

from agricultural and mining products to motor vehicles and scientific
instruments. Several years ago similar information was available for the
trucking industry, but its collection has been discontinued. The BLS uses these

data to adjust the overall measure of freight ton-miles for changes in the

composition of goods carried.
Although this adjustment for commodities hauled represents an
improvement over undifferentiated ton-mile figures, refinements cannot be
developed to the extent desirable. The adjustments to the index for the
commodity hauled are made in terms of unit revenue weights. The underlying

assumption, therefore, is that differences in labor requirements among

commodities are similar to differences in unit revenues. Since labor costs

constitute more than half of each industry's total operating costs, this

assumption may not
APPENDIX C
238Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.be unreasonable; however, the proportions could conceivably differ by
commodity. In deriving the index of total industry output for each of the

transportation industries, the freight ton-mile measure (adjusted or not) is

combined with the revenue passenger-mile measure.
The deregulation of many transportation industries has resulted in the
elimination of some of the operating statistics previously published and used to

develop the indexes of output. As a result, some of the measures for the

transportation industry have had to be extended on the basis of more limited

information. The BLS has been cooperating with other government agencies to
ensure that adequate statistics remain available for transportation industries.
CommunicationsThe BLS index of productivity for telephone communications covers about
70 percent of the employment of the communications sector. The index of

output is derived as a weighted aggregate of revenues adjusted for changes in

price for four different categories of telephone service: local calls, measured toll

service (MTS), wide-area toll service (WATS), and all other services, including
private-line service. The data on revenue are collected and published by the
Federal Communications Commission. Deflators are derived from price indexes

compiled and published by the BLS under its Producer Price Index program.
The measure of deflated revenue includes revenues from private-line
services. It also accounts for TV, radio, and computer transmission by telephone

industry facilities as well as directory services.
Despite the detail that is included in the measure of output, improvements
could be made if information were available on the intensity of use of telephone

equipment by customers. The number of calls made can vary without revenue

also varying proportionately because of flat charges such as WATS-line or local-

call charges. To the extent that the number of such calls varies over time, the

index overstates or understates changes in output.
Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Services
Services rendered by public utilities range from the provision of light, heat,
and water to the disposal of solid and liquid wastes. In this area the BLS

currently publishes indexes of productivity for electric utilities, gas utilities, and

a combination of the two.
The measure for electric utility output covers all privately owned utilities,
which account for roughly 80 percent of the total output generated in the United

States. Output is defined in terms of kilowatt-hours generated and distributed.

The measure of the output of gas utilities is defined in
APPENDIX C
239Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.terms of therms (one therm equals 100,000 British thermal units) delivered to
customers by all privately owned companies (which account for 95 percent of

total gas output).Since the labor requirements per kilowatt-hour or per therm are higher for
residential than for commercial and industrial customers and are higher for

small establishments than for larger ones, BLS differentiates among both

kilowatt-hours and therms by type of customer.
Retail Trade
Although the BLS has been publishing measures of productivity for retail
trade industries since 1975, the number of such industries has increased

markedly in recent years. At present, indexes are available for 11 important

industriesŠretail food stores, franchised new-car dealers, gasoline service
stations, apparel and accessory stores, furniture and appliance stores, eating and
drinking places, drug and proprietary stores, and liquor stores. Apparel and
accessory stores are further broken out into men's and boys' clothing stores,

women's ready-to-wear stores, family clothing stores, and shoe stores. Also,

furniture and appliance stores are disaggregated into furniture and furnishings

stores, and appliance stores. Work is currently under way on measures for

hardware stores, auto and home supply stores, and department stores.
For most retail trade industries, data on gross sales in current dollars,
deflated by appropriate price indexes, are used to estimate real output. This

method can yield good measures of real output if adequate consumer price

indexes can be developed that reflect the price movements of the various

commodities sold by the establishments. The recent improvements that have

been made in the BLS Consumer Price Index program have enabled it to
develop indexes of output and productivity for more components of retail trade.
Indexes of productivity based on deflated value of sales output measures
reflect shifts among services with different levels of sales but the same trade

labor requirements. Therefore, the overall industry productivity index can show

movements without any change in component elements.
In retail industries a large portion of the value of sales is provided by the
manufacturers and the wholesalers of the products sold. A measure of net

output would be desirable since it would most closely correspond to the

functions provided by the retailer. Unfortunately, measures of net output based
on data with separately deflated final sales and cost of materials can result in
large errors of measurement when the cost of materials is a large proportion of

the final value. This is because all the errors in the current value of sales, the

current value of material purchases, the Consumer Price Index, and the

Producer Price Index affect this residual.
Gross or total sales will represent a good measure of net output or value
APPENDIX C
240Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.added with less measurement error if the value added as a percent of sales
(gross margin) does not change over time. Available data seem to indicate that

for the industries published, average gross margins have not changed

substantially over time. To introduce labor input weighting, the indexes for

retail trade industries for the most part are developed in two stages. Deflated

output measures are first developed for detailed merchandise lines. These are
aggregated to higher levels, and the resultant indexes are then combined with
labor-cost weights. For example, in retail food stores, sales for 13 key

merchandise lines are deflated using specially prepared price indexes based on

the BLS Consumer Price Index components. The indexes for the merchandise

lines are aggregated to five department lines
Šmeat, produce, frozen food, dry
groceries and dairy, and all others. These in turn are aggregated with labor-cost

weights to develop a measure of overall output for grocery stores.
Wholesale Trade
Until recently the BLS did not publish any measures for wholesale trade.
Currently, only an index for scrap and waste materials dealers is published. The

measure of output is derived by combining the quantities of various types of

processed scrap into a broad product group and the various types of processed

wastepaper into an overall wastepaper group. Measures for these two groups are
then combined with employment weights to yield measures of overall output.
The BLS is currently examining three industries in considerable detail to
derive reliable measures: metal service centers, petroleum bulk stations, and

beer, wine, and distilled spirits distributors. These industries include about half

a million workers, or 10 percent of the employment in the sector. Data on

physical quantity are available to develop measures of output for these
industries. The data on quantity for disaggregated commodities will be
combined with fixed-period labor input weights reflecting the services provided

by the wholesalers to retailers and other users.
Several measurement problems with respect to these industries need to be
resolved. Some firms perform work on commodities that they distribute to

retailers, but this practice varies substantially among wholesale distributors.

Whether the labor input weights can adequately take this variation into account

is questionable. In addition, in some instances a regional wholesaler distributes

commodities to local wholesalers. This creates a problem of duplicate counting
in the measure of overall industry output.
FinanceIn the area of finance, the BLS publishes a measure of productivity for the
commercial banking industry that reflects the three major services commercial
APPENDIX C
241Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.banks render their customers
Šdeposits, loans, and trust services. While banks
also perform nonfund-using services, such as safe deposit services and customer

payroll accounting, lack of adequate data precludes deriving a measure for

them. However, because the proportion of employees engaged in such services

is small, the overall validity of the measure is little affected by the omission.
There has been a great deal of discussion over the years as to the
appropriate measure of the output of banking. Much of the discussion addresses

whether the appropriate concept is one based on what has been called the

liquidity approach or one based on a transactions approach.
1 In the liquidity
approach the banks are viewed as providers of money to hold, and their output

is measured in terms of the interest received on the volume of deposits held.

Such interest received by banks is assumed to be equivalent to the income
foregone by depositors due to their preference for holding deposits rather than
for investing directly. The interest the depositors forego represents the value of

the banks' services for such liquidity preference. This approach can be extended

to all types of savings accounts, the assumption being that the foregone net

interest is the value of the banks' services.
According to the transactions approach, the banks are providers of a series
of services to their clients that are reflected in the transactions performed. The

volume of the banks' output is proportional to the volume of the transactions

handled. Thus the final output of commercial banking represents an array of

services provided to bank customers relating to the depository, lending, and

fiduciary functions of banks. In developing a measure of productivity for

banking, the BLS adopted the transactions approach for the measure of output.
Estimates of the number of transactions in each of the service functions of
banks are derived. In some instances, no direct count of transactions is

available, and so the number of transactions is estimated from data on the total

value of transactions and on the results of surveys of the average dollar-value of

transactions. Although these estimates have some limitations, the derived count

of the number of transactions is the measure used to reflect the quantities of
services provided.
Deposit activity is measured in terms of the number of checks transacted
and the number of time- and savings-account deposits and withdrawals. The

data for demand deposit activities are derived ultimately from Federal Reserve

Bank counts and official benchmark surveys. For time-and savings-deposit

activity, the measure of output is derived from data published by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Functional Cost Analysis conducted
annually by the Federal Reserve Board. Lending services provided by banks are

also measured in terms of units. As in the case of deposit activity and trust

department activity, the BLS does not use banks' financial data to arrive at

measures of component output.
APPENDIX C
242Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Business and Personal Services
In the business and personal services sector, the BLS publishes measures
for four industries
Šhotels, motels, and tourist courts; laundry and dry cleaning
services; beauty and barber shops; and automotive repair shops. The output for

each of these industries is measured by total revenues from the various activities

of establishments within the industry adjusted by price changes. These

measures are then combined with employment weights to derive an index of
output for each industry. The BLS uses special price indexes derived from its
Consumer Price Index program for deflating the receipts from the principal

activities of each of the industries. For example, in hotels and motels, the

receipts from room rentals, food sales, beverage sales, and so on are separately

deflated by the appropriate price measures, and these measures are then

combined with employment weights. It would be desirable to differentiate

between all the separate activities of these establishments, but because of the

limited number of price indexes that can be developed, some broader groupings

have to be used.
GovernmentFor the last 2 decades, the BLS has been conducting a program of
developing indexes of labor productivity for all federal government agencies

with 200 or more employees. Currently, the measures cover 390 organizations

in 59 agencies that account for 60 percent of civilian government employment.

The agency measures are grouped into functional groups representing relatively

homogeneous activities, such as library services, loans and grants, and
information services.
Where possible, the output of a government agency is defined as its final
outputŠwhat it produced for use outside the government. Therefore, measures
are also developed for agencies (and parts of agencies) providing services to

other parts of the government, such as printing, personnel management,

communications, and supply and inventory control. Because of the inclusion of
intermediate activities and output, the index of overall productivity is not final
for the entire government. The summary productivity measure reflects the

average of changes in the productivity of the measured federal organizations.
The measures of output used in productivity calculations are diverse,
including such indicators as inspections completed and reports prepared (for

audit functions), statistical reports issued, maps produced, or weather fore-casts

made (for public information functions), food inspections conducted, drug

arrests made, applications and licenses issued, drugs approved, and patents

approved (for regulatory functions). Currently, output information is collected
on about 3000 indicators.APPENDIX C
243Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HospitalsFor several years the BLS has been working to develop a measure of
productivity for hospitals but has not yet determined whether the measure it has

developed is adequate for publication.
Hospitals provide services designed to eliminate, retard, or prevent
pathologies. Treatments, which can be regarded as producer technologies by

which those services are rendered, are specified to produce desired outcomes.

However, outcomes depend on factors other than, and in addition to, treatments,

such as the pre-admission health of the patient. There is thus some question as

to whether a measure of output related to hospital labor and other resources
should be based on outcomes. The BLS does not adjust for outcomes in
deriving its index of productivity for hospitals and instead uses a different

approach.Clinically named illnesses have been classified according to diagnosis, and
diagnoses in turn are standardized into diagnosis-related groups
Šreferred to as
DRGs. A DRG implies a complex of treatments or procedures, which in turn

are associated with the use of certain kinds and amounts of resources.
All diagnosis codes have been condensed into 23 major diagnostic
categories (MDCs). The MDCs are generally based on diseases that tend to be

diagnosed and similarly treated by specialists. Hospital discharges are first

coded by diagnosis and then into DRGs.
The BLS measure of output for hospitals is derived from data on the
number of inpatient discharges in each diagnostic category weighted by average

hospital operating costs and the number of outpatient visits for each diagnostic

category.MEASURES OF LABOR INPUT
Productivity calculations require data on the hours worked of
nonsupervisors, supervisors, unpaid family workers, and the self-employed. The

principal source of data on employment and hours for all of the service
industries for which BLS publishes indexes of productivity is the BLS survey of
establishments' payrolls, the Current Employment Survey (CES). This survey

provides good measures of the employment and hours of nonsupervisory

workers by industry, but it does not provide data on the average hours of

supervisory workers or on the employment and hours of unpaid family workers

and the self-employed.Information on the self-employed and unpaid family workers is derived
from a survey of non-institutional households, the Current Population Survey

(CPS). Based on 60,000 households in the United States, these data are
adequate for aggregate measures such as those for the business economy as
APPENDIX C
244Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.a whole or even major sectors, but they present limitations when used for such
detailed measures as those for specific service industries.
Currently, the average weekly hours of supervisory workers are assumed
to be equal to those of nonsupervisory workers in the service industries. This

assumption presents fewer limitations for developing measures of change than

for developing base labor input.
The most desirable measure of productivity is one that uses only the
amount of labor actually involved in the generation of the services provided and

excludes paid time off. The CES's data on hours are based on hours paid and

include paid vacations, holidays, sick leave, and other time off in addition to

actual hours worked. To the extent that leave practices change, the resultant

measures of productivity overstate or understate the actual change in output per
hour.To develop a better series of hours at work, the BLS has been conducting
an annual survey (now in its ninth year) of some 4000 establishments to collect

data on hours at work and hours paid for nonsupervisory workers in the private

nonagricultural business sector. From this survey, ratios are developed to adjust

the present measures of hours paid (based on the CES data) to reflect hours at
work. After careful study, ''hours at work" was defined as time on the job or at
the place of work and includes coffee breaks, short rest periods, paid cleanup

time, and other paid time at the workplace besides actual time worked.

Conceptually, this definition was considered to be the most acceptable one to

use for extracting data from establishments' records. Although the appropriate

information is available on hours at work at an aggregate level, a substantial

expansion of this survey will be required to develop reliable data for specific

service industries.The BLS measures of productivity based on the hours at work for all
persons assume that workers are homogeneous with respect to skill
Šthat an
hour of one worker's time is as productive as an hour of any other worker's

time. However, a highly skilled worker can be viewed as providing more labor
services per hour than a less highly skilled one. Shifts within the labor force
from less skilled workers to more highly skilled ones because of increased

education or experience are not reflected as increases in the measures of labor

input. When skill differences are ignored, increases in skill levels are measured

as increases in productivity.
To the extent that there are changes in the composition of the work force
with respect to education and experience that result in skill differences, it may

be desirable to reflect those changes in measures of labor input, since they will

otherwise be reflected in measures of productivity.
To address this problem, previous studies have usually taken the position
that relative wage- or income-level differentials associated with specific worker

characteristics reflect marginal productivity of these attributes. Generally, the
characteristics included are the number of years of schooling,
APPENDIX C
245Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.age, sex, and possibly industry and occupation. Weighting the quantity of labor
(hours of employment), classified by these characteristics of the work force, by

relative wage or income differentials results in an aggregate measure of labor

input intended to reflect the composition of the work force.
But this procedure is not without problems. For example, workers with
similar characteristics have different earnings in different occupations and

industries. However, the correlation between industry and occupation and

earnings may also be due to influences other than productivity, such as regional

differences in the cost of living, degree of unionization, and so on.
The BLS has developed some experimental measures of labor input based
solely on changes in the amount of work experience and schooling workers

have.2 The methods used follow directly from the economic theory of human
capital developed by Mincer
3 and Becker.
4 The method rests on the assumption
that increased schooling and on-the-job training increase one's stock of skills

and productivity. It also assumes that economic returns to higher education and
additional work experience reflect the marginal productivity of these
characteristics. The BLS has developed a multidimensional database that cross-

classifies the annual hours of workers grouped by schooling and experience.

The database has been developed from various models that make use of

decennial census data, a matched sample from the CPS, and social security

records.As mentioned above, it is recognized that hourly wages differ not only
because of differences in skills but also because of factors unrelated to

productivity. Accordingly, simple averages of hourly wage rates for each

education and experience group are not necessarily appropriate approximations

of marginal productivity. Consequently, the BLS has developed an econometric

model that provides measures of wages dependent on changes in education and
experience but that simultaneously controls for other types of variation.
Skill-adjusted measures of labor input have been developed for the
business sector as a whole, and this work is currently being extended to

determine the feasibility of developing corresponding measures for specific

industries, especially service industries.
NOTES1. Gorman, J. 1969. "Alternative Measures of the Real Output and Productivity of Commercial
Banks," pp. 155-188 in 
Production and Productivity in the Service Industries
, V.R. Fuchs (ed.),
Columbia University Press, New York.

2. Waldorf, W.H., et al. 1986. "New Measures of the Contribution of Education and Experience to

U.S. Productivity Growth." Paper presented at the annual meetings of the American Economic

Association, December 28-30, New Orleans, La.

3. Mincer, J. 1974. 
Schooling, Experience and Earnings
, Columbia University Press, New York.
4. Becker, G. 1975. 
Human Capital
, University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London.
APPENDIX C
246Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D
How the Committee Conducted Its Study
The Committee to Study the Impact of Information Technology on the
Performance of Service Activities was composed of knowledgeable information
technology (IT) executives from major service industries, nationally recognized
macroeconomists concerned with productivity in services, executives from

hardware- and software-producing groups, and representatives of government,

labor, industry, and research. In addition, the committee sought input from chief

executive officers, senior IT executives, and people with strong operating and

financial evaluation experience in service industries, and it attempted to draw

on the existing literature when appropriate.
The charge given to the committee was to examine the impact of IT on
productivity in the service sector. However, after examining the
macroeconomic data, existing surveys and publications on how IT has been
used in services, the taxonomy of IT as it relates to performance, and the

management practices of successful and less successful users of IT in services,

the committee determined that the proper issue for investigation was not

determining the impact of IT on standard measures of productivity in services,

but rather understanding the impact of IT on the overall performance of service

activities.As discussed in the main text of this report, many dimensions of
performance are difficult or impossible to quantify, let alone to collect reliable
data on. Nonetheless, the committee chose to regard performance broadly,
including such considerations as fulfilling mandated requirements, reducing

costs, creating new products, increasing the quality or timeliness of output,
APPENDIX D
247Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.avoiding loss of competitive position, developing new strategic capabilities,
generating greater flexibility of infrastructure, improving capacity to handle

complexity or customization, and so on. Furthermore, it included all aspects of

IT investments and expenses (hardware, software, training, support, and

operating) in its thinking, despite the fact that data on overall industry

expenditures for software, training, support, and systems operations are
generally difficult to obtain in any systematic manner.
The committee conducted analysis at the national, industry, enterprise, and
activity levels. Thus it did not address international, individual, or group issues

in any significant detail. Nor did it address small companies, although financial

data on smaller companies were included in the data that supported the

industry- and national-level analyses.
To conduct its national (or macroeconomic) analysis, the committee
investigated the current data relevant to evaluating how IT has been exploited in

the service sector. Much of this data is incomplete or inadequate in ways

discussed in the text, and in any event such data cannot establish cause-and-

effect relationships between investments in IT and the performance measured.
Once the committee went beyond the national level, the lack of
systematically collected data became quite apparent. The committee therefore

undertook to interview a large number of outside sources. The committee did

not attempt to develop new databases, a task that would have been far beyond

its expertise or resources to undertake. Instead, it relied on experts, both its own

inside the committee (through committee deliberations) and others outside the

committee (through interviews), as well as on other studies when available.
The industry level analysis was primarily for context-setting. The
committee drew on secondary literature and its own experts in the air transport,

communications, commercial banking, insurance, retail-wholesale trade, and

health care industries. These industries were selected because they had a wide

range of measurable improvements in productivity, high levels of investment in

IT, and different contexts in which to introduce IT; reflected important
implications for employment and public policy; and exhibited extensive variety
in the sophistication and scale of the IT installed. Good data were available for

some of these industries as well.
At the enterprise and activity levels, the committee sought to shed light on
the causal relationships underlying observed trends rather than merely to

analyze correlations of data. The enterprise and activity levels are crucial for

understanding these relationships, because decisions about investment in IT and

use of IT are usually not made at the industry or national level; most are made

by executives within the enterprises that employ them. Moreover, resources and
appraisal procedures for investing in IT are generally developed at the
enterprise and activity levels, and appraisals of investments, IT strategies, and

system paybacks ultimately occur at these levels.
APPENDIX D
248Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USE OF INTERVIEWS-APPROACH AND LIMITATIONS
To understand the causal relationships between IT investment and use and
the performance of service activities, the committee drew extensively on a set

of interviews it conducted with senior executives from firms in the service

industries. The purpose of these interviews was to seek insights (both from the

past and present) into patterns of behavior that could help explain why some

companies or industries were
Šor were not
Šrealizing more payoffs from IT.
Thus the committee conducted these interviews and analyzed the questionnaires
in an exploratory vein, rather than searching for high statistical reliability.
To select appropriate interviewees, the committee established a list of ten
leading companies in each chosen service industry (financial services,

transportation, retailing, wholesale distribution, communications, professional

services, and health care). These companies were selected on the basis of size,

rate of growth, profitability, recognition for innovation, and recognition as

major users of IT. These firms seemed most likely to have given systematic

thought to the problems of assessing and managing IT systems and to have
encountered the full range of problems in both activities. Based on the
committee's access to senior management, four companies in each group were

then selected for contact. Such access was critical in order to obtain reliable

responses concerning each company's practices, experiences, and results.
Executives from two of these four top-performing firms were interviewed
in each industry, in all a total of 80 individuals at 46 companies. All together,

these firms had nearly $500 billion in revenues in 1991 and employed nearly 3

million people.
1 Because the cooperation of key individuals was crucial, access
to the firm was sought at the highest possible level. In each company,

interviewers attempted to contact the chief executive officer or chief operating

officer, the senior executives for IT, a major operating officer, and the chief

financial officer. The individuals interviewed are listed in 
Appendix E
. Allquoted statements in this report were verified by those who made them as being
correct at the time of the interviews.
These interviews were conducted in a semistructured manner, and they
focused on the following concerns:1. How companies decided to go ahead with a particular IT project;
2. How companies evaluated IT projects post-investment (if at all);

3. The results of such evaluations;

4. The impact of IT's use on organizational structures;

5. Performance measurement and changes in reward systems made to
exploit IT effectively;
6. Causes of less-than-satisfactory returns from investments in IT;
APPENDIX D
249Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7. How companies evaluated intangibles like quality, flexibility,
response times, or complexity effects; and
8. What executives perceived to be the most important impacts of IT's
use in their industries.
The introductory information sent to interviewees prior to the interview is
given in 
Box D.1, and the interview guide for the interviewers is provided in
Box D.2
. To obtain more standardized data, a written questionnaire
(Figure D.1
) was submitted to each participating company after the oral
interviews. Seventy-nine percent of the questionnaires were returned.
Summaries of the responses to the questionnaire appear in Question Boxes 
1through 7.In addition to the qualifications noted in 
Chapter 3
, some furtherlimitations of these interviews must be noted. Although each interview was

conducted to gain understanding about both failures and successes in
implementing IT in services, those interviewed understandably focused more
readily on the successes of their firms, though most were willing to discuss

some of their failures or problems. The selection of companies "near the top" of

their industries and avowedly major users of IT resulted in a greater focus on

the "winners" or ''survivors." In addition, the focus on large firms
Šbecause of
limits on committee resources
Šleft a large gap in the committee's
understanding of how small and medium-size firms use and manage IT. This is

a gap that should be addressed in future research.
Although the data that emerged from the committee's interviews are
primarily qualitative, such data help to interpret the quantitative macroeconomic

data that do not adequately represent the wide range of impacts that using IT

has had on the performance of firms in the service sector. Thus, semistructured
interviews conducted by the committee were useful in defining (not measuring)
parameters, in interpreting correlation data, and in providing support for causal

hypotheses. Since the data from the interviews were not collected utilizing a

statistical sample, common themes are reported in the text using qualifiers such

as "virtually all" (90 percent or more), "a great majority" (70 percent or more),

"most" (50 percent or more), "less than half" (30 to 40 percent), "a few" (10 to

30 percent), "a very few" (less than 10 percent), and so on. Conclusions are

limited to the respondents' practices and views.
NOTE1. Revenues and employment figures for 1991 were gathered from a search of the Dunn and
Bradstreet Market Identifiers database available through DIALOG Information Services. For a small

number of companies, the 1991 data were not contained in this database, and 1990 figures were

used. Thus the $500 billion in revenues and 3 million people employed should be regarded as rough

estimates.
APPENDIX D
250Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.QUESTION BOX 1
Does your company have an overall IT strategy?
YesNoOnly
recently70%13%17%
What isthe timehorizon of
the
strategy?
1 Year2 Years3 Years4 Years5 Years10
Years4%12%42%4%38%0%

Does the decision process for IT differ from other investments?
YesNo
37%63%
Do the payback criteria differ from those for other investments?
YesNo

31%69%

Observations and Additional Comments
 Time horizons of IT strategy are around 3-5 years, generally with updates
annually through capital budgets and specific operational plans keyed in at
six-month to 1-year intervals.
 IT investment processes and payback criteria are essentially the same as
those for other investments.
 In discussion with interviewees, a majority described long-range plans for
IT investment and installation, rather than competitive positioning strategies.
APPENDIX D
251Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
252Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
253Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.QUESTION BOX 4
How do you account for different costs in your IT evaluations?
CapitalizedExpensed
Hardware89%11%

Software34%66%
Training Costs11%89%
Infrastructure Costs17%83%
Observations and Consequences
 A substantial portion of IT costs do not show up in "investment" figures.
APPENDIX D
254Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.QUESTION BOX 5
Overall, how, if at all, has use of IT influenced the organization structure of
your company?IncreasedDecreasedNo change
Spans of control68%14%18%
Levels of
hierarchy4%63%33%
Centralization46%24%30%
Decentralization44%26%30%
MuchSomeSlightNone
Did IT facilitate organizational
flattening, postproject?27%50%12%12%
Did IT facilitate significant use
of self-directed teams?
8%58%19%15%
Were performance measures
changed?11%56%4%30%
Were compensation systems
changed?4%33%15%48%
N.B. Rows may not add to 100% because of rounding.
Observations and Additional Comments
 The mix is about even between increased centralization (usually of data
centers or databases) and increased decentralization (usually of operations).
 Most report increased spans of control, flatter organizations, more use of
self-directed teams.
APPENDIX D
255Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.QUESTION BOX 6
Are users involved in the design of IT projects?
RarelySometimesUsuallyAlways
7%7%33%53%

How were they involved?
SpecifyingOnlyIn System
DesignInteractive in
DesignInteractiveThroughout8%6%16%69%
Are external customers involved in design of IT?

Specifying
OnlyIn System
DesignInteractive in
DesignInteractiveThroughout46%24%18%12%
N.B. Rows may not add to 100% because of rounding.

Observations and Additional Comments
 Users are involved in design of IT projects at design and implementation
levels. External customers are often involved, but less frequently.
APPENDIX D
256Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.QUESTION BOX 7
What performance metrics are used?
Measured InternallyMeasured at
Customer Level
Response times to
customers64%50%
Quality of performance5750
Financial payback to
company8214
Financial benefits to
customers4343
Internal engineeringmetrics544
Other important metrics711
N.B. Percentages are based on number of responses to individual
questions. Columns are not mutually exclusive.
Observations and Additional Comments
 About half of the respondents reported using formal techniques to monitor
perceived quality from their customers' viewpoint.

 Formal metrics to measure the quality of service outputs are almost
always engineering metrics (such as system response times, computer
availability percentages, cycle times for operations, etc.) or customer
survey data (expressing customers' view of the services of the company)
that cannot be converted into financial measurements of output quality.
APPENDIX D
257Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX D.1 INTRODUCTORY INFORMATION SENT TO
INTERVIEWEE PRIOR TO INTERVIEW
1.Purpose of Interview and Follow-up Questionnaire:
 Numerouspublications have suggested a seeming paradox. They contend that

the relatively high levels of investment in information technologies
(IT) in services have led to little or no measurable productivity
increases. This may be a problem caused by difficulties in
measurement. This questionnaire is intended to understand better:
(a) to what extent companies have, or have not, fared better and

improved performance levels through use of IT, (b) how companies
determine how much to spend on IT and set metrics for anticipated
performance, (c) how companies build IT into strategic plans, (d) how

companies evaluate benefits from their IT investments, (e) how these
evaluations compare to anticipations, (f) what management
techniques seem to work well or to cause problems in achieving
productivity from IT, (g) what the most important impacts have been
of IT on the organization's structure, management style, and industry

competitive position.2.Definitions used in Interview and Questionnaire:
 Informationtechnologies (IT) include the hardware, software, and implementation
processes for a cluster of technologies that provide transactions-
oriented and interactive computer-based capabilities for: collection,

input, processing, communication, storage, retrieval, and
presentation of data and information. Respondents should consider
the impacts of information technologies at several different levels: (a)
strategic uses which change the nature and purposes of the entire
enterprise, (b) 
systems uses
 which coordinate organizational units
and databases to perform overall enterprise functions more
effectively or efficiently, (c) 
operational uses
 which enable managing
of single functions or units for greater efficiency or higher value

added, (d) 
unit applications which improve performance at a single
workstation.Services include all items sold in trade which are neither products nor
constructions. The 
services industries
 include: financial services,retailing, wholesaling, transportation, communications, public utilities
(such as sewer, garbage collection, electric companies, etc.), health
care and delivery systems, entertainment, professional services

(such as accounting, legal, consulting, design, research, etc. firms),
computer software, entertainment, and so on. 
Services activities
(which occur both within the "product industries" and the "services
industries") may include logistics, applied research, process design,
product design, plant engineering, warehousing, market research,

marketing, advertising, sales, distribution, repair, post-sale services,
legal, public relations, accounting, personnel, regulatory affairs,
maintenance, basic research, or finance functions.
APPENDIX D
258Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
2593.Rules of the Interview:
 All interviews will be taped for accuracy. All
information will be held confidential unless specifically released by

respondent. All quotes or paraphrases will be cleared 
in context
 withthe respondent before publication. All publications will be sent to

respondents free at the earliest date they are released for

distribution. Interviews do not seek proprietary data, but useful

patterns and insights having to do with measuring and improving the

performance of IT in services activities. If copies of any relevant

reports or company documents are available, they would help

ensure accuracy.
4.Outline of Interview:
 We will be focusing on four central questions.
For each of these there will be some detailed questions the

interviewer will use to flesh out and make your responses compatible

with those of other respondents. These questions include the

following:A. Has your company made any major studies of the performance of itsinformation technology (IT) investments? Please describe the

breadth of the studies, levels of IT included, or if performed on

individual projects, which projects were included. What were the

results? What methodologies and metrics did you use?
B.How was the technology developed? Internally? Externally? Joint
ventures, other approaches? How was the IT function organized at

the time? What were the most important problems encountered in

introducing the technology? What have been, or are anticipated to

be, the most important changes resulting from the new technology?
C.How, if at all, have you used IT to affect the organizational structure
of your company? Spans of control? Levels of hierarchy,

centralization or decentralization of decisions? How has the

technology affected your competitive edge in some aspect of your

industry? How has it influenced the use of self-directed teams?

Boundaries of units? Horizontal relationships and communications?

Strategic alliances, and so on?
D.In light of the above what would be your overall evaluation of the way
IT investments enabled your company to improve services

performance? What are the most useful insights or patterns that

analysis of past projects offers for future IT investments?
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX D.2 INTERVIEW GUIDE FOR INTERVIEWERS
1.Has your company made any major studies of the performance of its 
information technology (IT) investments?
 If so, when? Please
describe the breadth of the study, levels of IT included, or if
performed on individual projects, which projects were included?
Were they successful? What performance measures were used?

What was the general level of IT investment involved? In software?
Hardware? Over what time periods were results measured? Why?
What were the general conclusions concerning performance payoff?
Could this be measured for discrete projects? Cumulative gains?
What were the main sources of gain? What were the main causes of

greater or less than anticipated benefits? What were the most
important problems encountered in measurement? How did you deal
with these? What were the major intangibles considered? How were

they evaluated? Quality of outputs? Faster response times?
Flexibility potentials? Greater knowledge about customers? Were
software costs (development and licensing) included? Training and
personnel development? If so, what were they? What would you say
was the precision (+/-___%) of the measurements?
Please pick two or three major projects (in terms of cost, impact, or
geographical scope) concerning which you are most familiar or for
which such evaluations may have been undertaken. If possible,
please choose some large-scale projects which ''went well" and
some which "did not go well." For each of these projects, what were

the main goals of the project? What metrics were used in making the
decision? What is the decision process for IT investments and how
does that differ from other types of investment decisions? How is IT
integrated into strategic planning? How was the actual evaluationcarried out? By whom? How were various critical factors balanced or

weighted? What was the approximate size of the investment? In
software? In hardware? What was the cost vs. other information
technology investments then installed? Was this a new activity for the

company? The replacement of earlier automation? Replacement of
people? Was there a specific investment return (hurdle rate) the
project had to meet? How did this compare to other IT and non-IT
hurdle rates? Were other criteria stated explicitly in advance? How
well or badly did the project meet initial expectations, goals?
2.How was the technology developed?
 Through internal groups?
Extensive outsourcing? Off-the-shelf purchases? Joint ventures?
Who was involved at each stage? When were users involved? What
was the nature of the development? How was the IT function
organized? Where are standards set? Who had final decision

authority? What important changes in organization or technical
infrastructure were necessary to develop, accommodate, or exploit
the new technologies? What were the
APPENDIX D
260Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.most important other problems encountered in introducing the
technology? What have been, or are anticipated to be, the most

important unforeseen changes resulting from the new technology?
Did the technology change economies of scale? Economies of
scope? From the operations level to the systems level, or vice versa?
How were the effects measured? What time span did it take to
introduce the project (from specification to outcomes)? Was the

project organized as a separate division? Cross-functional team
effort? Outsourced? What portions were expenses or capitalized?
Why?3.How, if at all, has the use of information technology affected the 
organizational structure of your company?
 Spans of control? Levels
of hierarchy? Locus of control? Centralization, decentralization of
decisions? Have there been shifts in staffing away from certain
functions and toward others? Has the technology enabled your
enterprise to shorten its response times? How much? What are the

organizational, control, and motivational implications of these
changes? How have they affected the use of self-directed teams?
Boundaries of units? Horizontal relationships and communications?

Strategic alliances? How has use of the technology affected your
methods of performance measurement? Motivation systems? Control
systems? What are the most important (or likely) impacts of the new
technologies on job skills, training requirements, wage structures?
How does your company approach the issue of "managing and

developing people as intellectual assets"? Does the technology allow
you to obtain a sustainable competitive edge in some component of
your industry? How? What have been the major spinoffs or totally
new directions new information technologies have enabled for the
company? To what extent were these anticipated? Unanticipated?
4.In light of the above, what would be your overall evaluation of the
way IT investments enabled you to improve services performance in
your company? Why? What are the most useful insights or patterns
that analysis of past projects offers for future IT investments?
APPENDIX D
261Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
262Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Figure D.1 Written questionnaire sent after oral interviews.
APPENDIX D
263Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
264Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
265Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix EList of Executives Interviewed
NOTE: Several executives interviewed preferred to remain anonymous and are not
listed in this Appendix.
APPENDIX E
266Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E
267Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E
268Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E
269Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century LeverCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E
270