DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/2312Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, andPrivacy272 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-04995-5 | DOI 10.17226/2312Molla S. Donaldson and Kathleen N. Lohr, Editors; Committee on Regional HealthData Networks, Institute of MedicineHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Data in theInformation AgeUse, Disclosure, and Privacy
Molla S. Donaldson and Kathleen N. Lohr, 
EditorsCommittee on Regional Health Data Networks
Division of Health Care Services
INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.1994iHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.National Academy Press
 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC
 20418NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of

the committee responsible for this report were chosen for their special competencies and with regard

for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-

ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
The Institute of Medicine was chartered in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to enlist
distinguished members of the appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertain-

ing to the health of the public. In this, the Institute acts under both the Academy's 1863 congres-

sional charter responsibility to be an adviser to the federal government and its own initiative in

identifying issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the

Institute of Medicine
Support for this project was provided by the John A. Hartford Foundation, the American
Health Information Management Association, Electronic Data Systems Corporation, and Science

Applications International Corporation.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Institute of Medicine (U.S.). Committee on Regional Health Data Networks.
Health data in the information age : use, disclosure, and privacy / Molla S. Donaldson

and Kathleen N. Lohr, editors ; Committee on Regional Health Data Networks, Division

of Health Care Services, Institute of Medicine.

p. cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-309-04995-4

1. Medical recordsŠAccess control. 2. Confidential communicationsŠPhysicians. 3.
Medical informatics. I. Donaldson, Molla S. II. Lohr, Kathleen N., 1941- . III. Title.
RA976.148 1994

651.5
`04261
Šdc20 94-2613
CIPCopyright 1994 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America

The serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost all cultures and
religions since the beginning of recorded history. The image adopted as a logotype by the Institute
of Medicine is based on a relief carving from ancient Greece, now held by the Staatlichemuseen in

Berlin.Cover art
: Woodcut of Galen, flanked by Hippocrates and Avicenna. Source: Galen, 
Opera, Lyon,
1528, vignette on title page. Courtesy of National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland.
iiHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATA
NETWORKSROGER J. BULGER,
* Chair, President and CEO, Association of Academic
Health Centers, Washington, DC
ROBERT H. BROOK,
* Professor of Medicine and Public Health, UCLA
Center for Health Sciences, and Director, Health Sciences Program, The
RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California
ELLIOTT S. FISHER, Director, Outcomes Group, Veterans Affairs Hospital,
White River Junction, Vermont, and Associate Professor of Medicine and
Community and Family Medicine, Center for the Evaluative Clinical

Sciences, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
SPENCER FOREMAN, President, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, New York

JANLORI GOLDMAN,ƒ Director, Project on Privacy and Technology,
American Civil Liberties Union, Washington, DC
CLARK E. KERR, Vice President, Government Relations, Bank of America,
San Francisco, California
JOHN W. KIRKLIN,
* Professor,Department of Surgery, School of Medicine
and Medical Center, University of Alabama Medical Center, Birmingham,
AlabamaANTHONY M. KOTIN, National Medical Director for Marketing and
Specialty Products, National Medical Quality Officer, The Travelers
Companies, Chicago, Illinois
ROBERT M. KRUGHOFF, President, Center for Study of Services,
Washington, DC
RENE LERER, Senior Vice President for Corporate Development, Value
Health Sciences, Santa Monica, California
ELENA O. NIGHTINGALE,
* Senior Program Officer and Special Advisor to
the President of the Carnegie Corporation of New York, Washington, DC
MADISON POWERS, Senior Research Scholar, Kennedy Institute of Ethics,
Georgetown University, Washington, DC
EDWARD H. SHORTLIFFE,
* Chief, Division of General Internal Medicine,
Associate Chair for Primary Care, Department of Medicine, Stanford

University School of Medicine, Stanford, California
ELLIOT M. STONE, Executive Director, Massachusetts Health Data
Consortium, Inc., Waltham, Massachusetts
ADELE A. WALLER, Partner, Gardner, Carton & Douglas, Chicago, Illinois

WILLIS H. WARE,
⁄  Corporate Research Staff, The RAND Corporation, Santa
Monica, California
iiiHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Study Staff, Division of Health Care Services
Karl D. Yordy, Director (until 10/1/93)
Kathleen N. Lohr, Director (as of 10/1/93), Study Director

Molla S. Donaldson, Study Director

Helen C. Rogers, Project Assistant
* Member, Institute of Medicine
ƒ Served through June 23, 1993
⁄ Member, National Academy of Engineering
ivHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceFrom the very first meetings, in the early 1970s, of the newly constituted
Institute of Medicine (IOM) of the National Academy of Sciences, a major
objective has been the engagement of the most important and difficult health
and science policy issues from the public's or society's perspective. The Institute

was created so that a broad-based and multidisciplinary membership could work

across professions, within and without the health sciences, toward the solution

of these complex and difficult problems.
From my personal experience as a staff member at the IOM during the first
four years of its life, I can attest to the early recognition of the importance of the
process of having a balanced, multidisciplinary committee working on the

policy issues at hand. The assumption was that the sum of the parts of such a

diverse group was surpassed by the synergy of the whole; more often than not,

this positive learning experience also produced a useful document or report. In

my personal experience with such groups, I cannot recall a failure either in the

product and its value or in the process and its impact on the individuals

participating. I must say, however, that the challenges facing this committee on

regional databases were so great and our initial difficulties so intense in

becoming clear about and comfortable with the seminal questions embedded in

our charge that I was not optimistic about either our two-year experience

together or the product that I could envision emerging.
Our challenges were formidable because the very nature of the "regional
databases" was obscure to some, their potentials for good or harm
PREFACEvHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.were obscure to others, and the interweaving of such heavy strands of legal
material with information technology, data management, security maintenance,

and the substance of health services research made it exceedingly hard for many

of us to get comfortable with our view and understanding of the completed

policy tapestry.
But we did it! Never have I been on a committee with the dogged
determination of this one; our relatively large committee seldom had a meeting

wherein even one, let alone more than one, member was absent, and they stayed

to the end. Never have I been on a committee wherein the doctors, scientists,

data experts, lawyers, representatives of the public interest, and experts from the

business world had such great expertise, such strong opinions, and such diverse

perspectives.The key to the success of this project, it seems to me, was the gradual
emergence of a commonality in shared values. Somewhat to our collective

surprise, we found ourselves unanimous in our acceptance of the following

fundamental assumptions: (1) use of population-wide databases developed from

individually collected, computerized personal health data has become a working

reality; (2) potential benefits of such data sets used for financial, organizational,
quality improvement, and research purposes to society are indeed great; (3)
protection of the individual record from person-identifiable exposure must

involve all possible behavioral, systematic, and technical security measures; (4)

relevant data sets and analyses including hospital-, clinic-, and provider-specific

data must be expeditiously made available to the public; and (5) bona fide

researchers must have access to person-identifiable records in order to provide

society with timely studies on health status and health care.
These five foundational elements were essential to the committee's
collective thinking and its observations, conclusions, and recommendations as

detailed in the report.
Once the committee came together around these ideas, it was able to move
systematically through the myriad of policy implications that come from

reasoning from basic principles. This could not have been accomplished

without the indomitable persistence and prodigious intellectual work of Molla

Donaldson and Kathleen Lohr. Karl Yordy made key contributions
intermittently as was appropriate for an IOM division head.
Finally, it has become increasingly obvious to me (and I believe to the rest
of the committee) that the future we see emerging before us, as a result of our

participation in this study, has heavy implications for public education. In a

way, developing an informed and sophisticated public is what regional

databases and their analyses and reports are all about. The burden of these
education efforts may fall primarily upon health database organizations, but in
my view this responsibility belongs to all interested parties,
PREFACEviHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.institutions, and professions. The purpose of these new information
technologies is to enhance the health status of society and to improve health

care for the individual patient. We hope and trust that this report itself will

contribute to public understanding of these complex but important matters.
ROGER J. BULGER, M.D., F.A.C.P.
ChairPREFACEviiHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEviiiHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AcknowledgmentsThe Committee on Regional Health Data Networks wishes to acknowledge
the assistance that they and the study staff received from many individuals and
organizations during this study. Among these are a large number of individuals
and organizations who met with members of the committee and staff during site

visits and provided valuable insight into both the benefits to be gained and the

obstacles to current efforts to establish and operate various kinds of health

database organizations and regional networks.
The committee benefited from presentations by guests invited to three of
its meetings. In March 1992 John P. Fanning, LL.B., Office of Health Policy
and Evaluation, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Health, Department of

Health and Human Services, spoke to the committee about privacy issues

related to the disclosure of data from various kinds of databases. Lance J.

Hoffman, Ph.D., Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer

Science, George Washington University, gave an evening presentation on issues

of security and inferential identification. In June 1992 the committee was joined

by H. Jefferson Smith, Ph.D., of Georgetown University School of Business

Administration; William Goss of the Health Care Management Program at

General Electric; Robin Stults, R.R.A., of the University of Maryland Medical

System; and Edward J. Hinman, M.D., of Lincoln National. All these

participants discussed current practices in the use and protection of health

information from their various perspectives (employers, providers, computer
security experts, and insurers and third-party payers). Bert Tobin of Benton
International also presented a working
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSix
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.model of an information repository. At both this meeting and the next meeting
in October 1992, Robert Belair, J.D., explored with the committee a range of

legal and regulatory aspects of privacy and confidentiality. At the October

meeting, the committee also heard from John Baker, Senior Vice President of

Equifax, Inc., in Atlanta, Georgia, regarding the issues of privacy,

confidentiality, and access in other databases.
The committee also wishes to acknowledge the organizations, institutions,
and groups, listed in 
Appendix A
, that participated in its five site visits. A
considerable debt of gratitude is owed to the many individuals, too numerous to

name here, who because of their association with those organizations gave the

committee valuable insights into the many issues of use, disclosure, and privacy

that make up the heart of the committee's report.
The study would not have been possible without the support of the John A.
Hartford Foundation, and the consistent and enthusiastic encouragement from

Richard Sharpe, the Foundation's Program Officer, is hereby acknowledged.

Generous assistance was also provided by the American Health Information

Management Association, Electronic Data Systems Corporation, and Science

Applications International Corporation.
This study benefited from both previous and current IOM studies,
including work by the Committee on Improving the Patient Record in Response

to Increasing Functional Requirements and Technological Advances, the

Committee on Employer-based Health Benefits, and the Committee on

Assessing Genetic Risks. The committee is particularly appreciative of the

assistance from Marilyn J. Field, Ph.D., and Jane Fullarton, M.P.H., the project
directors for the latter two studies, who provided cogent presentations on
privacy and confidentiality matters at one committee meeting.
Finally, and in particular, the committee would like to express its gratitude
to the IOM staff who facilitated the work of the committee. We are grateful for

the secretarial and logistical support provided by Helen Rogers and Donald

Tiller and for the assistance during the report review and preparation stage of

Claudia Carl and Michael Edington of the IOM's Office of Reports and

Information; the steady help of Nina Spruill, Financial Associate for the

Division of Health Care Services, was also greatly appreciated. Krys Krystynak,
while a participant in the federal 1992 SES Candidate Development Program,
spent some time at the IOM assisting on the study. Finally, the committee

acknowledges its considerable debt to Karl Yordy, Director of the Division of

Health Care Services through September 1993, for his unflagging guidance and

support during this project.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSx
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  SUMMARY 11 INTRODUCTION 27  Advancing the Prospects for Comprehensive Health Databases
and Networks 29  Health Database Organizations
 32  The Institute of Medicine Study
 33  Study Activities
 38  Organization of the Report
 38  Comment 392 HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGA-
NIZATIONS: USES, BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
 40  Definitions 42  The Benefits of Health Databases
 61  Users of Information in HDOs
 63  Uses of Databases
 65  Ensuring the Quality of Data
 85  Summary 893 PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE
PROVIDERS AND PRACTITIONERS
 91  Previous Studies 93CONTENTSxiHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Important Principles of Public Disclosure
 95  Important Elements of Public Disclosure
 96  Committee Findings and Conclusions
 105  Recommendations 106  Strengthening Quality Assurance and Quality Improvement
Programs 116  Summary 121  Appendix 3A
 1234 CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA
 136  Historical Perspectives and General Observations on Disclo-
sure of Information
 136  Sources of Concerns about Privacy and the Confidentiality of
Health Records 140  Definitions 142  Expanded Definitions
 154  Harm from Disclosure and Redisclosure of Health Record
Information 156  Privacy Interests and HDOs
 162  Relevance of Existing Laws to HDOs
 172  Options for Protecting Privacy and Confidentiality of Health-
related Data in HDOs
 179  Committee Recommendations
 190  Comment 209  Summary 212  REFERENCES 214  APPENDIXES 225A FACT-FINDING FOR THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL
HEALTH DATA NETWORKS
 227B COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATA NET-
WORKS BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES
 232  GLOSSARY 239  ACRONYMS 244  INDEX 247CONTENTSxiiHealth Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Data in the Information Age
  xiii
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  xiv
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SummaryAn Institute of Medicine (IOM) study committee has examined the
potential that existing and emerging health database organizations offer in
improving the health of individuals and the performance of the health care
system. 
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and Privacy
advances recommendations related to the public disclosure of quality-of-care

information and the protection of the confidentiality of personal health

information. The emergence of health database organizations
Šwhether through
national health reform, state legislative initiatives, commercial ventures, or local

business, medical, and hospital association coalitions
Šprovides the impetus to
explore how such assembled patient-level health care information can be used

appropriately.THE PROBLEMThe desire to understand and improve the performance of the health
system begets a need for better health data for several purposes: to assess the

health of the public and patterns of illness and injury; identify unmet regional
health needs; document patterns of health care expenditures on inappropriate,
wasteful, or potentially harmful services; identify cost-effective care providers;

and provide information to improve the quality of care in hospitals,

practitioners' offices, clinics, and other health care settings.
This, in turn, motivates proposals for the creation and maintenance of
comprehensive, population-based health care databases that can provide such
SUMMARY1Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information with ease and reliability. Considerable obstacles lie in the way of
achieving these goals. Some relate to the content and structure of current health

databases; others concern the difficulties and costs of creating and maintaining

comprehensive databases. Furthermore, public health databases (e.g., those

maintained by states) may themselves lack connections with one another. Other

problems include the need to create longitudinal records to understand how
patients fare ''in the system as a whole"; the need to adjust for important
characteristics about patients' sociodemographic circumstances or health status

(risk and severity adjustment); and the need to have information on the health of

the population as a whole, not just of those who use the health system. Finally,

the need for information on both end results (the outcomes) of care as well as

on the processes of care poses great challenges to database developers.
The current push for health care reform has made clear to many that the
success of reform options
Šas well as the ability to assess the effect of a
reformed system on the health of the public
Šdepends on access to the kinds of
data that too often are unavailable.
Finally, as the reasons for creating large health databases mount, so do the
possibilities that such databases (or, more correctly, their users) will do harm to

patients, providers (institutions, physicians, and others), payers (government,

private insurers, and corporations), and the public at large. The balance between

the advantages of such databases and their potential for harm, or at least
unfairness, to some groups is not yet clear, and the question of whether and how
such entities ought to evolve has not been explored.
Recently, diverse groups of researchers, business leaders, and
policymakers at state and regional levels have begun to develop databases

intended to overcome some of the problems cited above and to permit

increasingly sophisticated analyses of community health needs, practice
patterns, costs, and quality of care. The interests that have prompted such action
cover a broad range: the need to control business costs attributable to health

benefits, the desire to use technological and computer applications to decrease

administrative costs of processing insurance claims, the wish of experienced

health services researchers to exploit the potential of health databases to

evaluate and improve health care, the responsibility of community leaders to

plan expansion and contraction of health care facilities and services across the

nation, and the need to transmit medical history information for an increasingly

mobile population.
Coincident with these interests are the greatly enhanced electronic
capabilities for data management in many aspects of daily life. Comprehensive

computer-based health data files can be easily linked and information from
those files moved instantaneously. Many observers believe that an unparalleled
opportunity exists to apply computer technologies creatively to
SUMMARY2Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.address many of the informational needs and data problems noted above. The
report focuses on steps that might be taken to foster such action and progress

through what the IOM committee terms 
health database organizations.
The committee uses 
health database organization
 (HDO) to refer to
entities that have access to (and possibly control of) databases and a primary

mission to publicly release data and the results of analyses done on the

databases under their control. Although such entities do not yet exist, many are

moving forcefully toward implementation. Prototypical HDOs have several

characteristics; they
  operate under a single, common authority;
  acquire and maintain information from a wide variety of sources and
put their databases to multiple uses;
  have files containing person-identified or person-identifiable data;
  serve a specific, defined geographic area;
  have inclusive population files;
  have comprehensive data with elements that include administrative,
clinical, health status, and satisfaction information;
   anipulate data electronically; and
  support electronic access for real-time use.
For maximum accountability, protection, and control over access to person-
identifiable data, HDOs will need an organizational structure, a corporate or

legal existence, and a physical location. The value of HDOs and their databases
might be said to be the timely provision of reliable and valid information to
address all the major questions in health care delivery facing the nation today

and in the coming years. The prospect of creating these entities has raised

numerous issues, including (1) worries on the part of health care providers and

clinicians about use or misuse of the information HDOs will compile and

release, and (2) alarm on the part of consumers, patients, and their physicians

about how well the privacy and confidentiality of personal health information

will be guarded.
INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE STUDY
In early 1992 the IOM appointed a study committee to address these
issues. The project took place during the 18 months before the Clinton

administration introduced its Health Security Act in the fall of 1993; it was

neither designed nor intended to reflect specifics of that or any of the other
health care reform proposals that were debated beginning in late 1993. The
study committee consisted of 16 individuals with expertise in administration of

medical centers and academic health centers, the practice of medi
SUMMARY3Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.cine, administration of large (nonhealth) corporations, health insurance,
utilization management, use of large administrative and research databases for

research purposes, consumer services, health and privacy law, ethics, data

security, informatics, and state health data organizations. In addition to meeting

with experts in these areas and reviewing the literature, the committee

conducted five major site visits; it met with groups developing HDOs in
business coalitions and other organizations, practicing physicians and
representatives of local medical societies, insurers and third-party claims

administrators, health maintenance organizations, consumers, hospital

administrators and hospital associations, researchers, state and county health

officials, employers, and computer system developers. At the conclusion of the

study, the report underwent formal external review following the procedures of

the National Research Council and the IOM.
The IOM committee took as a given that a variety of HDOs were being
created and moving into operational phases and focused on two primary issues.

The first is public release of descriptive and evaluative data on the costs,

quality, and other attributes of health care institutions, practitioners, and other

providers. The second involves the risks to and opportunities for protecting the
privacy and confidentiality of data that do (or may) identify individuals in their
role as patients or consumers, not as clinicians or providers.
USES AND USERS OF INFORMATION IN HDOS
Chapter 2
 examines users and uses of HDO data and issues related to data
quality. The major users of HDOs include health care provider organizations

and practitioners, patients, their families, community residents, academic and

research organizations, payers and purchasers, employers, health agencies, and
others. The committee emphasizes that HDOs ought not necessarily to satisfy
all such claimants. It does acknowledge, however, that the mere existence of a

database creates new demands for access and new users and uses.

Consequently, those who establish health databases and HDOs may be creating

something for which the end uses cannot always be anticipated. Large databases

such as those maintained by HDOs will be dynamic; in the committee's view,

policies regarding access to those databases should, therefore, be based on firm

principles that are flexible enough to accommodate unavoidable changes and

unanticipated uses.DatabasesA database is "a large collection of data in a computer, organized so that it
can be expanded, updated, and retrieved rapidly for various uses." Although

databases may eventually be linked (or linkable) to primary medi
SUMMARY4Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.cal records held by health care practitioners, the report addresses databases
composed of secondary records that are generated subsequent to the primary

record or that are separate from any patient encounter. They are not intended to

be the major source of information about specific patients for the treating
physician. The committee was particularly interested in linked databases that

have, at a minimum, two specific characteristics: (1) their linking involves
movement of health data outside the care setting in which they have been
generated and (2) they include person-identified or person-identifiable data.
Key Attributes of Databases
In reviewing the considerable variation in databases that might be
accessed, controlled, or acquired by HDOs, the committee sought a simple way

to characterize them by key attributes. It selected two critical dimensions of

databases: comprehensiveness and 
inclusiveness.Comprehensiveness. Comprehensiveness describes the completeness of
records about patient care events. It refers to the amount of information one has

on an individual both for each patient encounter with the health care system and

for all of a patient's encounters over time.
Inclusiveness. Inclusiveness refers to which populations in a geographic
area are included in a database. The more 
inclusive a database, the more it
approaches coverage of 100 percent of the population that its developers intend

to include. Databases that aim to provide information on the health of the

community ought to have an enumeration of all residents of the community
(e.g., metropolitan area, state) so that the information accurately reflects the
entire population of the region, regardless of insurance category. Conversely,

inclusiveness is reduced when membership is restricted to certain subgroups or
when individuals expected to be in the database are missing.
Databases may be (and often are) designed to include only subsets of the
entire population of a geographic area. The potential benefits of the database,

however, will increase as the database moves toward being inclusive of the

entire population of a defined geographic area.
Other Characteristics of Databases
The more comprehensive and inclusive they are, the more databases
facilitate detailed and sophisticated uses. In turn, these attributes entail both

greater anticipated benefits and possible harms. Factors determining the

magnitude of either benefits or harms can depend on several properties of
databases in addition to comprehensiveness and inclusiveness. Among the more
important characteristics are linkage over time; the accuracy and
SUMMARY5Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.completeness of data; whether the databases are under public- and private-
sector control; and their origin (e.g., hospital discharge abstracts, self-completed

questionnaires from patients, insurance claims, computer-based pharmacy files,

computer-based patient records).
For purposes of this report, 
person-identified data
 contain pieces of
information or facts that singly or collectively refer to one person and permit

positive (or probable) identification of that individual. An obvious piece of

identifying information is an individual's name. Other identifiers may be

biometric, such as a fingerprint, a retinal print, or a DNA pattern. The
committee uses 
person-identifiable to characterize information that definitely or
probably can be said to refer to a specific person. It includes items of

information (e.g., the fact of a physician visit on a given day) that will allow

identification of an individual when combined with other facts (e.g., zip code of

residence, date of birth, or gender). To render data non-person-identifiable,

some data managers convert facts to a more general form before releasing those

data to others. Concerns with person-identifiable data arise because of the

ability of computers to combine and cross-match data in various databases. It is

thus the more inclusive of these terms.
Throughout its discussions, the committee focused on 
regional databases
Šthose that pertain to a 
defined population
 of individuals living in, or receiving
health care in, some 
specifiable geographic area.
 Far-thinking experts envision
a time when regional entities will be linked across the nation, even if their

governance and operations remain close to home; this creates the very long-

range view of a national health data repository (operated by either a single
organization or a consortium of regional or state entities) as a federation of
functionally linked databases from all regions of the country. Some proposed

and developing HDO models are based on state legislation that requires

submission of health data to a public agency. Other models are based on

voluntary community cooperation and may be based on provider or local

business coalitions.
Ensuring the Quality of Data
The real rewards from the development and operation of HDOs will
depend heavily on the quality of their data, which must be reliable and valid for

their intended purposes. Developers must ensure that the data in their systems

are of high enough quality that analyses can be done in a credible, defensible

manner. Success in meeting this responsibility will call for attention to the

reliability, completeness, and accuracy of the data. Although the federal
government may have to take the lead in standards development and improved
coding systems, the committee urges HDOs to encourage and work toward

national standards for coding and definitions for core data elements. Finally, the

basic structure and content of these databases ought
SUMMARY6Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to be carefully designed from the beginning, but they must have sufficient
capacity for expansion and change to accommodate the health care sector as it

evolves in coming years.
To address these issues, the committee recommends that HDOs take
responsibility for assuring data quality on an ongoing basis and, in particular,

take affirmative steps to ensure: (1) the completeness and accuracy of the data

in the databases for which they are responsible and (2) the validity of data for

analytic purposes for which they are used (Recommendation 2.1, see 
Box S-l
).The absence of sufficient clinical information in most databases today
leads investigators to acquire needed information through manual abstraction of

relevant information in hospital records, but this approach is costly and time-

consuming. Some means are needed to obtain this information more directly

from patient records. The best method of enhancing the comprehensiveness of

HDO databases and the accuracy and completeness of data elements is to move

toward a computer-based patient record (CPR). This is admittedly a daunting
task. Accordingly, the committee recommends that HDOs support and
contribute to regional and national efforts to create computer-based patient

records (Recommendation 2.2) including the development and adoption of

relevant standards.
BOX S-I COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS
RECOMMENDATION 2.1 ACCURACY AND COMPLETENESS
To address these issues, the committee recommends that health
database organizations take responsibility for assuring data quality on an
ongoing basis and, in particular, take affirmative steps to ensure: (1) the

completeness and accuracy of the data in the databases for which they
are responsible and (2) the validity of data for analytic purposes for which
they are used.
Part 2 of this recommendation applies to analyses that HDOs
conduct. They cannot, of course, police the validity of data when used by
others for purposes over which the HDOs have no a priori control.
RECOMMENDATION 2.2 COMPUTER-BASED PATIENT RECORD

Accordingly, the committee recommends that health database
organizations support and contribute to regional and national efforts to
create computer-based patient records.
SUMMARY7Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATION 3.1 CONDUCTING PROVIDER-SPECIFIC
EVALUATIONSThe committee recommends that health database organizations
produce and make publicly available appropriate and timely summaries,
analyses, and multivariate analyses of all or pertinent parts of their
databases. More specifically, the committee recommends that health
database organizations regularly produce and publish results of provider-
specific evaluations of costs, quality, and effectiveness of care.
RECOMMENDATION 3.2 DESCRIBING ANALYTIC METHODS
The committee recommends that a health database organization
report the following for any analysis it releases publicly:
Ł  general methods for ensuring completeness and accuracy of their data;
 a description of the contents and the completeness of all data files and
of the variables in each file used in the analyses;
 information documenting any study of the accuracy of variables used in
the analyses.
RECOMMENDATION 3.3 MINIMIZING POTENTIAL HARM

The committee recommends that, to enhance the fairness and
minimize the risk of unintended harm from the publication of evaluative
studies that identify individual providers, each HDO should adhere to two
principles as a standard procedure prior to publication: (1) to make

available to and upon request supply to institutions, practitioners, or
providers identified in an analysis all data required to perform an
independent analysis, and to do so with reasonable time for such analysis
prior to public release of the HDO results; and (2) to accompany
publication of its own analyses with notice of the existence and availability
of responsible challenges to, alternate analyses of, or explanation of the
findings.RECOMMENDATION 3.4 ADVOCACY OF DATA RELEASE:
PROMOTING WIDE APPLICATIONS OF HEALTH-RELATED DATA
To foster the presumed benefits of widespread applications of HDO
data, the committee recommends that health database organizations

should release non-person-identifiable data upon request to other entities
once those data are in analyzable form. This policy should include release
to any organization that meets the following criteria:
 It has a public mission statement indicating that promoting public health
or the release of information to the public is a major goal.
 It enforces explicit policies regarding protection of the confidentiality and
integrity of data.
SUMMARY8Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   It agrees not to publish, redisclose, or transfer the raw data to any other
individual or organization.
   It agrees to disclose analyses in a public forum or publication.
The committee also recommends, as a related matter, that health
database organizations make public their own policies governing the

release of data.
RECOMMENDATION 4.1 PREEMPTIVE LEGISLATION
The committee recommends that the U.S. Congress move to enact
preemptive legislation that will:
   establish a uniform requirement for the assurance of confidentiality and
protection of privacy rights for person-identifiable health data and

specify a Code of Fair Health Information Practices that ensures a
proper balance among required disclosures, use of data, and patient
privacy;   impose penalties for violations of the act, including civil damages,
equitable remedies, and attorney's fees where appropriate;
   provide for enforcement by the government and permit private
aggrieved parties to sue;
   establish that compliance with the act's requirements would be a
defense to legal actions based on charges of improper disclosure; and
   exempt health database organizations from public health reporting laws
and compulsory process with respect to person-identifiable health data
except for compulsory process initiated by record subjects.
RECOMMENDATION 4.2 DATA PROTECTION UNITS

The committee recommends that health database organizations
establish a responsible administrative unit or board to promulgate and
implement information policies concerning the acquisition and
dissemination of information and establish whatever administrative

mechanism is required to implement these policies. Such an
administrative unit or board should:
   promulgate and implement policies concerning data protection and
analyses based on such data;
   develop and implement policies that protect the confidentiality of all
person-identifiable information, consistent with other policies of the
organization and relevant state and federal law;
   develop and disseminate educational materials for the general public
that will describe in understandable terms the analyses and their
interpretation of the rights and responsibilities of individuals and the
protections accorded their data by the organization;
SUMMARY9Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   develop and implement security practices in the manual and automated
data processing and storage systems of the organization; and
  develop and implement a comprehensive employee training program
that includes instruction concerning the protection of person-identifiable
data.RECOMMENDATION 4.3 RELEASE OF PERSON-IDENTIFIED DATA

The committee recognizes that there must be release of patient-
identified data related to the processing of health insurance claims. The

committee recommends, however, that a health database organization 
notrelease person-identifiable information in any other circumstances 
exceptthe following:
   to other HDOs whose missions are compatible with and whose
confidentiality and security protections are at least as stringent as their
own;   to individuals for information about themselves;
   to parents for information about a minor child except when such
release is prohibited by law;
   to legal representatives of incompetent patients for information about
the patient;
   to researchers with approval from their institution's properly constituted
Institutional Review Board;
   to licensed practitioners with a need to know when treating patients in
life-threatening situations who are unable to consent at the time care is
rendered; and
   to licensed practitioners when treating patients in all other (non-life-
threatening) situations, 
but only with the informed consent of the patient.
Otherwise, the committee recommends that health database
organizations not authorize access to, or release of, information on
individuals with or without informed consent.
RECOMMENDATION 4.4. RESTRICTING EMPLOYER ACCESS

The committee recommends that employers not be permitted to
require receipt of an individual's data from a health database organization

as a condition of employment or for the receipt of benefits.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE
PROVIDERS AND PRACTITIONERS
Chapter 3
 examines public disclosure of data on health care practitioners
and providers and presents recommendations about how HDOs can ensure that
such analyses are fair to those identified and to the public.
SUMMARY10Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HDOs are presumed to have two major capabilities. One is the ability to
amass credible descriptive information and evaluative data on costs, quality,

and cost-effectiveness for hospitals, physicians, and other health care facilities,

agencies, and providers. The other is the capacity to analyze data to generate

knowledge and then to make that knowledge available for purposes of

controlling the costs and improving the quality of health care
Šthat is, of
obtaining value for health care dollars spent. The committee characterizes the
activities that HDOs might pursue to accomplish these goals as 
publicdisclosure, defined as the timely communication, or publication and
dissemination, of certain kinds of information to the public at large. The aims

are to improve the public's understanding about health care issues generally and

to help consumers select providers of health care.
The committee stance favoring public disclosure takes two forms. One is
that the HDOs ought 
themselves to carry out some minimum number of
consumer-oriented studies and analyses and publish them routinely. The other is

that HDOs must make appropriate data available for 
others to use in such
studies and analyses, where the expectation is that the results of such work will

be publicly disclosed.
Acceptance of HDO activities and products relating to public disclosure
over time will depend in part on the balance struck for fairness to patients, the

public in general, payers, and health care providers. Fairness to patients

involves protecting their privacy and the confidentiality of information about

them. Fairness to the public involves distributing the accurate and reliable

information needed to make informed decisions about providers and health care
interventions. Finally, fairness to providers entails ensuring that data and
analyses are reliable, valid, and impartial, giving providers some opportunity to

confirm data and methods before information is released to the public, and

finding some means of publishing their perspectives when it is released.
Key Factors in Public Disclosure
Public disclosure is acceptable 
only when it (1) involves information and
analytic results that come from studies that have been well conducted, (2) is

based on data that can be shown to be reliable and valid for the purposes at

hand, and (3) is accompanied by appropriate educational material.
Several elements are crucial to successful public disclosure of health-
related information. Among the more significant are topics of analysis (e.g.,

hospital-specific death rates) and who is identified in such releases (e.g., health

plans, institutional providers, and individual practitioners). The full report
explores these matters in some detail.
In the committee's view, disclosure of information about larger aggre
SUMMARY11Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.gations of health care providers, such as hospitals, will generally be less prone
to cause undeserved losses of reputation, income, or career than disclosure of

information on specific individual practitioners. The committee takes the

position that public disclosure is a valuable goal to pursue, to the extent that it is

carried out with due attention to accuracy and clarity and does not undermine

the quality assurance and quality improvement (QA/QI) programs that health
care institutions and organizations conduct internally.
Analyses and Disclosure of Results
The committee recommends that HDOs produce and make publicly
available appropriate and timely summaries, analyses, and multivariate analyses

of all or pertinent parts of their databases. More specifically, the committee

recommends that HDOs regularly produce and publish results of provider-

specific evaluations of costs, quality, and effectiveness of care
(Recommendation 3.1).
The subjects of such analyses should include hospitals, health maintenance
organizations, and other capitated systems; fee-for-service group practices of all

sorts; physicians, dentists, podiatrists, nurse-practitioners, or other independent

practitioners; long-term-care facilities; and other health providers on whom the

HDOs maintain reliable and valid information.
The intended audience for publication or disclosure is the public, not
simply member or sponsoring organizations. Some HDOs may be based in the

private sector, operate chiefly for the benefit of for-profit entities, and have no

connection with or mandate from states or the federal government. In these

cases, the imperative to make information and analytic results available to the

public on a broad scale is less clear. In the committee's view, however, the
charters and bylaws of such HDOs ought to include firm commitments to
conduct consumer-oriented studies, and where state legislation is used to

establish HDOs or similar entities (e.g., data commissions), the enabling

statutes themselves should contain such requirements. If public funds are used

to support the development of HDOs, public release of analyses should be

required as a condition of funding.
Describing Analytic Methods
The committee recommends that an HDO report the following for any
analysis it releases publicly:
  general methods for ensuring completeness and accuracy of data;
  a description of the contents and the completeness of all data files and
of the variables in each file used in the analyses;
SUMMARY12Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  information documenting any study of the accuracy of variables used in
the analyses (Recommendation 3.2).
The committee expects HDOs to accompany public disclosure of provider-
specific information with clear descriptions of the database (including

documentation of its completeness, accuracy, and data sources), of methods of

risk adjustment, and of appropriate uses by the public, payers, and government

of the data and analyses
Šincluding notice of those uses of data and analyses
that are not valid.Minimizing Potential Harms
The committee has taken a strong pro-disclosure stance toward
comparative, evaluative data. Disclosure proponents assume that such studies

will be done responsibly, and the public has every right to expect that to be the

case. The committee sees some potential for harm in public release of

comparative or evaluative studies on costs, quality, or other measures of health

care delivery, however, and did not wish to rely solely on marketplace
correctives; it believes that a more protective stance is needed. To enhance the
fairness and minimize the risk of unintended harm from the publication of

evaluative studies that identify individual providers, the committee recommends

that each HDO should adhere to two principles as a standard procedure prior to

publication: (1) to make available to and upon request supply to institutions,

practitioners, or providers identified in an analysis all data required to perform

an independent analysis, and to do so with reasonable time for such analysis

prior to public release of the HDO results; and (2) to accompany publication of

its own analyses with notice of the existence and availability of responsible

challenges to, alternate analyses of, or explanations of the findings

(Recommendation 3.3). Feedback from providers may reveal problems with

data quality and study methods that HDOs would want to remedy. This set of
recommendations reflects what might be regarded as a fairness doctrine.
Releasing Data
HDOs might well serve as a major repository of data that will be
accessible to other groups. To foster the presumed benefits of widespread

applications of HDO data, the committee recommends that HDOs should

release non-person-identifiable data upon request to other entities once those

data are in analyzable form. This policy should include release to any
organization that meets the following criteria:
SUMMARY13Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   It has a public mission statement indicating that promoting public
health or the release of information to the public is a major goal.
   It enforces explicit policies regarding protection of the confidentiality
and integrity of data.
   It agrees not to publish, redisclose, or transfer the raw data to any other
individual or organization.
   It agrees to disclose analyses in a public forum or publication.
The committee also recommends, as a related matter, that HDOs make
public their own policies governing the release of data (Recommendation 3.4).
STRENGTHENING QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS THROUGH DATA FEEDBACK
HDOs could help to improve the quality of health care through direct
assistance to health care institutions, facilities, and clinical groups by making

available to providers and practitioners the data for or results of evaluative

studies of their services and those of their peers.
The committee assumed such an activity would occur chiefly as a part of
or as an adjunct to a formal QA/QI process that providers and plans might

conduct. Information on identified providers and individual clinicians would be

made available to organizations' QA/QI programs so that they could take

constructive action.
Some readers may think that a tension will exist between public disclosure
and such feedback for internal use, but the committee believes that both will be

important tools available to HDOs to improve quality and foster informed

choices in health care. Thus, it voices support for both functions, in the belief

that one activity does not
Šor at least need not
Šdiscredit the other and that
effective combination strategies can be designed.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA
Chapter 4
 of the IOM report examines privacy, confidentiality, and
security of information about individuals or patients
Šwhat this committee
refers to as person-identified or person-identifiable data.
Two somewhat distinct trends have led to increased access to the primary
health record and subsequent concerns about privacy. One has to do with

primary health records, however they are created and maintained, and the other

involves health records stored electronically.
The increasing complexity of health care and the involvement of greater
numbers of individuals in health care delivery has resulted in ever more people

accessing the health record to deliver and document care. The pri
SUMMARY14Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.mary health record serves many purposes beyond direct health care, and many
parties external to the healing relationship seek person-identified information.

Of particular concern is the confidentiality of health information that is stored

electronically; the aggregation of information on individuals from diverse

databases will make computer-based health data increasingly valuable and in

need of protection from unauthorized access.
Existing ethical, legal, and other approaches to protecting confidentiality
and privacy of personal health data offer some confidentiality safeguards, but

major gaps and limitations remain. The committee's recommendations are

intended to strengthen current protections for confidentiality and privacy of

health-related data, particularly for information acquired by HDOs.
Privacy and Privacy Rights
The most general and common view of privacy conveys notions of
withdrawal, seclusion, secrecy, or of being kept away from public view, but

with no pejorative overtones. In public policy generally, and in health policy in

particular, privacy takes on a special meaning, namely, that of 
informationalprivacy, ''a state or condition of controlled access to personal information."
Informational privacy is infringed, by definition, whenever another party has

access to one's personal information by reading, listening, or using any of the
other senses. Such loss of privacy may be entirely acceptable and intended by
the individual, or it may be inadvertent, unacceptable, and even unknown to the

individual.This definition of privacy thus reflects two underlying notions. First,
privacy in general and informational privacy in particular are always matters of

degree. Rarely is anyone in a condition of complete physical or informational

inaccessibility to others, nor would they wish to remain so. Second, although

informational privacy may be valuable and deserving of protection, many

thoughtful privacy advocates argue that it does not, in itself, have moral
significance or inherent value.
Nonetheless, informational privacy has value for all in our society, and it
accordingly has special claims on our attention. The most salient federal

protections for privacy are the principles of fair information practices embodied

in the Privacy Act of 1974. The act addresses the right to know about,

challenge, control, and correct information about oneself in federal government
databases.Privacy RightsNo explicit right to privacy is guaranteed by the Constitution of the United
States. The presumed right as the basis of a civil action is based on
SUMMARY15Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.legal opinion written by Justice Louis D. Brandeis in 1890, and its
constitutional status derives from various amendments to the Bill of Rights. The

Constitution generally has not provided strong protection for the confidentiality

of individual health care information; the constitutional protection for

informational privacy is very limited and derived from case law interpreting the

Constitution.To assert a right is to make a special kind of claim. Rights designate some
interests of the individual that are sufficiently important to hold others under a

duty to promote and protect, sometimes even at the expense of maximizing or

even achieving the social good. Two interests are widely cited as providing the

moral justification for privacy rights: the individual's interest in autonomy and

the instrumental value that privacy may have in promoting other valuable
human goods.Whether HDOs can achieve their potential for good in the face of their
possible impact on privacy will likely turn on the interplay of three

considerations. First, to what extent do HDOs provide important (and perhaps

irreplaceable) health care benefits to the regions in which they operate, and

perhaps to the nation? Second, how will adequate privacy safeguards be
incorporated into the HDOs? Third, do the societal benefits resulting from the
implementation of HDOs outweigh the privacy risks?
There cannot be much doubt that HDOs will serve legitimate societal
interests. Nevertheless, because HDOs will represent one of the more

comprehensive and sensitive automated personal record databases yet

established, the system inevitably implicates interests protected by
informational privacy principles.
ConfidentialityConfidentiality relates to disclosure or nondisclosure of information.
Historically, a duty to honor confidentiality has arisen with respect to

information disclosed in the context of a relationship such as that between a

physician and a patient. When one is concerned about data disclosure, whether

or not any relationship exists between a data subject and a data holder, an
essential construct is that of 
data confidentiality.
 It is the status accorded data
indicating that they are protected and must be treated as such.
Exceptions to confidentiality requirements are widely acknowledged.
Situations exist in which sensitive health information about individuals must be

disclosed to third parties. Such reporting requirements are justified by society's

need for information. Examples include mandatory reporting of communicable
diseases and gunshot wounds. Physicians and other health professionals may
also be required to divulge personal health information under legal "compulsory

process," which may take the form of subpoenas or discovery requests enforced

by court order.SUMMARY16Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The most important exception to the rule of confidentiality, however, is
that of disclosure authorized by consent of a patient or a patient representative

in the course of applying for insurance, employment, or reimbursement for

medical claims. Such disclosure may or may not be justifiable and acceptable to

patients. In such a case, however, consent cannot be truly voluntary or

informed. Such authorizations are often not 
voluntary because the patient feels
compelled to sign the authorization or forego the benefit sought, and they are
not 
informed because the patient cannot know in advance what information will
be in the record, who will subsequently have access to it, or how it will be used.

Although such consent procedures are a necessary adjunct to other autonomy

protections, this committee generally does not regard these procedures as

sufficient in themselves to protect sensitive information from inappropriate

disclosure.Legal and ethical confidentiality obligations are the same whether health
records are kept on paper or computer-based media. Current laws, however,

have significant weaknesses. First, and very important, the degree to which

confidentiality is required under current law varies according to the holder of

the information and the type of information held.
Second, legal obligations of confidentiality often vary widely within a
single state and from state to state, making it difficult to ascertain the legal

obligations that a given HDO will have, particularly if it operates in a multistate

area. These state-by-state and intrastate variations and inconsistencies in

privacy and confidentiality laws are well established among those

knowledgeable about health care records law; they are worrisome because some
HDOs will routinely transmit data across state lines.
Third, current laws offer individuals little real protection against
redisclosure of their confidential health information to unauthorized recipients

for a number of reasons. Once patients have consented to an initial disclosure of

information (for example, to obtain insurance reimbursement), they have lost

control of further disclosure. Information disclosed for one purpose may be
used for unrelated purposes without the subject's knowledge or consent. Such
redisclosure practices represent a yawning gap in confidentiality protection.
As a practical matter, policing redisclosure of one's personal health
information is difficult and may be impossible. At a minimum, such policing

requires substantial resources and commitment. With the use of computer and

telecommunications networks, an individual may never discover that a
particular disclosure has occurred, even though he or she suffers significant
harmŠsuch as inability to obtain employment, credit, housing, or insurance-as
a result of such disclosure. Pursuing legal remedies may result in additional

disclosure of the individual's private health information.
Further, federal law may preempt state confidentiality requirements or
protections without imposing new ones. For example, the Employment
SUMMARY17Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Retirement Insurance Security Act (ERISA) preempts some state insurance
laws with respect to employers' self-insured health plans, yet ERISA is silent on

confidentiality obligations.Last, enforcing rights through litigation is costly, and money damages may
not provide adequate redress for the harm done by the improper disclosure.
SecurityIn the context of health record information, confidentiality implies
controlled access to and protection against unauthorized access to, modification

of, or destruction of health data. In computer-based or computer-controlled

systems, security is implemented when a defined system functions in a defined

operational environment, serves a defined set of users, contains prescribed data

and operational programs, has defined network connections and interactions

with other systems, and incorporates safeguards to protect the system against a
defined threat to the system, its resources, and its data.
Two consequences flow from defining data as sensitive and needing
protection. First, those data must be made secure; second, access must be

controlled. Access control can be operationalized by HDO planners and

legislators in a form that this committee would term "information-use policy." It

leads to policymaking about who may be allowed to use health-related

information and how they may use it. It might also include consideration of

whether some data should be collected at all.
In a study that focuses on the protection of health-related data about
individuals, defining which items are health-related is more difficult than one

might initially think. Any data element in medical records, and many data items

from other records, 
could be considered either health-related or sensitive, or
both. In considering the actions of HDOs, this committee proceeds from an

assumption that 
all information concerning an individual and any transactions
relating directly or indirectly to health care that HDOs access or maintain as
databases must be regarded as potentially requiring privacy protections.
A National Identification System or Dossier
HDOs may be perceived as enabling the development of a national
identification system or dossier. Privacy advocates can be expected to express

acute concern about the potential for HDOs to be linked not only with one

another, but, more importantly, with government databases and with other

personal databases such as the financial, credit, and lifestyle databases

maintained by consumer reporting agencies. The committee believes that HDO

proponents should take every practicable step, including
SUMMARY18Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.those recommended by the committee, to assure that HDOs will not contribute
to the development of a national identification database.
Personal Identifiers and the Social Security Number
The personal identifier (ID) that is used in an HDO to "label" each of the
individuals on whom it keeps data is a crucial issue. It not only is related to past

practices, but it will also be strongly influenced, if not mandated, by the health

care reform actions now under way in the nation.
An "Ideal" Identifier
The choice of a personal ID that is satisfactory for the operational needs of
health care delivery but at the same time assures the confidentiality of medical

data and the privacy of individuals is neither easy nor casual. An ideal identifier

would meet the requirements described in detail in the report. Superficially, the

choice would be the Social Security number (SSN), Medicare number, or

something similar simply because people are accustomed to using them,
systems are used to handling them, and the government would bear the burden
of administering the enumeration system and the cost of assigning new

numbers. The SSN has many faults, however, that are familiar to researchers

and privacy experts. Perhaps the most salient of these is that if the SSN were to

become the ID for health care delivery, linkage of medical records to all the

other databases would become easy.
The most problematic objection to the SSN as a medical ID is that it has no
legal protection, and because its use is so widespread, there is no chance of

retroactively giving it such protection. As a data element, it is not characterized

by law as confidential; hence, organizations holding it are under no legal

requirement to protect it or to limit the ways in which it is used. Its use is for all

practical purposes unconstrained, and this makes the risk of commingling health
data with all other forms of personal data and an individual's actions extremely
high. Major privacy risks arise when medical information is used in decisions

unrelated to health care, such as employment, promotion, and eligibility for

insurance or other benefits. Further, access by unauthorized users would be very

much simpler because the SSN is so readily available.
Relevance to HDOs of Existing Laws on Confidentiality and
PrivacyThe committee examined existing law
Šconstitutional, statutory, and
common lawŠfor its relevance to HDOs and its adequacy for protecting
SUMMARY19Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.patient privacy and confidentiality. The committee also examined the way these
laws might affect the design, establishment, and operation of HDOs.
It concludes that most of this body of law is unlikely to apply to HDOs.
With the exception of laws that regulate certain information considered

sensitive, existing laws regulate recordkeepers and their recordkeeping

practices; they do not regulate on the basis of either the content or the subject

matter of a record.
Recommendations Regarding Protection of Patient and
Person-identifiable Data
Given (1) the unprecedented comprehensiveness and inclusiveness of
information expected to be in HDO databases, (2) the generally scanty and

inconsistent legal protections across geopolitical jurisdictions, and (3) the

current public interest in and concern about privacy protections, the committee

believes that HDOs have both an obligation and an opportunity to fashion well-

delineated privacy protection programs that will also foster the realization of

HDO goals. Some of these protections, such as the establishment of data

protection boards and organizational policies regarding security and access

control, can be implemented in the short term. Others, such as passage of

federal preemptive legislation, will likely require longer-term efforts.
Preemptive Legislation
The committee recommends that the U.S. Congress move to enact
preemptive legislation that will:
   establish a uniform requirement for the assurance of confidentiality and
protection of privacy rights for person-identifiable health data and

specify a Code of Fair 
Health Information Practices that ensures a
proper balance among required disclosures, use of data, and patient

privacy;   impose penalties for violations of the act, including civil damages,
equitable remedies, and attorney's fees where appropriate;
   provide for enforcement by the government and permit private
aggrieved parties to sue;
   establish that compliance with the act's requirements would be a
defense to legal actions based on charges of improper disclosure; and
   exempt health database organizations from public health reporting laws
and compulsory process with respect to person-identifiable health data

except for compulsory process initiated by record subjects

(Recommendation 4.1).
SUMMARY20Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In the last item, the committee believes that both processes
Špublic health
reporting and responding to compulsory process such as subpoenas
Šshouldremain the responsibility of the provider, as is now the case.
The committee concludes that federal preemptive legislation is required to
establish uniform requirements for the preservation of confidentiality and

protection of privacy rights for health data about individuals. It further advises

that Congress enact such legislation, including a Code of Fair 
HealthInformation Practices, as soon as possible. At a minimum, federal legislation

should establish a floor and allow states or HDOs to implement more stringent
standards so that state-imposed safeguards are not weakened.
Although current state protections often apply duties of confidentiality to
the recordkeeper (e.g., the hospital), such protection is no longer in effect once

the data have left the recordkeeper's control. This means that health data can be

deprived of legal protection unless such protection is specified by another law;

furthermore, such protection is likely to be left to the discretion of organizations
or individuals who acquire such information as secondary data. That is little
shelter indeed. Therefore, legislation should clearly establish that the

confidentiality of person-identifiable data is a property afforded to the data

elements themselves, regardless of who holds those data. Proper preemptive

legislation should also provide for enforcement by government officials and

aggrieved private parties. It should also impose penalties for violations of the

act. It will be important that the legislation clarify whether individuals have

standing to bring suit.
Federal legislation can be expected to encourage standard setting in such
areas as connectivity and transmissions standards. Standard setting is a major

obstacle to the development of automated medical records and will be no less a

problem for HDOs. Thus, the committee sees the route of federal legislation as
one more mechanism for addressing this problem for all computer-based
systems that deal with health data.
Data Protection Units
HDOs will need clear and enforceable, written organizational policies and
procedures in several areas: informing patients of their rights regarding their

own data; protecting medical information and materials; ensuring the accuracy

of data; and verifying compliance with their policies. Members of the public
should be able to request and receive clearly written materials describing these
policies. Although precise policies cannot be written to cover every eventuality,

they must be broad enough to address the most common situations, such as

types of data and potential requestors. Organizations should also make

considerable efforts to educate (and reeducate) staff, the public, and potential

requestors about these policies. Thus, the committee recommends that HDOs

establish a responsible administrative
SUMMARY21Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.unit or board to promulgate information policies concerning the acquisition and
dissemination of information and to establish whatever administrative

mechanism is required to implement these policies. Such an administrative unit

or board specifically should:
   promulgate and implement policies concerning data protection and
analyses based on such data;
   develop and implement policies that protect the confidentiality of all
person-identifiable information, consistent with other policies of the

organization and relevant state and federal law;
   develop and disseminate educational materials for the general public
that will describe in understandable terms the analyses and their

interpretation of the rights and responsibilities of individuals and the

protections accorded their data by the organization;
   develop and implement security practices in the manual and automated
data processing and storage systems of the organization; and
   develop and implement a comprehensive employee training program
that includes instruction concerning the protection of person-

identifiable data (Recommendation 4.2).
The commitment to protection of confidentiality of the governing body and
executives of the HDO will be critical, and these objectives should be written

into the organization's bylaws. The committee strongly advises that HDO policy

boards include in their policies and procedures fair health information practices.
Any HDO should consider these practices as the foundation of its privacy
framework and depart from them only after careful consideration and

explanation.Legislation and organizational policies have sometimes distinguished
among levels of sensitivity of various elements of health-related data, based on

the belief that it is possible to identify categories of data that warrant special
protection. Despite precedent for adopting such a stance, this committee has
decided otherwise. It has concluded that a given data element cannot always be

designated reliably as inherently sensitive; rather, the sensitivity of data

depends on the kinds of harm to which individuals are or believe themselves to

be vulnerable if the information were known to others. Such assessments could

differ dramatically from one person to another, one circumstance to another,

one place to another, and over time as cultural attitudes change. Rather than

recommending special protections for certain categories of data, the committee

prefers that all data accessed by HDOs be afforded stringent, and essentially

equal, protection.
SUMMARY22Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Release of Person-Identified Data
Policies Relating to Access and Disclosure
Clearly, the question of who 
outside the HDO has access to what data, and
under what circumstances, is supremely important and is the essence of the

privacy issue from the patient's point of view. The committee takes up these

matters in a series of recommendations (presented below) that refer to person-

identified or person-identifiable information only. As discussed earlier in this
summary, the committee recommends release and disclosure of non-person-
identifiable information that protects patient identity but that provides reliable,

valid, timely, and useful descriptive and evaluative information on a full range

of health care providers and clinicians.
The committee recognizes that there must be release of patient-identified
data related to the processing of health insurance claims. The committee

recommends, however, that a health database organization 
not release person-
identifiable information in other circumstances 
except the following:
  to other HDOs whose missions are compatible with and whose
confidentiality and security protections are at least as stringent as their

own;  to individuals for information about themselves;
  to parents for information about a minor child except when such release
is prohibited by law;
  to legal representatives of incompetent patients for information about
the patient;  to researchers with approval from their institution's properly constituted
Institutional Review Board;
  to licensed practitioners with a need to know when treating patients in
life-threatening situations who are unable to consent at the time care is

rendered; and
  to licensed practitioners when treating patients in all other (non-life-
threatening) situations, 
but only with the informed consent of the patient.
Otherwise, the committee recommends that health database organizations
not authorize access to, or release of, person-identifiable information with or
without informed consent (Recommendation 4.3).
In the last item, the committee has specifically recommended that consent
for access to the database be a necessary and sufficient condition in only one
circumstance: when needed by the treating practitioner in non-life-threatening
situation. In such a situation it will be important that specific consent

mechanisms be in place. Otherwise, the committee believes that
SUMMARY23Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.informed consent should 
not be required for release of person-identifiable
information in six situations as described below.
First, HDOs will need to acquire information about out-of-area care
provided to persons in their databases and should be able to do so. Second,

HDOs also ought to release person-identifiable data without requiring consent

when individuals seek information about themselves. The third and fourth cases

above reflect the need to care for minors and persons who are legally

incompetent to give consent for themselves.
The fifth case concerns researchers with approval from relevant human
subjects committees or institutional review boards (IRBs). In this case, person-

identified information is not being sought 
by a patient 
or for care of
 a patient,
but to conduct studies that are regarded as being in the public's interest. Such

uses of the databases are considered by this committee to be central and vital to

the effective implementation of HDOs.
The sixth case involves treatment of licensed practitioners with a need to
know in life-threatening situations, whom the committee believes also ought to

be able to access data about a patient. This requires that the patient be unable to

consent at the time care is rendered.
The seventh case
Šthe release of data to licensed practitioners when
treating patients in all other (non-life-threatening) situations, but only with the

informed consent 
of the patientŠ
is the only case in which the committee has
recommended the use of informed consent to release of person-identifiable

information. Such a circumstance might occur when a treating physician wishes

to access the HDO database in addition to the medical records he or she keeps.
For example, information on medications prescribed by other practitioners
might be pertinent. In such cases, the treating practitioner should obtain explicit

consent of the patient. As discussed earlier, consent might be given

electronically and might be time limited.
Finally, the committee recommends above that HDOs 
not authorize access
to or release of health information on individuals 
with or without the informed
consent of the individual in any situation or to any requestor other than those
stated above. To ensure that individuals (i.e., patients, parents of minor

children, or patients' legal representatives) are not placed in an untenable
situation concerning release information, the committee has opted for a position
that does not rely on consent procedures insofar as most uses or disclosures of

data are concerned. It prefers to rely on stringent policies against disclosure or

release of personal information on individuals. The consent procedures

described in this recommendation are for release of information by the HDO.

Patients will always be able to consent to release of information directly by

each of their care providers.
Special circumstances exist in the health sector that are of particular
concern to the committee. One involves the current practice of extensive

exchange of medical information between employer and payer with little
SUMMARY24Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.control by providers or patients. This practice has dramatic implications for
patients whose information is accessed by an HDO if the employer and payer

are readily able to tap into data in the network. Such exchanges of information

could be especially harmful to patients because the information exchanged

could cover all encounters the patient has with the health care system (not just

those covered by insurance or by the employer's health plan). The committee
acknowledges the danger and inappropriateness of these practices and regarded
them as sufficiently worrisome that it recommends that employers not be

permitted to require receipt of an individual's data from a health database

organization as a condition of employment or for the receipt of benefits

(Recommendation 4.4).
Universal Person-Identifiers
The committee believes that unique individual person-identifiers are
essential to facilitate the efficient operation and data interchange of HDOs. The

committee also recognizes that there are strong arguments against the SSN

being used as the unique identifier. The great majority of the committee agreed

on the need for a new unique identifier on the grounds that the SSN offers too

many opportunities to breach confidentiality. The creation of a new number

would (1) permit legislative protection of that number, (2) offer the possibility
of providing greater protection for health information than is possible with the
SSN, and (3) likely occur at the time of implementation of universal health care

coverage, which will, if enacted, require some scheme for unique identification.
THE FUTURE
Little is yet known about how HDOs will function, what their likely
benefits will be, or how they will evolve over time. In emphasizing the use of

aggregated health information, the Clinton Administration's health reform

proposal has put the issue of confidentiality squarely on the agenda. What is not

known is which uses of health care information will be acceptable and will

wisely serve the needs of society. Moreover, new uses for and users of data will
emerge, some raising new threats to privacy. Accordingly, the privacy
dimension of health care information is dynamic and should be revisited from

time to time.
Regional HDOs hold tremendous promise for evaluating and improving
health care and implementing effective new ways to protect health information.

Although the great public benefit may be easily understood, the potential for

harm or lack of fairness may create concern and fear in many. To gain public

support for the vision advanced in this report
Šand to ensure the best public use
of the health-related information that will be released
ŠSUMMARY25Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HDOs, government agencies, and public- and private-sector institutions must
implement carefully planned strategies for fairness and privacy protection and

educate the public, health care providers, policymakers, and patients about these

protections. This report is intended to be an early step in that educational and

public policymaking process.
SUMMARY26Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1IntroductionThe Bradys have recently moved to Capital City from a small town in
another state. According to the family practitioner in their former residence,
their young daughter needs heart surgery, and they want to identify a surgeon
and hospital with considerable experience and good outcomes to do the

surgery. They need to choose a health plan from among those offered by Mr.

Brady's employer that covers services by these providers. Which plan should

they choose?Mike, a shy three-year-old, has been brought to the attention of the
Montgomery County Protective Services unit because of concerns about his
failure to thrive. He has been living on and off with an aunt. She has no records

of any previous medical care and no special knowledge of any illnesses. How

can the county caseworker acquire health-related information as part of her

responsibilities to manage this case and make recommendations for

appropriate referrals?
Alice Johns, an elderly woman who rarely visits any physicians, appears in
Dr. Mark's office with fever and other flu-like symptoms. Dr. Mark needs to

know what infectious organisms have been appearing in their community lately

as a guide to treating Mrs. Johns appropriately on this one examination. How

can he quickly get this information?
Gerry Middlemarch, a health services researcher at State University,
INTRODUCTION27
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.leads a team that is studying treatments for low back pain. They want to know:
What are the outcomes for patients who have surgery, who attend pain control

clinics, or receive chiropractic services? How well are these patients

functioning? How satisfied are they with their treatment? What have been the

relative costs of care?
A man in jogging clothes arrives unconscious at the emergency department
of Santa Teresa Memorial Hospital, having been found collapsed at an

intersection nearby. Who is he? What medications is he taking? Is he diabetic?

Does he have a history of heart disease? Is he allergic to any medications?
Officials in the Columbia County Department of Health must begin to plan
for long-term development of health facilities in the area, making the best use of

local resources, tax revenues, and bonds. In particular, they need to decide:

whether to renovate the only community hospital to expand traditional inpatient

care services; whether to shift inpatient beds to rehabilitation and skilled

nursing beds or to authorize construction of a new nursing home; and whether
to establish additional neighborhood clinics for maternal and child care, to
upgrade the emergency medical services system for both adults and children, or

to add staff for substance abuse facilities. How can they determine the

community's greatest needs now and five to ten years from now, and how can

they calculate the most cost-effective use of the county's limited health budget?
The Tectonic Plate Manufacturing Company, a large employer in
Ironweed City, is facing soaring costs for its health benefit plan. The company

is a somewhat paternalistic one, with a generous health plan, and it does not

want simply to direct its employees to the ''cheapest" hospitals in the area. As

the metropolitan area has many hospitals, which range widely in size, services

offered, and reputation, how can the company determine which ones will likely

have good outcomes with only moderate charges?
The local chapter of the National Paralysis Foundation has a young and
energetic executive vice president who wants to move the organization more in

the direction of outreach and case management and away from simple fund

raising. She wants to find better ways to identify children and families to whom

a greater range of services might be offered. How can she best target these

efforts in this city of 800,000 as well as in the larger suburban counties
surrounding the city?INTRODUCTION28
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.These vignettes are fiction. Yet, every day, across the nation, these and
similar scenarios play out and each describes a valid and legitimate need for

medical information. Sometimes the questions are answered quickly and

correctly. Sometimes they are not, especially when no central repository of

information or network of data sources exists or can be queried easily. In

response to this situation, many experts in the health care field share an exciting
vision: a community-oriented database or group of linked databases that can
address all kinds of inquiries about health care matters in a timely and

satisfactory manner.
This report from an Institute of Medicine (IOM) study committee
examines the potential that existing and emerging health databases offer for

fulfilling this vision. It gives special attention to appropriate uses of data in such

repositories and to adequate protections for the privacy and confidentiality of

individually identifiable information. It concludes that "health database

organizations" can play a pivotal role in health care delivery and research but
that they, or other interested parties, will have to take significant steps to ensure
that private information remains private. To promote these ends, the committee

advances recommendations that are detailed in subsequent chapters. Taken

together, the committee's findings, conclusions, and recommendations

underscore the extreme importance of the ways in which health care

information is to be controlled and used in the future.
ADVANCING THE PROSPECTS FOR COMPREHENSIVE
HEALTH DATABASES AND NETWORKS
The ProblemThe desire to understand and improve the performance of the health care
system begets a need for data to answer the questions that opened this report.

This, in turn, motivates proposals for the creation and maintenance of

comprehensive, population-based health care databases that can provide such

information with ease and reliability. The past quarter-century has already seen

an exponential rise in the number, complexity, and sophistication of health

databases, yet they do not approach in extent, inclusiveness, or quality the
vision offered above.
What is the state of health databases today? The databases briefly noted
here illustrate the range of existing databases; 
Chapter 2
 discusses selected
databases in more detail. Among the oldest and best known of the so-called

administrative data sets are those associated with the Medicare program,

particularly the Part A and Part B files (for, respectively, inpatient and

outpatient services) and more recent compilations such as the National Claims

History system. All states maintain some form of database for their Medicaid

programs; more than two-thirds maintain databases on hospital
INTRODUCTION29
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.discharges, such as the Statewide Planning and Research Cooperative System
(SPARCS) database in New York State; a similar proportion collect information

on emergency medical services (chiefly for prehospital emergency vehicle

runs); and more and more states are establishing state databases to support

research, policy analysis, and performance of the health care delivery system.

As something of a counterpoint to existing databases in the United States,
Canadian provincial databases, such as those in Manitoba, contain information
on virtually all health encounters (inpatient and outpatient) for all persons in the

province, permitting the analyses contemplated for state databases and by this

committee.Other databases are maintained by insurers in the private sector; they are
derived from insurance claim forms and include groups covered by service

benefit, indemnity, or employer-based health insurance plans. In the past, such

databases served chiefly to adjudicate claims for reimbursement; today, they

also support research applications. Some health maintenance organizations
(HMOs), particularly group and staff model HMOs maintain patient health
records that can be used both for patient care and research. Other major

databases (and public use files) have been specially constructed for research

studies, such as the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, and for national

surveys, such as the National Medical Expenditures Survey and the National

Health and Nutrition Examination Survey and its various supplements.
Despite this activity and progress, many difficulties obstruct the realization
of this committee's vision. Some problems relate to the content and structure of

current health databases; others pertain more to the difficulties of creating and

maintaining comprehensive databases. One major drawback is that most

information gathered today reflects independent events and a single setting

(almost always hospital admissions). In the absence of computer-based patient
records, even hospital databases are often limited in the quality and quantity of
the patient data they contain. Correspondingly, databases often have little or no

information about ambulatory and other nonhospital services; thus, they lack

facts about primary care, despite the major impact that primary care has on the

public's health. Another, related challenge is that episodes of care
Šlongitudinalrecords that tell how patients fare "in the system as a whole"
Šcannot easily be
constructed. In addition, currently available information is not (or cannot easily

be) adjusted for important characteristics about patients' sociodemographic

circumstances or health status, and this makes it difficult to compare the

performance of providers and practitioners or to set insurance premiums or

capitated payments correctly and without bias.
Databases created from information generated by the use of health care
services, such as those assembled from insurance claim forms, reflect

information only on users of the health care system; missing is information on
INTRODUCTION30
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.those who never seek or obtain care. As a consequence, planners and others
usually cannot use today's databases to learn much about the population as a

whole or to assess unmet needs in a community. Moreover, many contemporary

databases are essentially archives of information collected at some time in the

(possibly remote) past; this retrospective aspect of the information may give

little if any support for real-time patient care. Furthermore, much more
information will be available on what was done to patients (the processes of
care) than on the end results (the outcomes) of that care, yet those wishing to

make decisions about treatments or providers prefer, indeed require, outcome-

related information. Even the clinical information, if gathered through insurance

claims or encounter forms, may be quite limited and of questionable reliability

and validity; if obtained from paper-based medical records, then considerable

manual abstraction and computer data entry are required (all tasks that

introduce their own inaccuracies and biases). The cleanest and most

comprehensive data on some topics may come from research projects, but such

databases have their own limitations in populations covered, timeliness, and

access by individuals or organizations not involved in research.
Other issues may be more prosaic, albeit no less difficult. Chief among
these is cost. Creating and maintaining databases, whatever the original source

(s) of information, can be expensive. When private entities bear the costs, they

may see little reason to share information with others who have not helped to

shoulder the monetary burden; when the public sector bears the costs, other

claims on the public treasury may take precedence.
Another obstacle is competition in the health field. Rival health care
providers or insurers have not been (and are not likely to be) willing to share

what they may regard as sensitive, proprietary information. Antitrust

considerations may also play a role in the reluctance of possible or actual

competitors to share data; health care reform may prompt reinterpretation of

antitrust rules, but this area was well beyond the committee's charge or

expertise. Even organizations that do not directly compete may see little or no
incentive to make their databases available to others. In any case, such groups
may not wish to participate in collective actions to set standards for

terminology, definitions of data elements, or electronic transmission of

information; this has been especially true for organizations whose long-

established internal systems would be expensive to change or upgrade.
Finally, as reasons accumulate for creating large health databases, so do
the possibilities that such databases (or, more correctly, their users) will do

harm to patients, to providers (institutions, physicians, and others), to payers

(government, private insurers, and corporations), and to the public at large. The

balance between the advantages of such databases and their potential for harm,

or at least unfairness, to some groups is not yet clear, and the question of

whether and how such entities ought to evolve has been
INTRODUCTION31
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.incompletely explored. This perception of potential harm from the proliferation
of large databases is itself a barrier to their development.
The OpportunityIn the past few years, diverse groups of researchers, business leaders, and
policymakers at state and regional levels have begun to design and develop an

array of databases, networks, repositories, and the like. These are intended to

overcome some of the above problems and to permit far more sophisticated

analyses of community health needs, practice patterns, and costs and quality of

care than has been possible to date. The interests that have prompted such

action cover a broad range: controlling business costs attributable to health
benefits; applying computer technologies to decrease costs of processing
insurance claims; evaluating and improving health care; conducting technology

assessments; planning the expansion and contraction of health care facilities and

services across the nation; and transmitting medical history information for an

increasingly mobile population. The success of health care reform
Šas well as
the ability to assess the effect of a reformed system on the health of the public
Šdepends on access to the kinds of data that too often are unavailable.
Coincident with this conjunction of needs, interests, and enthusiasm are
greatly enhanced electronic capabilities for data management in many aspects

of daily life. Comprehensive, computer-based health data files can easily be

linked, and information from those files can be moved essentially

instantaneously. Thus, an unparalleled opportunity exists to apply computer

technologies creatively to address many of the informational needs and data

problems noted above. This report focuses on the actions that might be taken to

foster such action and progress by what the IOM committee terms 
healthdatabase organizations.HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS
Many kinds of health databases, networks, and repositories exist today,
although they differ in many characteristics. They may be created by business

coalitions, built by entities supported with private funds, mandated by state

health legislation, or established by federal action. For purposes of this report,

these entities are collectively termed 
health database organizations
 (HDOs).As ideally conceptualized by the committee, and discussed more fully in
Chapter 2, HDOs have several important characteristics in common. They:
INTRODUCTION32
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   operate under a single, common authority;
   acquire and maintain information from a wide variety of sources and
put their databases to multiple uses;
   have files containing person-identified and person-identifiable data;
1   serve a specific, defined geographic area;
   have inclusive population files;
   have comprehensive data with elements that include administrative,
clinical, health status, and satisfaction information;
   manipulate data electronically; and
   support electronic access for real-time use.
The prospect of creating these entities has raised numerous issues. Among
the more conspicuous are: (1) worries on the part of health care providers and

clinicians about use or misuse of the information that HDOs will compile and

release and (2) alarm on the part of consumers, patients, and their physicians
about how well the privacy and confidentiality of personal health information
will be guarded. Addressing these two concerns was the chief focus of the IOM

committee appointed to conduct this study. A third issue
Šthe technical and
political feasibility of building such repositories of health information and

assuring that the expected benefits are achieved
Šis often voiced, but
addressing it was beyond the scope of the study.
THE INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE STUDY
The direct impetus for this study came from discussions between staff of
the John A. Hartford Foundation and the IOM in the early 1990s. The Hartford

Foundation has a long-standing interest in issues relating to the generation and
application of information to improve health care delivery and to increase the
value of health care spending. Its interests have intensified in the present

context of vastly greater computer capabilities in the health care sector,

increasing attention to health matters in the business community, rising interest

among health professionals in understanding the effectiveness and

appropriateness of the health care services they deliver, and growing

sophistication among consumers about health care matters. In
1 Person-identified means that the record contains an obvious individual-related
identifier such as name or Social Security number. 
Person-identifiable means that the
record contains a variety of facts that collectively can be used to infer the identity of the
individual. That is, person-identified is a subset of person-identifiable data. These two
related terms are discussed more fully in 
Chapter 2.INTRODUCTION33
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.this framework, the foundation had supported earlier IOM studies on computer-
based patient records (IOM, 1991a) and clinical practice guidelines (IOM,

1992a). It now had specific questions concerning potential obstacles to the

successful implementation of regional health data networks or repositories
Šknown as Community Health Management Information Systems (CHMISs)
Šwhose creation it was supporting in several areas of the country.
2The Study Committee and Its Charge
In early 1992 the IOM appointed a study committee that conducted the
major part of its work between March 1992 and December 1993.
3 The study
committee, chaired by Roger Bulger, M.D., consisted of 16 individuals (see

roster) with expertise in the administration of medical centers and academic

health centers, the practice of medicine, health insurance, utilization

management, use of large administrative and research databases for research
purposes, administration of large (nonhealth) corporations, consumer services,
health and privacy law, ethics, data security, informatics, and state health data

organizations.During meetings and other study activities, the committee addressed the
charge given below, which incorporated both the concerns of the Hartford

Foundation (about what was then termed regional health data networks) and a

somewhat wider set of issues and concepts that committee members themselves

believed significant:
The study committee will examine regional health data networks and possible
impediments to their effective implementation. The focus will be on ways to
facilitate cooperative regional efforts among payers, employers, insurers,
health care providers, and other parties that will be practical, useful, and
acceptable to a wide array of community interests and mem
2 Apart from the major support for this project from the Hartford Foundation,
additional funding was made available by the American Health Information Management
Association, Electronic Data Systems Corporation (EDS), and Science Applications
International Corporation. The interests of these groups varied widely and are reflected
in the committee charge; the particular concern with ethical problems of privacy and

confidentiality expressed by EDS were addressed not only by committee discussions but
also by reliance on IOM reports being prepared at the same time that dealt directly or
indirectly with these matters (IOM, 1993b; IOM, 1993e).
3 The IOM committee conducted this project chiefly during the 18 months before the
Clinton administration introduced its Health Security Act in the fall of 1993. Therefore,
the study was neither designed nor intended to reflect specifics of that or any of the other
health care reform proposals that were being debated as this report was being released.
Although the committee takes no stance on the desirability or feasibility of elements of
the various contending proposals, it does note throughout its report the features of the

administration's proposals most germane to its formal charge.
INTRODUCTION34
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.bers. The study will address privacy, confidentiality, security, and other
concerns about health-related information in several kinds of regional data
repositories and files in the broad context of the uses to which these databases
might be put. Specifically, the committee will seek to understand more about
databases now in existence and those now under development and will

consider how current impediments to their successful implementation might be
addressed in the context of public and private decision making about the costs,
quality, appropriateness, effectiveness, and cost-effectiveness of health care
services and care providers. The committee will seek information from many
sources (e.g., site visits, expert panels or workshops, focus groups,

commissioned papers) and will produce an NRC-reviewed report.
4Questions Confronting the Study Committee
The IOM committee took as a given that, even as it conducted its
investigations, a variety of HDOs were being created and moving into

operational phases. It thus initially addressed itself to two critical "downstream"

questions: (1) What current dangers arising from electronic data interchange

and the widespread sharing of personal health data might continue, be

exacerbated, be ameliorated, or be prevented by such entities? (2) What new

harms might be anticipated and minimized or avoided by design? Within the

broad sweep of these questions, several more specific issues surfaced during the

study.First, how will HDOs be governed?
 Developers, providers, consumer
representatives, and others ask who will and should own these organizations,

what sorts of organizations they will be, and how they should be governed. The

different legal mandates that might give rise to such entities and contribute to

their effectiveness also come into play. For instance, HDOs might emerge in the

private sector as the result of the interests of a business coalition or provider

association. Conversely, state legislation might prompt and direct their

development. Yet other data repositories might come about through a

combination of public- and private-sector interests, data sources, and governing

structures.54 Procedures of the National Research Council (NRC)
Šthe administrative arm of the
National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute
of Medicine-establish rigorous requirements for expert peer review of all committee
reports resulting from the activities of those organizations. Reports such as this one are
not released to the public or the sponsoring agencies or institutions until that review is
successfully completed.
5 The logistics and costs of HDO implementation and operation arise naturally in this
context. The committee did not explore these matters directly, however, because little if
any empirical information was available to the study and because the committee felt that

these issues would be highly idiosyncratic to locales.
INTRODUCTION35
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Second, what is the scope of an HDO?
 One factor is whether such
databases can be designed and implemented to ensure that they encompass a

given region's population, not just the users of health care in the area. The more

inclusive and comprehensive the database, the more likely it is to have value for

a broad range of users and uses, such as research into the epidemiology of

disease or the effectiveness of medical treatments, health care planning, and
quality assurance and improvement. Clearly, however, the more expansive the
database, the more difficult and more expensive it is to create and to maintain.

The arguments concerning the breadth of the population covered relate equally

to health care providers; that is, databases that include 
all independent
practitioners and types of facilities are certain to be more useful than those that,

for example, cover only physicians with hospital admitting privileges.
Third, how good will the data be? 
Many of the experts contributing to the
IOM committee's fact-finding efforts raised questions about data accuracy,

quality, comprehensiveness, reliability, and validity. This led many committee

members to wonder how the public, policymakers, providers, and others can

determine whether data are factual, sufficiently complete, and appropriate for

the analyses in which they are used. Even when data for a given purpose appear
to be adequate in these respects, many observers worry about using data for
aims other than those originally intended; a case in point is the use of

information originally intended for administrative functions to support patient

care or quality assessment applications.
Fourth, what about the "safety" of personal health data?
 Many individuals
question whether private information about an individual (however "private" is

construed by the individual in question) can be kept private and confidential in

these databases, especially when such information is accessible over electronic

networks. Aggregation of personal health data in data repositories greatly
increases the possible benefits as well as the potential for harm. Thus, many
wonder whether it will be possible to assure the public that very sensitive

personal health data will be protected, and they ponder the circumstances under

which various users should gain access to person-identifiable data.
Fifth, how "secure" will these HDOs be? 
Apart from protecting privacy
and confidentiality through rules about access to data files that contain person-

identified information or about release of person-identified information to

others, what security measures for the system as a whole can and should be put

in place? Many experts state that the threats of breaches of security are myriad
and sometimes difficult to detect; although less technologically oriented, lay
persons worry as well about unauthorized access to their personal information.

All consider that finding ways to prevent, or alternatively to detect and mitigate,

such security problems is a significant challenge.
INTRODUCTION36
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sixth, who will see and use whose data? 
The rules that now govern access
to patient-, provider-, employer-, and payer-specific data, and should continue

to do so in the future, all occasion concern. The reasons for and levels of

apprehension differ widely depending on the potential users
Špatients(including their families and proxies); health care providers (and their

employees); insurers and third-party administrators; employers (including those
who self-insure medical care for employees); researchers; local health care
planners; clinical and health services researchers; community and consumer

interest groups; attorneys (including patients' attorneys); law enforcement

officials; and other interested parties. For health care providers, employers, and

insurers, data on competitors may be of intense interest; similarly, plaintiffs'

lawyers in malpractice suits will seek to acquire information from HDOs

concerning other patients cared for by the defendants. Many observers question

whether access to such information should be permitted.
As another case in point: even if access to or use of person-identified
information is severely restricted, one can still inquire about the proper uses of

data on defined populations. For instance, should analyses be done and made

public (even if individuals are never identified) on groups characterized by

having certain diseases or belonging to a given socioeconomic or ethnic group?
One significant issue relating to health care providers is whether different
rules should govern access to and public disclosure of data on specific

institutions 
versus named practitioners. One can also ask about the propriety of
releasing information on groups or categories of providers and practitioners. A

principle of fairness in the use of data lay behind much of the committee's

thinking on these matters.Seventh, how should information be made public?
 Given that HDOs meet
conditions for adequate data as well as those relating to security and to privacy

and confidentiality of person- or patient-specific information, a further question

is how to ensure that they release and disseminate useful knowledge and

information in ways that can be understood by the public at large.
Eighth, where do current laws and statutes fit in?
 Present-day laws and
regulations at both the national and state levels may pose constraints for

regional HDOs, or they may not affect them at all. The impact of current

statutes will depend on the issue at hand, the jurisdiction under consideration,

and the reach of existing laws to secondary records. Among the issues are

barriers to accessing certain categories of data, such as information on mental

health or substance abuse treatment, and statutes establishing time limitations

on keeping (or destroying) data.
INTRODUCTION37
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STUDY ACTIVITIES
The committee met five times between March 1992 and August 1993 to
debate these matters. Several outside experts (see 
Appendix A
 to this volume)
were invited to three of these meetings. They described analogs of regional

HDOs and other databases and discussed several specific problems with the

committee, such as the range of organizations, agencies, and individuals who

now seek access to patient health records and possible approaches for
addressing misuse of patient data.
To avail itself of expert and detailed legal analysis of issues beyond the
time resources of its members, the committee commissioned a paper from an

expert in privacy and confidentiality matters (Belair, 1993). The paper

identified privacy interests relevant to HDOs (chiefly of the CHMIS variety);

examined the impact of existing law on these organizations; advanced some
short- and long-term options and strategies for privacy protection of patient-
identified information; and gave particular consideration to the status and

protection of clinical and other patient-identified data once they move beyond

legal or other protections afforded to primary medical records.
When IOM studies with national significance involve activities initiated at
the grassroots, state, and local levels, the IOM often makes a concerted effort to

reach out to a wide range of people in those locales. The aims are to learn about

the activities and to understand the views of interested parties about issues

pertinent to the local efforts, and then to apply those lessons, as appropriate, to
broad national, professional, and policy-related issues. The IOM takes care, in
these circumstances, not to evaluate or draw public judgments about local efforts.
During the summer and fall of 1992, the committee conducted five major
site visits to the following cities (and nearby locales): Memphis, Tennessee;

Cleveland, Ohio; Des Moines, Iowa; Seattle, Washington; and Albany and

Rochester, New York. During these site visits two or three committee members
and IOM staff met with groups developing HDOs in business coalitions and
other organizations, practicing physicians and representatives of local medical

societies, insurers and third-party claims administrators, health maintenance

organizations, consumers, hospital administrators and hospital associations,

researchers, state and county health officials, employers, and computer system

developers. (Sites and organizations visited are listed in 
Appendix A.)ORGANIZATION OF THE REPORT
The committee considered all the questions raised earlier but focused on
two primary issues. The first is the public release of descriptive and evaluative

data on the costs, quality, and other attributes of health care
INTRODUCTION38
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.institutions, practitioners, and other providers, which the committee assumed
would be a major function if not a hallmark of HDOs. The second involves the

opportunities, risks, and remedies for protecting the privacy and confidentiality

of data that do (or may) identify individuals in their role as patients or

consumers, not as clinicians or providers. These topics are taken up,

respectively, in Chapters 
3 and 
4. Before that, 
Chapter 2
 describes health
databases and HDOs in more detail, discusses their ostensible benefits in
general and with respect to a wide range of potential users, and introduces some

caveats about how their intrinsic limitations (e.g., poor or incomplete data) must

be recognized and overcome.
COMMENTThis report reviews the tremendous promise of regional health data
networks for evaluating and improving health care and controlling its

administrative costs. While the potential for great benefit to the public may be

understood by those in the relevant fields, the potential for harm or lack of

fairness in their use may create doubt and fear in many.
Powerful technologies (and electronic technologies are increasingly
powerful) can be deliberately or inadvertently misused and cause great harm, in

this case primarily in the loss of privacy and confidentiality and the resultant

harms this may engender. To gain public support for the vision in this report,

and for the public to make best use of the health-related information that will be

released, carefully planned strategies must be developed for education about the
data networks, about how the data can be used to help the public access and
obtain better care, and about what each individual needs to know about the right

to privacy and confidentiality and the steps being taken to protect their rights.

The responsibility for providing usable public information should be assumed

by those who undertake to make the vision of regional data networks become

reality.INTRODUCTION39
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Health Databases and Health Database
Organizations: Uses, Benefits, and Concerns
No one engaged in any part of health care delivery or planning today can
fail to sense the immense changes on the horizon, even if the silhouettes of
those changes, let alone the details, are in dispute. 
1 Beyond debate,
1 The Clinton administration's proposed Health Security Act (HSA, 1993) gives
appreciable attention to information systems and related matters. It calls for the
establishment of a National Health Board to oversee the creation of an electronic data
network consisting of regional centers that collect, compile, and transmit information
(Sec. 5103). The board will, among other duties, provide technical assistance on (1) the
promotion of community-based health information systems and (2) the promotion of

patient care information systems that collect data at the point of care or as a by-product
of the delivery of care (Sec. 5106).
The types of information collected would include: enrollment and disenrollment in
health plans; clinical encounters and other items and services provided by health care

providers; administrative and financial transactions and activities of participating states,
regional alliances, corporate alliances, health plans, health care providers, employers,
and individuals; number and demographic characteristics of eligible individuals residing
in each alliance area; payment of benefits; utilization management; quality management;
grievances, and fraud or misrepresentation in claims or benefits (Sec. 5101).
The HSA further specifies the use of (1) uniform paper forms containing standard data
elements, definitions, and instructions for completion; (2) requirements for use of
uniform health data sets with common definitions to standardize the collection and
transmission of data in electronic form; (3) uniform presentation requirements for data in

electronic form; and (4) electronic data interchange requirements for the exchange of
data among automated health information systems (Sec. 5002). It also calls for a national
health security card that will permit access to information about health coverage
although it will contain only a minimum amount of information (Sec. 5105) (Health
Security Act. Title V. Quality and Consumer Protection. Part 1. Health Information

Systems).HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
40Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.however, is the need for much more and much better information on use of
health care services and on the outcomes of that care. The needs are quite

broad: health care reform; evaluation of clinical care and health care delivery;

administration of health plans, groups, and facilities; and public health planning.
Policymakers, researchers, health professionals, purchasers, patients, and
others continue to be frustrated in their attempts to acquire health information.

They may not be able to determine with confidence the outcomes, quality,

effectiveness, appropriateness, and costs of care for different segments of the

population, for different settings, services, and providers, and for different
mechanisms of health care delivery and reimbursement. When this is so, they
can say little, with confidence, about the value of the investment in health care

for population subgroups, regions, or the nation as a whole.
In principle, this information can be acquired through numerous avenues,
such as surveys, electronic financial transactions for health insurance claims,

computer-based patient records (CPRs), and disease registries. In practice, no

one system will suit every need or produce information appropriate for every

question. As introduced in 
Chapter 1
, however, health database organizations
(HDOs) hold considerable promise as a reasonably comprehensive source of the
information needed to:
  assess the health of the public and patterns of illness and injury;
  identify unmet regional health needs;
  document patterns of health care expenditures on inappropriate,
wasteful, or potentially harmful services;
  find cost-effective care providers; and
  improve the quality of care in hospitals, practitioners' offices, clinics,
and various other health care settings.
The latter half of this chapter outlines these and other benefits of HDOs,
the databases they access or control, and the analytic and information
dissemination activities they undertake. It also discusses the applications that
user groups might have for different types of databases. The committee

advances some views on how major concerns about these databases, chiefly

relating to the quality of their data, might be addressed, and it makes two

recommendations. In preparation for those sections, the chapter next offers

some definitions of key concepts and terms, explores the basic construct of

HDOs (which the committee sees as the administrative and operational structure

for regional health databases), and provides some examples of the variety of

entities that now exist, are being implemented as this report was written, or are

envisioned for the future.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
41Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEFINITIONSEven among experts, terms such as database and network are not used in
the same manner. For this report, the committee advances the following

working definitions for certain major concepts, building to its view of an HDO.
DatabaseThe term 
database embraces many different concepts: from paper records
maintained by a single practitioner to the vast computerized collections of

insurance claims for Medicare beneficiaries; from files of computerized patient

encounter forms maintained by health plans to discharge abstract databases of

all hospitals in a given state; from cancer and trauma registries maintained by

health institutions and researchers to major national health survey data of
federal agencies. As commonly used and meant in this report, a database (or,
sometimes, data bank, data set, or data file) is ''a large collection of data in a

computer, organized so that it can be expanded, updated, and retrieved rapidly

for various uses" 
(Webster's New World Dictionary,
 2nd ed.).
Although databases may eventually be linked (or linkable) to primary
medical records held by health care practitioners, this report addresses

databases composed of secondary records.
2 Secondary files are generated from
primary records or are separate from any patient encounter (as in the case of

eligibility or enrollment files for health plans and public programs). They are
not under the control of a practitioner or anyone designated by the practitioner,
nor are they under the management of any health institution (e.g., the medical

records department of a hospital). Furthermore, they are not intended to be 
themajor source of information about specific patients for the treating physician.

Secondary databases facilitate 
reuse of data that have been gathered for another
purpose (e.g., patient care, billing, or research) but that, in new applications,

may generate new knowledge.
2 According to the IOM (1991a, p. 11): "A 
primary patient record
 is used by health
care professionals while providing patient care services to review patient data or
document their own observations, actions, or instructions. A 
secondary patient record
 is
derived from the primary record and contains selected data elements to aid nonclinical
users (i.e., persons not involved in direct patient care) in supporting, evaluation, or
advancing patient care." At present, most medical records are maintained on paper, not

in computers, and the U.S. General Accounting Office provides the following startling
figures on the equivalent volume of paper: "We estimate that the 34 million annual U.S.
hospital admissions and 1.2 billion physician visits could generate the equivalent of 10
billion pages of medical records" (GAO, 1993a, p. 2).
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
42Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The committee distinguishes between databases composed of secondary
records and CPRs or CPR systems (IOM, 1991a; Ball and Collen, 1992), but its

broader vision of computer-based health information systems includes direct

ties to CPR systems. Many experts argue that until CPR systems are linked in

some fashion to such data repositories or networks, neither will be complete or

reach their full health care, research, or policymaking potential.
3This chapter cites several examples of health databases used today for
many purposes, but the ones noted are highly selective and intended to illustrate

particular applications or kinds of data maintained. To understand the range of

databases that HDOs might access and why there might be concern about

protection of personal data, readers are referred to the many inventories of

health databases. Publications from the National Association of Health Data
Organizations (NAHDO) describe state and insurance databases (NAHDO,
1988, 1993). For databases related to federal programs supported by the

Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), readers can consult

publications and manuals from the Health Care Financing Administration

(HCFA, for Medicare and Medicaid), the Public Health Service (PHS, for

surveys conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics; see also Gable,

1990; IOM/CBASSE, 1992; NCHS, 1993; Smith, 1993), and the Agency for

Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR, for the National Medical

Expenditure Surveys and Patient Outcome Research Teams [PORTs]; AHCPR,

1990a). Major research databases include those developed for the RAND

Corporation's Health Insurance Experiment (a large-scale social experiment

conducted in the late 1970s and early 1980s on the utilization, expenditures, and
outcomes effects of different levels of cost sharing [Newhouse and Insurance
Experiment Group, 1993]), which were turned into a large number of carefully

documented public-use tapes.
Key Attributes of Databases
In reviewing the considerable variation in databases that might be
accessed, controlled, or acquired by HDOs, the committee sought a simple way

to characterize them by key attributes. It decided on two critical
3 One major hurdle to the development of CPRs involves standards for vocabulary,
structure and content, messaging, and security, according to GAO reports (1991, 1993a);
without standards for uniform electronic recording and transmission of medical data,

effective automated medical record systems will be delayed. This committee did not
examine these technical issues, although they pertain as well to large-scale regional
HDOs; arguably, the government and the private sector will need to move more
forcefully on development of such standards
Šperhaps moving beyond near-total
reliance on voluntary efforts
Šif CPRs, CPR systems, and regional health databases and
networks are to succeed.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
43Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.dimensions of databases: 
comprehensiveness and 
inclusiveness. (Because these
terms are used with distinct meanings in this report, they are italicized

whenever used.)Comprehensiveness. Comprehensiveness
 describes the completeness of
records of patient care events and information relevant to an individual patient

(Table 2-1
).4 It refers to the amount of information one has on an individual
both for each patient encounter with the health care system and for all of a

patient's encounters over time (USDHHS, 1991, refers to this as completeness).

A record that is 
comprehensive contains: demographic data, administrative data,
health risks and health status, patient medical history, current management of
health conditions, and outcomes data. Each category is described briefly below.
   Demographic data
 consist of facts such as age (or date of birth),
gender, race and ethnic origin, marital status, address of residence,

names of and other information about immediate family members, and

emergency information. Information about employment status (and

employer), schooling and education, and some indicator of

socioeconomic class might also appear.
   Administrative data
 include facts about health insurance such as
eligibility and membership, dual coverage (when relevant), and

required copayments and deductibles for a given benefit package. With

respect to services provided (e.g., diagnostic tests or outpatient

procedures), such data also typically include charges and perhaps

amounts paid. Administrative data commonly identify providers with a
unique identifier and possibly give additional provider-specific facts;
the latter might include kind of practitioner (physician, podiatrist,

psychologist), physician specialty, and nature of institution (general or

specialty hospital, physician office or clinic, home care agency,

nursing home, and so forth).
   Health risks and health status
 Health risk information reflects behavior
and lifestyle (e.g., whether an individual uses tobacco products or

engages regularly in strenuous exercise) and facts about family history

and genetic factors (e.g., whether an individual has first-degree family

members with a specific type of cancer or a propensity for

musculoskeletal disease).4 The discussion of 
comprehensiveness
 and 
inclusiveness of databases is couched in
terms of what might be regarded as the traditional domain of medical care, including
mental health care. Clearly, more advanced databases could include information on
dental care and care provided by health professionals that practice independently, such as
nurse-practitioners and nurse-midwives, acupuncturists, or alternative healers of various
sorts. Even more far-reaching databases might contain information on sociomedical

services provided through, for instance, day care and home care for adults or children.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
44Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
45Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health status (or health-related quality of life), generally reported by
individuals themselves, reflects domains of health such as physical functioning,

mental and emotional well-being, cognitive functioning, social and role

functioning, and perceptions of one's health in the past, present, and future and

compared with that of one's peers. Health status and quality-of-life measures are

commonly considered outcomes of health care, but evaluators and researchers
also need such information to take account in their analyses of the mix of
patients and the range of severity of health conditions.
   Patient medical history
 involves data on previous medical encounters
such as hospital admissions, surgical procedures, pregnancies and live

births, and the like; it also includes information on past medical

problems and possibly family history or events (e.g., alcoholism or

parental divorce). Again, although such facts are significant for good

patient care, they may also be important for case-mix and severity
adjustment.   Current medical management
 includes the content of encounter forms
or parts of the patient record. Such information might reflect health

screening, current health problems and diagnoses, allergies (especially

those to medications), diagnostic or therapeutic procedures performed,

laboratory tests carried out, medications prescribed, and counseling
provided.   Outcomes data
 encompass a wide choice of measures of the effects of
health care and the aftermath of various health problems across a

spectrum from death to high levels of functioning and well-being; they

can also reflect health care events such as readmission to hospital or

unexpected complications or side effects of care. Finally, they often
include measures of satisfaction with care. Outcomes assessed weeks
or months after health care events, and by means of reports directly

from individuals (or family members), are desirable, although these are

likely to be the least commonly found in the secondary databases under

consideration here.The more 
comprehensive the database is, the more current and possibly
more sensitive information about individuals is likely to be. This suggests that

comprehensiveness as envisioned here will have a direct correlation with
concerns about privacy and confidentiality. By analogy, the Department of

Defense treats information with increasingly higher levels of security as it

becomes more 
comprehensive, even when the aggregated information is not
considered sensitive (Ware, 1993).
Some patient events are unlikely to appear in databases (depending on how
they originate); missing from the databases considered here are services that

may have been advised but neither sought nor rendered
Šscreeningexaminations not given, physician follow-up visits not advised or kept, and

prescriptions given but not filled. Other reasons for missing data involve out-of-
area care for an individual who is otherwise in the database; an example is
medical services provided in Florida to New York residents
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
46Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.when they are on vacation or living part of the year out of state. Yet another is
when patients do not make claims against health insurance policies (regardless

of where they are rendered); this transaction may not be recorded through any

of the usual claims processing mechanisms used to generate the database.
Furthermore, databases may never be sufficiently 
comprehensive for
research or outcomes analysis, especially if the choice of core data elements is

parsimonious. Thus, when the question at hand is health status and outcomes

long after health care has been rendered, HDO staff or outside researchers may

need the capability and authority to contact individuals (providers and possibly
patients) for information about outcomes and satisfaction with care. Such
outreach activities would require some adequate funding mechanism.
Inclusiveness. Inclusiveness
 refers to which populations in a geographic
area are included in a database. The more 
inclusive a database, the more it
approaches coverage of 100 percent of the population that its developers intend

to include. Databases that aim to provide information on the health of the
community ought to include an enumeration of all residents of the community
(e.g., metropolitan area, state) so that the information accurately reflects the

entire population of the region, regardless of insurance category. Conversely,

inclusiveness is reduced when membership is restricted to certain subgroups or
when individuals expected to be in the database are missing (
Table 2-2
). For
instance, a database that is intended to include all residents in a local area may

include only those who are insured and file claims for services; it misses those

not insured and those who, although insured, do not use health services. An

insurance claims database that does not include members of a health

maintenance organization (HMO) because no claims are filed will also not be

inclusive for the geographic area.
Databases may be (and often are) designed to include only subsets of the
entire population of a geographic area: those eligible for certain kinds of

insurance, such as enrollees (subscribers, their spouses and dependents) in

commercial insurance plans; persons receiving care from specific kinds of.
providers or in certain settings (e.g., prehospital emergency care from
emergency medical services and hospital emergency departments); persons with

a given set of conditions (e.g., a cancer or trauma registry); an age group such

as those age 65 and older (e.g., Medicare beneficiary files);
5 residents of a
defined geographic area or political jurisdiction or scientifically selected

samples of individuals, as in major health surveys. Clearly these categories are

not mutually exclusive
Šindividuals (as well as providers)
5 This is illustrative only because Medicare files also include younger but disabled
beneficiaries and persons with end-stage renal disease.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
47Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.can and do appear in more than one such database. The potential benefits of the
database, however, will increase as the database moves toward being inclusive

of the entire population of a defined geographic area.
TABLE 2-2 Inclusiveness: Populations Covered as a Critical Dimension of Health
Care Databases
Defined Populations
ExamplesNationalAll persons physically resident in the 50
states, District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,
and the Trust Territories
Geographic areaAll persons resident in a defined
geopolitical or other describable area,
such as an MSA
Insurance typeHMO, indemnity, Medicaid, none

Site and care settingHospital, nursing home, clinic

Disease, injury typeCancer, trauma registry

Age or other demographic characteristic
Age 65 or older, belonging to a defined
ethnic or racial group
NOTE: MSA = Metropolitan statistical area.
HDOs will have to be clear about what groups are missing when
describing their databases and the results of their analyses. Perhaps more

important, HDOs should seek ways to ensure that all relevant populations are

included, so that their analyses accurately reflect the population of the region
and, thereby, yield estimates of the levels of underuse of health care in their
respective regions.Table 2-3
 summarizes these two attributes.
6 The dummy matrix, al
6 The congressional Physician Payment Review Commission (PPRC) has been in the
forefront of advocates for a national data system (PPRC, 1992, 1993). In its 1992 annual
report, PPRC described an 
"all-patient database"
 [emphasis in the original],
conceptualized as a "network of local or regional data processing centers ... to streamline
the transfer of administrative information for payment and service-use tracking

purposes" (p. 269). The report goes on to posit "parallel organizing entities ... to
coordinate the use of these data [and] the data processing centers and the organizing
entities would make up an 
all-patient data network"
 (p. 269). The commissioners also
envisioned the network evolving into a "means to link and assimilate more detailed
clinical information." Although the general thrust of the PPRC idea is consonant with the
long-range views of this IOM committee, the specific understanding of what a database
or network is differs. In defining an all-patient database, the commissioners appear to
have in mind what this committee terms 
inclusiveness; what the PPRC report lays out as
"core data elements'' in that database approaches what the IOM report calls
comprehensiveness.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
48Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.though empty, illustrates how databases can be described, evaluated, and
differentiated from each other. Cell 
a represents patient populations and data
elements that are included in a database. Cell 
b depicts the individuals who are
missing from a database that is otherwise fairly 
comprehensive. Cell 
crepresents patient nonevents and missing data in a database that is otherwise

reasonably inclusive.  Cell 
d represents missing individuals and missing data.
To the extent cells 
b, c,
 and especially 
d are large, the database in question will
be less able to provide extensive, or unbiased, information; the sizes of cells 
b,c, and d are, therefore, three determinants of database quality.
TABLE 2-3 Characteristics of Databases According to Two Critical Dimensions
COMPREHENSIVENESS (Data Elements)
Inclusiveness (Population)
HighLowHighab
LowcdOther Characteristics of Databases
The more 
comprehensive and 
inclusive databases are, the more they
facilitate detailed and sophisticated uses and, in turn, entail both greater

anticipated benefits and possible harms. The magnitude of either benefits or

harms can depend on several other important properties of databases, however,

as noted below.
Linkage over time.
 The ability to analyze patterns, quality, and costs of
care over a period of time may be very important to users. They may want to

construct episodes of care or develop other longitudinal profiles; cases in point

(respectively) involve all the care provided to a specific patient for a discrete

course of illness or injury, regardless of site or setting, and compilations of

information on services provided by a local HMOs over rolling five-year

periods. Such studies require not only unique identifiers for patients and

providers (see below) but also a record structure that permits analysts to link

dates and times with patient care events, problems, and diagnoses.
Timeliness. Facts based on patient-provider interactions and other relevant
information (e.g., employment, health plan, health status, or outcomes)
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
49Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.should be entered or updated frequently enough to permit their timely use and
analysis. If databases are to be of assistance with direct patient care, then

information must be sufficiently up to date that caregivers can rely on it in all

clinical decision-making situations.
Accuracy and completeness. 
 Data used for clinical care
Šdecision making
about a given individual
Šmust be of far greater accuracy and completeness
than those required for administrative uses. Databases used for clinical decision

making must, in describing an individual, describe 
only that individual and do
so accurately. For instance, missing or out-of-date data or files that commingle
data for more than one individual under a single identifier have grave potential
for harm. In addition, correcting errors found at a later time must be possible;

ideally, alerting past users of the database to those errors and corrections ought

to be possible as well.
Control, ownership, and governance.
 Whether a given database has been
established by the public or the private sector (or is some hybrid) will have

important implications for 
inclusiveness and access. For instance, databases
addressed in this report may be publicly supported
Šespecially at the state level
Šand may be operated and administered by a private entity. Some state
hospital discharge databases
Šsuch as the Health Care Policy Corporation in
Iowa and the Massachusetts Health Data Consortium
Šare of this kind.
Alternatively, they may be developed, maintained, and financed wholly in the

private sector, such as those developed by professional or health care

organizations, insurers, or business coalitions. A database created by state or

federal law can require participation; that is, it can demand that health

professionals, institutions, and patients participate in providing data. For

example, Washington state has passed legislation that mandates development of

a statewide data system by a health services commission that will identify a set

of health care data elements to be submitted by all providers (e.g., hospitals and

physicians) (Engrossed Second Substitute Senate Bill 5304, 1993). To the

extent databases are developed and maintained in the public sector or are
networked with public-sector databases (especially at the federal level), they
will be subject to regulations that differ from those affecting databases operated

purely within the private sector for the benefit of private sponsors. Given the

evolving nature of state and national health care reform plans and programs,

movement toward electronic data interchange (EDI), progress toward CPRs,

and emergence of various hybrid arrangements for financing and delivering

health care, the development of HDOs is taking place in very different (and

perhaps unpredictable) environments that will likely have disparate effects over

time.Origin of data.
 Databases can vary widely in the source(s) of their
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
50Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information. For example, data may come from hospital discharge abstracts,
self-completed questionnaires from patients or survey respondents, insurance

claims submissions, employer files, computer-based pharmacy files, CPRs, and

other sources.Hospital discharge abstracts are common sources of publicly held data: 36
states have mandates for the collection, analysis, and dissemination of hospital-

level information for prudent purchasing, decision making, education of the

public, and rate regulation. Such databases may be maintained by a variety of

entities, including: the Department of Insurance (North Carolina), a
freestanding health data commission (Iowa and Pennsylvania), a rate-setting
commission (Massachusetts), or the Department of Health (Minnesota, New

Jersey) (NAHDO, 1993). One well-known model is that of the New York

Statewide Planning and Research Cooperative System, called SPARCS, which

has been an influential source of information for research on hospital-specific

mortality (Hannan et al., 1989b).
An example of a survey database is the Medicare Current Beneficiary
Survey, a longitudinal panel survey that the HCFA Office of the Actuary

launched in September 1991. Individuals sampled from the Medicare enrolled

population are interviewed three times a year. The survey includes demographic

and behavioral data, health status and functioning, insurance coverage, financial

resources, family support, source of payment, use of Medicare and non-
Medicare services, and access and satisfaction. Information from the survey can
be linked to Medicare claims and other administrative data.
Person-identified and person-identifiable data.
 For purposes of this report,
person-identified data
 contain pieces of information or facts that singly or
collectively refer to one person and permit positive (or probable) identification

of that individual. An obvious piece of identifying information is an individual's

name. Other identifiers may be biometric, such as a fingerprint, a retinal print,

or a DNA pattern.
The committee uses the term 
person-identifiable to characterize
information that definitely or probably can be said to refer to a specific person.

It includes items of information (e.g., the fact of a physician visit on a given

day) that will allow identification of an individual when combined with other

facts (e.g., zip code of residence, age, or gender). To render data non-person-

identifiable, some data managers convert facts to a more general form before

releasing those data to others. For instance, date of birth may be converted to
age, date of admission to month of admission, or date of physician visit to
intervals between visits.
Concerns about misuse or improper disclosure of person-identifiable data
are likely to escalate as more health information is stored in computer files.

Ultimately, protecting patient identity in the commonly understood
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
51Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sense may become very difficult given increasing computer capabilities,
creative cross-linkages among data sets, and the usual curiosity of human beings.
Unique, universal person-identifiers.
 A unique identifier (1) applies to one
and only one person and (2) does not change over time. It includes the

biometric identifiers noted above as well as numeric or alphanumeric codes.

Health insurers, plans, and entitlement programs assign identifiers; among them

are the Social Security number (the basis of the health insurance claim numbers

used by Medicare) and other alphanumeric codes typically used by Medicaid

programs and commercial insurers. Such identifiers may be neither reliably
unique nor universal in the sense of linking health databases. Providers also
assign identifiers to patients
Šusually a medical record or account number
Šbutthey are not universal, as they are not used beyond that specific provider, and

generally they cannot be matched to identifiers assigned by other providers,

plans, or programs. The term universal as used here does 
not apply to identifiers
that could link health and nonhealth (e.g., financial) databases.
The extent to which unique and universal identifiers are available for
individuals in the database
Šfor instance, all persons in a geographic area, or all
users of the health system
Šmay prove to be a critical factor in the utility of that
database. They are a prerequisite for the construction of longitudinal records on

individual patients that can reflect their health care events and outcomes across

sites and time. Ideally, 
inclusive population-based databases will have unique
universal identifiers for all members of the relevant population group, so that
nonusers of the health care system can be taken into account in various analytic

applications. The need for a universal identifier and the debate about the use of

the Social Security number (or its derivatives) for this purpose are discussed in

detail in Chapter 4
.Nonvolitional identifying information
Šfor example, fingerprints or retinal
printsŠmay also be important, particularly for HDOs that intend to contribute
to direct patient care. These markers allow positive identification of individuals,

such as trauma victims, who cannot identify themselves, presuming of course

that the data about individuals are in the database. They may also help to ensure

that a patient record corresponds to the presenting patient both in delivering

patient care and in verifying eligibility for benefits.
Unique identifiers for health care providers and practitioners.
 This
characteristic pertains to individual practitioners, particularly physicians;

hospitals and other inpatient or residential facilities or institutions; HMOs as

well as independent practice associations (IPAs), preferred provider or
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
52Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ganizations (PPOs) and similar organized, integrated health systems; and
various other providers such as pharmacies (and pharmacy chains) and home

health agencies. HCFA assigns a universal physician identification number, or

UPIN, for records of care to Medicare patients. Because not all providers see

Medicare patients (e.g., pediatricians do not), however, UPINs are not a means

of identifying all practicing physicians in the country.
As with patient identifiers, unique identifiers for providers will ideally be
consistent over time and used for one and only one individual institution or

clinician. Failing that, HDOs will need to find ways to link multiple identifiers

(e.g., when a physician belongs to more than one health plan or bills from

different addresses with different tax numbers) and to assign individual

identifiers to a group using a single number (e.g., when all physicians in an
HMO use the HMO's identification number).
Data Network
A data network
 can be thought of as a set of databases that: (1) are hosted
on several computer systems interconnected with one another and to terminals

and (2) serve some community of users. Such a network will typically have a

number of attributes. First, the databases are dispersed over several machines;

each database or group of databases resides on one or more computer systems.
Second, the computer systems are often, but not necessarily, physically distant
from one another. Third, all the machines in the network are linked so that

information can be transmitted from one machine to another. Finally, each

machine has software to permit exchange of information among individual

systems in the network and, in turn, to allow individual users of the network to

query the many databases and to receive, analyze, and aggregate these data.

This report focuses on networks in which one or more common data elements

(e.g., patient name, provider identity, facility name) is a link parameter that

relates records in one database to those in others.
Databases in data networks may be linked by various physical or other
arrangements. These include telecommunications (e.g., microwave channels,

local-area networks, the public-switched network, satellite circuits), physical

transfer of magnetic tapes or disks, and dial-up connections. This report is

intended to apply to any or all of these mechanisms for linking databases; that

is, the term 
network does not imply here that an electrical connection between
computers must be in place (in contrast to the common terminology of
computer professionals, for whom 
network usually does include electrical
linkage).Hospitals, pharmacies, physicians' offices, insurance companies, public
program offices, and employers all generate inputs to databases that are

interconnected in such networks. This committee, however, is particularly
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
53Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.interested in data networks with linked databases that have, at a minimum, two
specific characteristics: (1) their linking implies or involves movement of health

data outside the care setting in which they have been generated and (2) they

include person-identified or person-identifiable data.
Health Database Organization
The Concept of HDOs
The committee chose the phrase 
health database organization
 (HDO) to
refer to entities that have access to (and possibly control of) databases and that

have as their chief mission the public release of data and of results of analyses

done on the databases under their control. For purposes of this report,
prototypical HDOs have the characteristics outlined in 
Chapter 1
; theseproperties may not, however, be present to the same degree in existing or

emerging HDOs today. As conceptualized by the committee, HDOs have a

number of crucial characteristics.
   They operate under a single, common authority.
   They 
acquire and maintain information from a wide variety of sources
in the health sector
Šfor example, institutions and facilities, agencies
and clinics, providers such as pharmacies, and physicians in private
practice. They might also obtain information from other sources not
directly connected with personal health care, such as the administrative

files or databases on persons covered by a specific insurance plan or

employed by a given company. In all these cases, HDOs might add and

update information periodically (from hourly to annually) or on a case-

specific basis (e.g., on all patients with a certain diagnosis or on all

providers of a certain type). They put these 
databases to multiple uses
(some of which may not yet be imagined), in contrast to administrative

or research databases created to perform specific tasks or to answer

only specific questions.   Files accessible to HDOs will include 
person-identified or person-
identifiable data.
   HDOs 
will serve a specific geographic area
 that is defined chiefly by
geographic or political boundaries (e.g., metropolitan area, county,

state) and will include those who reside in or receive services in that
area, or both.
   HDO 
population files will be inclusive,
 meaning that they include all
members of a defined population
Šfor instance, in a region
Šso that
denominators are known and population-based rates of service
utilization and health outcomes can be calculated.
   The 
data will be comprehensive
 in the kinds of data included about
individuals and will include not only administrative and clinical
information, but also information about health status and satisfaction

with care.HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
54Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   HDOs will process, store, analyze, and otherwise 
manipulate data
electronically.   Files held by HDOs can be 
designed for interactive access in real-time
for assistance with patient care when primary records are unavailable

to a treating physician. They are not, however, typically viewed as

primary patient records (e.g., a computer-based patient record), and

they are not meant to be simply passive archives or warehouses for

health information.
For maximum accountability, security, protection, and control over access
to data, HDOs should have an organizational structure, a corporate or legal

existence, and a physical location; for example, they would have a governing

board, a staff, a building, and a mailing address. They would conduct business,

articulate a mission statement, promulgate policies, implement procedures, and

carry out manipulations and analyses of data, and they could be held
accountable for their actions. Assuming these characteristics exist, the
committee targets most of its recommendations at such HDOs. Some

organizations may develop the functions described above, but not as their

primary mission. The committee intends its recommendations to apply to those
HDO-like units as well. One might also imagine proprietary programs, systems,

or entities with units that function as HDOs and that would be controlled by the

same general principles.Although the committee adopted the simplified construct offered above for
its study, it was aware that more complex entities may arise. The variations that

may emerge
Šfor instance, bifurcated legal structures that include a network
operator and a user organization
Šmay result in consortia of legal entities. To
the extent that this trend decentralizes authority and undermines common
operating rules, the issues addressed in this report will become far more serious
and possibly unresolvable.The committee examined the repository function of an HDO. In this role,
information collected at the level of the patient or about patients, providers,

plans, and clinical encounters is accessed, stored, and made available for others,

such as providers, researchers, insurers, and planners, to analyze. In some cases
HDOs may have additional functions, such as claims transfer and adjudication,
but these were not the subject of the committee's work or recommendations.
Throughout its discussions, the committee focused on 
regional databases
and HDOs. In this context, the term 
regional is meant to suggest that HDOs and
their constituent networks and databases pertain to a 
defined population
 of
individuals living in, or receiving health care in, some 
specifiable geographic
area. These may be city centered, such as the established metropolitan
statistical areas that comprise cities and their surrounding counties or suburbs;

they may be statewide (and not cross state borders). In some uses, 
regionalconveys the idea of a multistate territory (e.g., the Mountain
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
55Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.States or the Mid-Atlantic region), but most of this committee's work has been
directed at smaller regions. Far-thinking experts envision a time when regional

entities will be linked across the nation, even if their governance and operations

remain close to home. This creates the very long-range view of a national health

data repository operated by a single organization or a federation of regional or

state entities. Especially in the short term, however, HDOs may have
overlapping geographic and population boundaries; that is, there might be
several in a metropolitan area or within a state's boundaries that include

different subpopulations.The committee elucidated these concepts precisely because regional HDOs
are only now emerging in the United States. Some have been legislated or are

under consideration by several cities and states for legislative mandate, but none

is in full operation. It believes, however, that such entities will become

repositories of an immense array of health information
Šfar more extensive in
their holdings than any of today's data systems. Thus, the issues raised in
Chapters 
3 and 
4 of this report are explored with an eye to the policies and
procedures these emerging HDOs might establish today to realize their many

potential benefits while protecting against or minimizing possible harms to

individuals (whether patients or practitioners), institutions, or society in general.
HDOs Under DevelopmentDescribed below are several HDOs currently under development that
represent the kinds of entities the committee considered during this study. Only

selected characteristics of these programs are given, as a means of illustrating

specific points that reflect the attributes of prototypical HDOs as defined earlier

in this chapter.
Hospital Consortium of Greater Rochester.
 In existence since the late
1970s, the Rochester Area Hospital Corporation (RAHC) was originally

established to enhance cooperative links among the community hospitals and to

put community resources to their best use. A recent initiative has led to its

reorganization as the Hospital Consortium of Greater Rochester (HCGR) and to

the continuing development of a community-wide health information network
that has HDO characteristics. Recent community discussions have focused on
the creation of a health care commission that will include representatives of the

area's eight hospitals, physicians, employers, the two major third-party payers,

and residents (Gates, 1993a; personal communication, Beverly Voos, President

and CEO, RHI Group, November 1993). While the function of this commission

is still being discussed, the initiative could include the use of a database

maintained by the Rochester Healthcare Information Group (RHI Group), a

wholly owned, for-profit subsidiary.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
56Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.From 1980 to 1987, RAHC administered an experimental payment
program with both state and federal funding. Under this program, it established

a community-wide hospital data system and administered an annual global

budget using a community database. That database contains demographic,

clinical, and financial data on all acute-care discharges from RAHC hospitals

from 1980 onward. It has approximately 100 data elements per patient record in
the following categories: Social Security number, demographics, clinical
information, patient classifications, provider identification, payer data, and

resource use data. Reports are provided to HCGR and to member hospitals on

an ad hoc basis. Regional and national comparisons can be made using

statewide data and the National Hospital Discharge Survey.
Beginning with 1980, more than a million patient discharge records are
recorded in this database. Reports can provide case-mix analyses (which

compare lengths of stay by diagnosis, payer, age, and hospital); trend reports on

mortality statistics and readmission statistics by year and by diagnosis; payer

analysis (which uses cases by insurers by years to analyze age and length of

stay); resource utilization analysis comparing routine daily care and ancillary

care; severity-of-illness analysis; market share analysis using zip codes; and
physician caseload and hospital case mix.
The RHI Group database now includes ambulatory surgery and will soon
include outpatient clinic visits as well. Other database components include

patients awaiting discharge from a hospital to a nursing home and a perinatal

database that is under development. Eventually, it is expected that the database

will include information from every clinical setting. RHI Group is able to track

patient care over time because it has Social Security numbers in the database.
Henry Ford Health System.
 The Center for Clinical Effectiveness at the
Henry Ford Health System in Detroit is developing systems to track patients'

long-term functional status six months or more after treatment as well as costs

of their care (Gates, 1993b). This focus has provided the impetus for the

development of a uniform electronic data collection system. The developers

plan to integrate the collection of data from many operational units of the

hospitals and sites of care (e.g., ambulatory care physician visits, tumor

registries, patient satisfaction surveys) to make data available for a variety of
uses within Henry Ford's large integrated health care system, ranging from
patient reminders and managed care activities to outcomes research that would

be supported by a central data repository. From the standpoint of 
inclusiveness,such a system would include only patients at Henry Ford sites. That system

includes over 400,000 HMO members of the Health Alliance Plan and 920

physicians. It owns four hospitals, operates two nursing homes, and has joint

ventures to manage four other hospi
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
57Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tals. The Henry Ford Health System is an independent, not-for-profit provider
network (Anderson, 1993).
The New York Single-Payer Demonstration Program.
 New York State is
implementing a three-year program to improve administrative efficiency of

hospitals and other providers (some free-standing clinics and physicians) by

coordinating, automating, and standardizing claims processing, billing, and

payment systems. The initiative is not literally a single-payer effort but rather a

single-claim demonstration to translate insurance claims and billing forms in

whatever format they are submitted and forward them to payers. In terms of
inclusiveness, the databases will be statewide and will include patients
hospitalized in New York state; with respect to 
comprehensiveness, they will
contain primarily hospital data with the addition of physician and clinic data

from billing forms. The state does not plan to maintain a data repository, but the

potential exists for it to direct data to such a repository in the future.
The Vermont Health Care Authority. 
The Vermont Health Care Authority
(VHCA) is the creation of 1992 state legislation (Vermont Health Reform Act).

It draws on earlier state efforts to share health care information, particularly the

Vermont Program for Quality in Health Care, a project that has been under way

since the late 1980s (Keller, 1993). The VHCA program will be 
inclusive(covering all Vermont residents) and 
comprehensive (all health care services
that Vermont residents receive from providers both in state and out of state).
The initiative will include a lifetime patient record
Šessentially a unified health
care database
Šlinked to an information repository.
The unified database is to be developed by a subsidiary group, Vermont
Health Care Information Consortium, using files of all providers, a uniform

insurance claims form, and electronic claims submission. The claims-driven

health care database is intended to provide policy-related information such as

aggregate levels of expenditures and utilization by sectors; it will include

Medicare, Medicaid, Blue Cross and Blue Shield, and other provider or insurer

groups (e.g., HMOs).
The information repository, when linked to the lifetime health record, is
meant to be an integrated system that improves access, controls costs, gives

consumers health care information, and improves quality of care. These

outcomes are to be achieved through two proposed mechanisms that are similar

to those examined in 
Chapter 3
 of this report: (1) feedback programs to share
data on quality and practice patterns with one-third of Vermont's practicing
physicians and (2) public disclosure of information about providers.
As of late 1993, the role of state agencies was not yet clear, but gover
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
58Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.nance of the not-for-profit consortium will include a public-private partnership,
with representation of state government (the Department of Health and the

governor's office), Vermont employers, the Vermont Business Roundtable, Blue

Cross and Blue Shield, health care providers (hospitals, physicians, the state's

medical school), and consumer and patient advocates. It will have an advisory

committee and several subcommittees for activities focused on patient advocacy
and confidentiality, a business plan, financial issues, technical concerns, and
data elements.Community Health Management Information System. 
In the early 1990s
the John A. Hartford Foundation launched a program of support for innovative,

community-based development efforts to meet the shared information needs of

all health system stakeholders at the local level: purchasers, consumers,

providers, payers, and regulators. The Hartford initiative has focused on several

regions of the country; grantees are located now in the states (or cities) of Iowa,

Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Tennessee (Memphis), Vermont, and Washington.
The program concept
Šgenerally known as the Community Health
Management Information System (CHMIS)
Šhas been described by Benton
International (BI, 1991a, 1991b, 1992), which developed the CHMIS design

and functional specifications that were being adapted by the local sites.
7The CHMIS is based on two components. The first is a 
transaction system.
To facilitate point-of-service transactions for the patient and to speed claims

processing, computer terminals at each provider site will be used to access

patient information based on a 
personal identification code
 (PIC) and a
magnetized card similar to those used by automatic teller machines. At the time

of service, patients or clerks will key in a PIC to allow access to eligibility,

coverage, and billing information. This approach is comparable to those

followed by prescription medication plans that use terminals in pharmacies to
confirm that a customer is eligible for plan coverage and to determine what
charges should be paid. Electronic 
switches or clearinghouses process bills and
insurance forms from hospitals, physicians, laboratories, pharmacies, and other

sites by electronically forwarding claims and encounter information to the

insurance carrier, health plan, or third-party administrator.
The second component is a data 
repository, the main focus of this
committee's interest. Certain information about patients, providers, plans,
7 Benton International is a consulting firm for the financial services industry, with
expertise in credit card and ATM (automatic teller machine) transaction processing. All
information about CHMIS in the BI specifications is in the public domain, and neither
the John A. Hartford Foundation nor BI retains proprietary claims on this information.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
59Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and clinical encounters will be routed to and stored in a data repository (or
made available through distributed databases); these data will then be available

for use and analyses by providers, payers, purchasers, consumers, regulators,

and researchers (see William M. Mercer, Inc., 1993). The repositories are

intended to be 
inclusiveŠall individuals receiving care in a defined region or
state. They are also designed to be 
comprehensiveŠincluding demographic,
eligibility, clinical, health risk, and health status information.
As envisioned in the BI specifications for CHMISs, data sources are varied:
   Transaction-based information
 In fee-for-service systems, encounter
data typically associated with insurance claims, such as procedure and

diagnostic codes, constitute much of the general data set and will be
acquired directly from the provider as part of the claims transaction. In
prepaid capitated systems (group and staff model HMOs) that do not

normally produce insurance claims forms, special arrangements will be

designed to obtain needed data. The system is intended to incorporate

Medicare and Medicaid claims data at some point.
   Patient satisfaction surveys and health status questionnaires
 This
information will be obtained from the patient (or possibly a family

member in the case of, e.g., minor children), on either a routine or a

sample basis. Survey instruments and questionnaires might also
contain inquiries about lifestyle and health habits.
   Special studies
 The general data set will be augmented by specified
clinical data acquired from providers to permit researchers and others

to conduct special studies of specific health conditions or other topics.

The subjects of special studies would likely change over time, but

clearly could include matters related to quality of, satisfaction with,
access to, and costs of health care in the relevant community or state.
Although not fully operational as this report was being prepared in1993,
the Hartford CHMISs were moving forcefully toward implementation. Two
different operating models seem to predominate. One model is based on a state

legislative requirement for all providers to send data to a public agency that

contracts with the CHMIS operating entity; Washington State and Vermont fall

into this group. A second model is voluntary, relying on recognition by

providers and payers of the system's benefit to them. In such cases local

business or health care purchasing coalitions may require that all providers with

whom they contract submit data through the CHMIS; the Memphis Business

Group on Health exemplifies this approach.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
60Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BENEFITS OF HEALTH DATABASES
The gains expected from imaginative but responsible uses of the
information held by HDOs accrue not only to various interest groups but also to

populations generally, whether in a metropolitan or substate region, a given

state, or the nation as a whole. The size of the potential benefits, whether to the

community at large or to specific users, is likely to be a function of the

comprehensiveness and 
inclusiveness of the databases
Šthe more
comprehensive or 
inclusive (or both) the more powerful the information will be
at every level and for every potential user and use.
Broad-based Benefits
The intent of many database and HDO efforts today is to give regions a
way to monitor and improve the value of their health care services and the well-

being of their residents. HDOs might achieve this by making available

information on access to care, costs, appropriateness, effectiveness, and quality

of health care services and providers. HDOs can also contribute to

improvements in quality of care by making information available to institutions

and groups of practitioners for their use in quality assurance and quality
improvement (QA/QI) programs and for regional health planning.
Many HDOs (especially those developed with public funds and by
legislative mandate) can be expected to be useful in addressing a wide range of

policy questions and in this way they will contribute to the national debate

related to health care reform.
8 Regardless of the path of reform efforts, the
questions noted below are of special importance, as implied by the brief

scenarios that opened 
Chapter 1. For example:   Access Are people in a given region receiving appropriate care in a
timely manner? Are services equitably available and affordable by all

groups in that population? Do access barriers relating to social and

cultural factors appear to persist? Does the use of particular types of

providers or facilities differ by patient or consumer characteristics?
   Costs Can the rate of increase in aggregate health expenditures be
8 In a recent report, the Institute of Medicine (IOM, 1993c) outlined the critical
elements of health care reform that it believed sound reform proposals ought to address.
The five main topics were access, containing costs, ensuring quality, financing care, and
enhancing the infrastructure of health care. Individual IOM reports have dealt with
specific topics related to certain aspects of health reform, such as access (IOM, 1993a),
employment-based insurance (IOM, 1993e), quality of care (IOM, 1990), clinical

practice guidelines (IOM, 1992a), and the information infrastructure (IOM, 1991a).
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
61Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.moderated? Can accurate estimates be made of the costs of care in
given geographic areas? Can health care delivery and administration be

made more efficient? Can administrative costs be reduced? Can cost

shifting within the public sector (e.g., between states and the federal

government, or from the private to the public sector) be minimized?
   Quality of care 
Can the provision of health services be organized so as
to increase the likelihood of health outcomes that are desired by

individual patients? Can information from these databases address

three main quality problems: use of inappropriate and unnecessary

services, underuse of appropriate and needed services, and poor

technical and interpersonal performance? Can clinical and other

information in HDO files contribute to more, and better, practice
guidelines? Can credible information about more effective and
appropriate health care services be made available to clinicians and

institutions in a more timely, and less threatening, fashion? Can useful

information about the quality and outcomes of care of different kinds

of providers be assembled and made available in convenient and

prompt ways to consumers and organizers of provider networks and

plans (e.g., insurance companies)?
9   Delivery of health services
 What services are appropriate and effective
for what health care problems? How does the provision of those

services vary across geographic areas, population groups, types of

providers, settings of care, and time? Can innovative approaches to

health care delivery be designed so as to promote the goals of health

reform?   Disease incidence and public health
 What are the major causes of
death, illness, and disability for different groups in the population?

How are these patterns changing over time?
   Health planning
 How might the acquisition, location, operation, and
financing of facilities, capital equipment, health personnel, and other

resources be made more rational, more affordable, and more

responsive to clear community and regional needs?
9 At the time this study was conducted, the Hartford Foundation sponsored a separate
study from researchers at the Harvard School of Public Health to examine questions
related to the establishment of an ''Institute for Health Care Assessment," which would
have as a major goal the advancement of quality measurement and improvement.
Services that such an institute might provide to HDOs might include project formulation,
technical assistance (in quality measurement, data collection and management, and

analysis), report design and profiling (e.g., of morbidity, patient satisfaction, provider
adherence to guidelines, and variation in use of costly technologies), and project
evaluation. A clearinghouse effort and dissemination might also be contemplated. For
further information, see McNeil et al. (1992).
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
62Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Differential Benefits as a Function of Users and Uses
Answers to the questions above benefit almost all members of a given
population; in that sense, the gains are broad-based. Other benefits of HDOs

and their activities will depend on a specific user and use, which are explored

more fully in the next section. One aspect of differential benefits should be

underscored, however. In today's complicated U.S. health sector, what may

profit one party may well work to the detriment of other parties. For example,
information that encourages insurers or others to contract only with certain
providers in a community, on grounds of either quality or cost, is doubtless of

benefit to those insurers and providers, and it does give insurers the opportunity

to direct patients toward high-quality providers. Such practices may, however,

threaten the financial stability, livelihood, or professional standing of other,

noncontracted providers
Šthis is certainly not a benefit for them and may
undermine the systems for the delivery of care to other, less-favored patient

groups.The next section briefly identifies users
Šgroups that have a stake in the
use of health-related data
Šand is followed by a discussion of potential uses of
HDO databases. Some potential applications of data raise concerns that the

report returns to in Chapters 
3 and 
4. In developing positions and
recommendations about the actions that HDOs should take with respect to data

(this chapter), public disclosure of health-related information on providers

(Chapter 3
), and with respect to privacy and confidentiality of person-identified
data (
Chapter 4
), the committee tried to balance the broad-based benefits (and
the narrower benefits sought by certain groups) against the possible harms that

might be done to individuals or to broader health and social policy goals.
USERS OF INFORMATION IN HDOS
As noted, many stakeholders in the health care system will share the
general uses and the derivative benefits described above for HDOs. The major

users include:   Health care provider organizations and practitioners
 Provider
organizations include physicians in solo practice and large

multispecialty groups; managed care groups such as HMOs, IPAs, and

PPOs; free-standing surgery centers and other ambulatory care

facilities; institutions such as hospitals and nursing homes; and
enterprises such as pharmacies, clinical laboratories, and home health
agencies.   Patients, families, and community residents in general
 The information
in HDO databases may also be valuable for active patients and their
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
63Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.families; more generally, it will be useful for residents who, although
not patients at a given time, seek information about health care.
   Academic and research organizations 
Academic and research
organizations take many forms: academic health or medical centers

affiliated with the nation's public and private universities; schools of

medicine, dentistry, nursing, and allied health professions; and schools

of public health. Private research institutes also fall into this group.

Most of the entities in this category have major patient care and

educational responsibilities, but they also carry out much of the health
research in this country on issues involving access, effectiveness,
utilization, costs, quality, and acceptability of care.
   Payers and purchasers
 This category of users includes health
insurance firms and companies with self-insured health plans that pay

for some or all of the health care of their beneficiaries or employees. It

also includes managed care companies, third-party payers (TPPs), and

third-party administrators (TPAs), who will look to HDOs for

assistance in managing standard insurance tasks. Insurers and self-

insured employers also administer a variety of retrospective and
prospective utilization management and case management programs.
   Employers and business or purchaser coalitions
 Typically, business
coalitions comprise major employers in a given area, many of whom

have self-insured health plans; some coalitions may have provider

members, but many do not. These groups have been a driving force in

developing data networks in several regions of the country. (For

example, as the CHMIS models were evolving during the period of

this study, they were motivated in large measure by the concerns and

interests of business or purchaser coalitions.)
   Health agencies
 At the federal level, at least three PHS agencies might
find HDO databases of considerable value in their daily operations

(beyond the clear contributions that such databases would make to

outcomes and effectiveness research): the Food and Drug

Administration, for postmarketing surveillance and monitoring

responsibilities (USDHHS, 1991); the Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention, for public health and prevention activities; and the Health

Services and Resources Administration, for its Maternal and Child

Health block grants and health work force training programs. Other
DHHS agencies
Šsuch as HCFA, the Administration on Children and
Families, and the Administration on Aging
Šmight be added to this list
of potential users for similar federal oversight tasks. At the state,

county, and municipal level, analogous health departments are likely to

be users of HDO information for corresponding purposes; they are also

likely to be central to HDO development and operations.
   Other potential database users 
Other users may well view HDO
information as valuable. These include community and consumer

organizaHEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
64Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tions; charitable groups and volunteer groups concerned with various
diseases; social service agencies; law enforcement agencies at the

federal, state, and local level; attorneys; and commercial entities such

as direct marketing firms, financial and credit institutions, and bill

collection agencies, to list only a few. To the extent that these users

seek person-identifiable information, however, the committee takes an
extremely negative view toward providing access to HDO files.
USES OF DATABASES
Without a clear understanding of potential users and their reasons for
wanting access to data, HDOs cannot frame or implement sensible policies

about a range of operational activities. To provide a background for reaching

conclusions about HDOs and for developing recommendations to address the

major issues implied by the vignettes that opened 
Chapter 1
, the committee
explored the uses of HDO information. Those described below are seen as the
most likely in the short term, but as the direction of health reform becomes

clearer, new uses and users may arise (e.g., related to health purchasing

alliances), and some described below (e.g., insurer roles) may become obsolete.

In some cases, uses of HDO data are illustrated by reference to databases held

by organizations or public agencies that approach the HDO concept (see

Table 2-4).Assessing Access to Care and Use of Services
Assessing access or lack of access to care is critical in evaluating the
performance of systems of health care delivery and the rational planning of

those systems. Understanding the economic, geographic, and transportation

barriers to health services, variations in, and access to health services is

essential in the evaluation of the effects of ongoing or changing health care
delivery systems. Several recent studies have examined the relationship
between insurance, socioeconomic status, and race, on the one hand, and access

to and use of health services, on the other (Bravemen et al., 1989; Burstin et al.,

1992; Patrick et al., 1992; Adler et al., 1993); racial and gender differences in

disease incidence and survival have also been examined (Ayanian and Epstein,

1991; Hannan et al., 1991b; Ayanian, 1993; Becker et al., 1993; Whittle et al.,

1993). At the level of regions of the country, unmet health needs may be

especially significant for minorities or other groups such as pregnant women or

poor children; users of HDO information may need to pay special attention to

such groups.Among the better-known work on patterns of utilization is that related to
the phenomenon of geographic or small-area variations in the use of
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
65Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
66Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
67Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
68Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
69Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.medical services, particularly invasive procedures.
10 Much of the landmark
research in this area has relied on the administrative and other databases that

HCFA maintains for the Medicare program (
Table 2-4
); these files have been
extremely useful for research purposes for more than a decade. Other studies

have employed data from state data organizations (e.g., Wennberg and

Gittelsohn, 1982). For purposes of tracking use of services, conducting many
different kinds of health services and health policy research, and otherwise
administering a complex population-based health system, many experts regard

the databases maintained by the individual provinces of Canada as models for

uses of HDO information (see 
Table 2-4 for a description of the Manitoba files).
Some uses of HDO data to explore patterns of utilization could raise
concerns, however. For example, information that permits third-party payers to

devise insurance packages attractive to (or affordable by) only certain groups in

the population is clearly of competitive benefit to the companies and the

populations they target, but such practices may operate to the disadvantage of
the excluded groups. To the extent the latter overlap with the vulnerable
populations noted above, many would regard this use of HDO data as

undesirable.Assessing Costs and Identifying Opportunities for Savings
Curbing health care expenditures includes placing global limits on
spending and linking fees to changes in the volume of services. For such efforts

to be effective and equitable, however, those directing them will have to

understand better the geographic variations in services and the reasons for these

variations (Welch et al., 1993). Equally significant will be documenting the true

economic costs of delivering health care as a means of understanding patterns
of health expenditures and, secondarily, the efficiency of different plans and
systems of care. To the extent that HDOs acquire reliable and valid information

on services rendered and on charges and payments for those services (however

questionable the actual relationship between billed charges and true costs), they

will be in a position to clarify cost and expenditure issues.
10 The literature in this area is extensive. Well-known articles
Šbeginning about a
decade ago on small-area-variations analysis
Šinclude McPherson et al., 1981; Roos and
Roos, 1981; Roos et al., 1982; Wennberg and Gittelsohn, 1982; Wennberg et al., 1982,
1984; Eddy, 1984; Roos, 1984; Wennberg, 1984; 
Health Affairs,
 1984; Chassin et al.,
1986a, 1987; Merrick et al., 1986; Winslow et al., 1988a, 1988b; Wennberg, 1990; Paul
et al., 1993. For a recent review of this literature and a new interpretation of this body of
empirical work that suggests that physician enthusiasm for particular services explains

much of the geographic variation in utilization, see Chassin, 1993a.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
70Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Evaluating Quality and Outcomes of Care
Information about quality of care is important to everyone
Šfor choosing a
source of care, designing a health plan, building a malpractice case, or trying to

improve care
Šand this committee gave quality assurance and improvement
issues special attention in its deliberations. Physicians, institutions, and others

who deliver direct patient care and insurers who establish their own provider

networks will need to carry out QA/QI activities. It can be argued that the
quality issues will have even greater visibility if certain approaches to health
care reform gain prominence (those premised on managed competition) because

of the heavy reliance that will be placed on the availability of credible quality-

of-care information to consumers, purchasers, and regulators. As noted above

with respect to access, the work that HDOs might do or support on quality of

care must take disadvantaged, at risk, vulnerable populations more directly into

account (Lohr et al., 1993).
If information available from HDOs is reliable and amenable to diagnosis-
specific analyses and if it can be aggregated by physician, institution, and the

like, then it may prove more useful for these purposes than current regulatory

approaches to quality assurance. Of special interest to insurers (and

policymakers in implementing health reform) is the potential for HDOs to use
aggregate data to provide clinical practice benchmarks or norms. Such norms
allow insurers (or others) to compare the practices and outcomes of a given

provider with those of similar providers.
Hospital-specific Mortality Rate Studies
Hospital-specific mortality rate studies have been an early focus of quality
of care studies using large databases. Much of this work began with HCFA'S

release of such information in the mid-1980s, and a steady stream of reports

(produced annually until 1993 by HCFA) from numerous teams of investigators

has appeared since that time. 
11 Statewide databases have also been used for
research projects on mortality rates following open heart surgery. One example
comes from the New York State Cardiac Surgery Reporting System (Hannan et
al., 1989b, 1990, 1991a; Zinman, 1991; see also 
Chapter 3
 of this report) and
another from the Pennsylvania Health
11 The first major release of hospital-specific mortality rates dates to publications from
HCFA (e.g., HCFA, 1991). Other illustrative research efforts include those reported by
Chassin et al. (1989) on all Medicare hospitalizations, by Dubois et al. (1987a, 1987b) on
admissions to institutions belonging to a single hospital chain, and by Luft and Romano
(1993) on risk-adjusted death rates from coronary artery bypass and graft operations for

hospitals in California.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
71Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Care Cost Containment Council, whose report listed hospital charges and risk-
adjusted mortality rates for coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery for 35

Pennsylvania hospitals and 170 cardiac surgeons (PHCCCC, 1992).
A painstaking evaluation of the impact of the Diagnosis-related Group
Prospective Payment System (DRG-based PPS) in Medicare also relied on

Medicare files for critical data on patient outcomes (Kahn et al., 1992; Keeler et

al., 1992a). Because the thrust of this work relates to quality of care, this report

returns to such studies in 
Chapter 3.Effectiveness and Outcomes Research
Yet another critical research area involves the effectiveness and outcomes
of health care
Šthe clinical evaluative sciences as some call it. Understanding
effectiveness involves evaluation of the utility and appropriateness of health

care in everyday settings with so-called average patients and usual providers

(Brook and Lohr, 1985). William Roper, M.D., the former HCFA administrator,

coined the phrase ''what works in the practice of medicine" to characterize the

questions that researchers in medical effectiveness might address (Roper et al.,
1988). At about the same time, the National Center for Health Services
Research (now AHCPR) began an ambitious research program whose grantees

are known as Patient Outcomes Research Teams (PORTs) (AHCPR, 1990a,

1990b; Raskin and Maklan, 1991). A dozen or more PORTs are under way at

any one time in this country, and all of those concerned with health problems of

the elderly rely heavily on Medicare files.
Although these studies often involve rigorous design and statistical
methods, by intent they are usually not randomized trials that require massive

primary data collection
Šhence the attractiveness of information on health care
that already has been collected and stored in data files. Information in these

databases can, nonetheless, contribute to classic randomized, controlled trials
Šfor example, by providing indications of the epidemiology of disease or
treatment patterns or, in some circumstances, serving as a means of designing a
sampling frame for the study.
12 As a case in point: two articles that appeared as
this report was being prepared examined the utility of
12 Technology assessment overlaps with these research efforts in so far as it extends
beyond reviews of the published literature or operations of expert panels to actual

collection and analysis of data. Often, however, technology assessment is directed more
at emerging technologies
Šfor example, new drugs, devices, or (less often) procedures
Šthan at established ones. To the extent this is true, databases of the sort described in this
report, particularly those derived from financial transactions in health care, will not
contain much relevant or useable data on those newer technologies. They will, however,

contain valuable information for the comparison of these new technologies with existing
approaches (which always include watchful waiting). When the focus of technology
assessment is on established technologies, databases are useful not only for such
evaluation activities, but also for setting priorities for assessment (IOM, 1992b).
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
72Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.surgery for prostatic cancer (Fleming et al., 1993; Lu-Yao et al., 1993). One
paper relied on Medicare's claims system to estimate the risk of radical

prostatectomy; the other examined time trends and geographic variations in

prostate cancer diagnosis. Both can be traced to earlier analyses on variations in

the use of transurethral prostatectomy for benign prostatic hypertrophy, which

had been based on data contained in large-scale databases (see the citations in
footnote 10). The committee thus placed great emphasis on the need to expand
such uses of health databases
Šincluding those expected to be assembled by
HDOsŠto address the myriad health services research questions that now
confront this nation. A recent report from AHCPR provides a useful

compilation of automated data sources and a literature review for ambulatory

care effectiveness research as well as a description of automated ambulatory

record systems (USDHHS, 1993a).
Quality Assurance and Quality Improvement Programs
Providers will find information in HDO databases of particular value for
QA/QI programs. In a health care environment emphasizing competition
Šonethat may heavily regulate prices and other economic factors and disallow

preexisting condition clauses, biased risk selection by insurers, and similar cost-

shifting tactics
Šcompetition on the basis of quality of care may become far
more prominent (AMPRA, 1993; IOM, 1993c; Palmer and Adams, 1993;
Tillmann and Sullivan, 1993). Provider groups have a clear incentive to

implement meaningful QA/QI efforts as a means of doing as well as possible in

comparative analyses. Some internal efforts may involve recruiting high-quality

staff or dismissing poorly performing staff; other elements involve improving

performance across the board. Thus, these databases may offer provider groups

help for strategic planning, marketing, and competing in local health markets;

these benefits presuppose that providers choose to act on the information that

they can glean directly from the database or that they are furnished as part of an

external quality-review program.
In California, for example, all nonfederal acute-care hospitals submit
discharge abstracts to the state's Office of Statewide Health Planning and

Development. Among the data elements available for analysis are age, sex,

presence of chronic conditions, dates of admission, surgery, and procedures
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
73Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in addition to a primary operation; information dates back to at least 1983.
Using data from this file, Luft and Romano (1993) reported on two sets of

CABG-related analyses: (1) describing general patterns of CABG use and risk-

adjusted outcomes over a seven-year period and (2) identifying hospitals with

significantly or consistently higher or lower death rates after CABG than would

be expected. These kinds of analyses are commonly done with hospital
discharge abstract databases; often, however, they are subject to considerable
criticism, especially because of the inadequacy of information to permit

adjustment for patient risk factors, such as ejection fraction or previous CABG.

Given the constraints of the database that Luft and Romano used, their study

was considered exemplary because of their sophisticated approach to measuring

outcome and performing statistical analyses (Chassin, 1993b).
Another example of quality-of-care applications of databases is the
quantitative and qualitative work done for the IOM report on the end-stage renal

disease (ESRD) program (IOM, 1991b). These analyses drew on information in

one or more of three major ESRD data systems: the ESRD Program

Management and Medical Information System, administered by HCFA; the

United States Renal Data System, administered by the National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases; and the United Network for
Organ Sharing data system, a part of the Southeast Organ Procurement

Foundation.In short, for well more than a decade researchers have employed large
databases, particularly those of the Medicare program, for studies that today

have significant bearing on our understanding of the quality of health services

in terms of both processes and outcomes of care. Apart from their intrinsic

worth and findings, such studies have generated important hypotheses, the

exploration of which promises to yield further, and considerable, social benefit.
Planning and Monitoring Patient Care
Health care practitioners will be able to use the information in HDO
databases in many patient care responsibilities. Examples of such applications

include: checking patients' allergies to medication, obtaining patient histories at

the time of patient-practitioner encounters, planning the management of

complex cases, and fostering better communication among all providers

rendering care to an individual patient and between clinicians and ancillary
personnel.Descriptive information derived from such databases may enable primary
care physicians (and their support staffs) to conduct outreach and health

promotion activities; such tasks might involve identifying individuals who

should receive periodic screening tests and providing up-to-date immunization

records for school enrollment. Chronically ill patients and their
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
74Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.families could use HDO data files to help maintain family health records (e.g.,
logs of visits to a specialist or admissions to a hospital) or to create a running

sum of out-of-pocket expenses for office-based care, medications, or

hospitalizations.HDOs with prescription databases might enable physicians, pharmacists,
and others to track prescribed medications and to report adverse drug reactions

more readily. Their databases might also be used to identify medication abuse

by patients who obtain a pharmaceutical agent from multiple providers or to

detect medications prescribed by different providers whose interactions could
cause adverse reactions or reduce their effectiveness.
Even for those who are not patients or relatives of patients at any given
time, HDO databases may be of value. Descriptive information on primary care

physicians, specialists, other caregivers, and health plans (e.g., location, special

aspects of a practice or facility, or usual charges) may be of great help when

individuals plan to seek care for new problems or in new locales. Health
education materials that could be developed as an adjunct to HDO activity, such
as guidelines for preventive care, nutrition, or available community resources,

can be a valuable resource for residents as well.
Many large employers have become deeply involved in managed care,
case management of high-risk or high-cost patients, and in workplace health

promotion efforts. They are likely to use HDO information in all these kinds of

programs for their employees, employees' dependents, and (possibly) retirees.

Government is a significant employer at the federal, state, and local levels, and

it has as much interest in good health and good decision making among civil
servants, as does the private sector for its work force. Thus, the uses that
corporate (or small) employers might have for HDO information apply equally

to the public sector.
Less obvious reasons for seeking access to health databases can be
imagined. For example, adopted children may wish to obtain information on

certain health or genetic characteristics of their birth (natural) parents, as a

means of making health-related decisions of their own; such requests might be

brought through third parties as a way of protecting the privacy of the parents or

the adopted child, or both. Although this example may seem remote today,
uncommon uses of these databases
Šand the considerable ethical,
psychological, political, and practical ramifications they may have
Šought to be
contemplated in advance as policies about access, privacy, and disclosure are

set in motion.
Enhancing Administrative Efficiency
One major goal of health care reform is to make health insurance claims
processing and financial transactions more efficient. All health insurers have

databases derived from several sources. These databases have tradi
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
75Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tionally served as mechanisms for eligibility verification, provider reporting (for
tax purposes), and claims adjudication. When their data flow in an electronic

transaction (i.e., EDI) system, the efficiency related to billing, reimbursement,

claims tracking, remittance reconciliation, and similar business matters can be

very high; the Workgroup for Electronic Data Interchange, in its report to the

Secretary of DHHS (WEDI, 1992), estimated benefits, savings, and strategies
for implementing EDI in the coming years.
Analogously, when HDOs build their repositories through such electronic
systems, they may be able to support nearly instantaneous verification of

insurance plan eligibility and covered benefits,
13 facilitate claims submission,
and eliminate time-consuming, costly paperwork. The closer that these

databases approximate the medical record, the more exact reimbursement
strategies will become and the less time can be spent on record requests and
appeals.Operating Managed Care Programs
Providers or others may find HDO databases helpful in identifying likely
high-cost patients who would benefit from case management and in

streamlining precertification tasks. Case management and precertification

customarily call for case-by-case decision making
Šwhether an individual's
care for severe mental illness will be reimbursed if given in the inpatient setting
or whether services for a high-risk pregnancy will be organized through a case

manager.TPPs and TPAs have begun to apply medical logic programs to augment
their precertification programs with what might be called intelligent adjudication

Šthat is, decision making that takes into account historical medical
information. Given appropriate and consistent use of standardized coding rules,
electronic (as opposed to telephone- or paper-based) precertification systems

can simplify and speed decision making for patients, physicians, TPPs, and

TPAs. HDO data may be useful for profiling services received
13 The term "benefits," as used in this report, has two distinct meanings, depending on
the context. One reflects the general notion of positive advantages, gains, and useful aids
in the conduct of some activity. The other is the narrower insurance-related concept of a

benefit package or contract, in which a set of services (typically characterized as
"medically necessary") is specified as covered (and in which other services may be
specifically identified as not covered). This committee assumes that major health care
reform will likely bring about a standardized class of covered benefits, at least in a
"basic" package mandated nationally; this would reduce the need for verification of

covered benefits by providers and insurers. To the extent that reform initiatives permit
differential types of supplemental insurance plans to be offered, however, such
verification may still be needed and the desirability of doing that instantaneously remains
high.HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
76Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.by patients who are subject to precertification programs and for portraying
prevailing practices in a locale, thereby contributing to the construction of such

logic programs.
In these ways, HDO data could be brought to bear to improve patient care
and to minimize the frustrating, inequitable, or idiosyncratic features of present-

day utilization review and case management. Looking well into the future, some

experts hypothesize that information in large-scale databases will significantly

change utilization management processes and, indeed, even obviate the need for

utilization management as it is conducted today. This might happen as better
epidemiologic data and the methods of artificial intelligence make it possible to
create case-management protocols based on complex logic trees that take

account of far more patient, clinical, and other variables than is possible today.
Strategic Planning and Selective Contracting
HDO data can facilitate a range of long-term planning, business, and
financial management tasks that insurers, employers, and providers face. Such

information can also be applied in the selective contracting activities that are

becoming increasingly common.
Strategic Planning
With respect to long-range strategies, TPPs and TPAs might be able to
improve their underwriting and benefits design through analysis of HDO data;

for instance, such analyses might enable them to set premiums more accurately

or to establish benefit packages. However, the committee hopes that TPPs and

TPAs would not use HDO databases for selective underwriting that further
fragments the risk pool. More broadly, payers and purchasers might be able to
determine the risks they face with respect to future demand for health care more

accurately from such databases than they could in the past. If HDO databases

are reasonably 
inclusive, TPPs and TPAs might then be able to understand
better how such demand might vary by geographic area or population group and

how it might change over time.
Payers are likely to use HDO information in strategic planning for more
than just the health insurance portion of their business. For instance, some

health insurers may be part of conglomerates that offer life, disability, workers'

compensation, and other forms of insurance. In theory, HDOs might provide

information on individuals, or groups in a geographic area, that would be of

considerable interest to those managing other activities of an insurance
company. Such data might be helpful in devising nonhealth insurance packages
that are attractive (or not attractive, as the case may be) to certain individuals or

populations in those locales.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
77Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Providers may seek to use HDO databases for many reasons: to project
market share when considering mergers with other facilities, to select sites for

satellite clinics, to establish ambulatory surgery centers, to acquire group

practices, and in other ways to plan future activities with financial implications.

Some groups may wish to acquire competitive intelligence in order to set

charges for their services, so that they can consider whether to lower or raise
their charges for some or all purchasers or patients. Although such activities
might well raise antitrust issues, addressing such questions was beyond the

expertise of the committee or the scope of the study.
Selective ContractingTo develop provider networks
Šsystems of practitioners (including
physicians, dentists, optometrists, and psychologists), ancillary facilities (e.g.,

clinical laboratories or short-term substance abuse programs), hospitals and

nursing homes, and agencies that deliver home health or home-based hospice

careŠthat can compete effectively in the health sector today, insurers need
more specific, accurate, and detailed data that will permit them to contract
selectively with such providers. Selective contracting in this context means not
only identifying practitioners and providers that can deliver high-quality care

within some acceptable cost norms, but also recognizing those that cannot; in

either case, it implies that providers will perform in accordance with responsible

practice guidelines and protocols. In addition, providers might use measures of

normative behavior to determine the standards of quality each provider or plan

might expect of its practitioners.
Thus, HDO information might be applied in retrospective profiling of
provider-related information as a means of identifying providers that might be

brought into (or kept out of) selective contracting arrangements; it can also be

employed to monitor performance over time. One of the chief aims of HDOs

emerging today is, in fact, to aid payer or other groups in this process by
enabling them to develop (or acquire) analyses of practice patterns, outcomes,
costs, and similar variables that will permit them to make decisions about the

providers their systems will include or exclude.
Other Business-related Uses
Nearly three-quarters of employers with 1,000 or more employees manage
self-insured health plans (Foster Higgins, 1991, in IOM, 1993e). These firms

can, for all practical purposes, be regarded as conducting (or being responsible

for) the same tasks as insurers, as discussed above.
14  Health14 The technicalities
Šnot trivial matters
Šrelating to Employment Retirement Income
Security Act (ERISA) preemptions with respect to self-insured employer plans were not
directlyHEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
78Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.databases or HDOs based chiefly on the sponsorship of employers will thus, in
theory, offer considerable advantages in benefits planning, selective

contracting, monitoring provider network performance, and similar activities

relating to management of employment-based health insurance coverage. For

example, employers may want to create case-management plans that are

increasingly directive and oriented toward exclusive provider organization
(EPO) arrangements, like those that are common today for high-technology
therapies such as transplantation and cardiac surgery.
Employers might also wish to use the information in some databases for
personnel actions
Špromotions, relocations, dismissals, and the like.
15 As will
be noted later in this report, serious concerns must be addressed about misuse of

data in general and with respect to possible violation of the Americans with

Disabilities Act (ADA), for instance. Nevertheless, the connections between

workplace wellness and personnel actions are clear.
Tracking Injury and Illness, Preventive Care, and Health
BehaviorsThose studying and having responsibility for public health efforts can be
expected to use HDO databases for a broad set of applications. These include

analyses of the incidence of injury and disease and studies of the prevalence of

trauma-related health problems and chronic illness. Today, disease and injury

registries provide information on traumatic events, episodes of illness, and the

processes and outcomes of care that exemplify what might be done with HDO

data in the future. For instance, cancer registry data from two states, Illinois and

Washington, have been used to address a range of questions (Hand et al., 1991;

Lasovich et al., 1991) including underuse of services in the hospitals studied.
One study focused analyses on the percentage of early-stage breast cancer
patients who do not
addressed by this IOM committee. Many observers believe, however, that meaningful
health care reform will require modification, if not outright repeal, of ERISA insofar as

health insurance is concerned (IOM, 1993e, 1993c). Federal preemptive legislation
would override existing state statutes and regulations and effectively take some aspects
of insurance regulation out of the hands of state insurance commissioners; if that occurs,

distinctions between self-insured corporations and insurers subject to state insurance
regulation will decrease if not disappear altogether. The ramifications of ERISA extend
beyond insurance regulation to rules for protecting the privacy and confidentiality of
personal health data, including those held by HDOs; informational privacy issues are
addressed in 
Chapter 4
.15 For purposes of making hiring decisions about individuals, 
potential employers may
wish to obtain information on such persons. This committee will (in 
Chapter 4
) take a
very strong position against person-identifiable information being made available for this
purpose and thus does not examine that possible use of health databases further.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
79Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.receive indicated auxillary lymph node dissection or assays for hormone
receptors; in another, the study question was the percentage of women receiving

breast-conserving surgery who did not receive indicated radiation therapy. In

commenting on these studies, Chassin (1991) notes that they suggest problems

"in the extent to which physicians fail to communicate options and outcomes

data objectively" (p. 3473) and advocates routine feedback of these kinds of
data to hospitals. With respect to injury, the American College of Surgeons
National Trauma Registry is another example of a database that provides

information on patterns of injury and their outcomes (see 
Table 2-4
); for those
concerned with emergency medical services, such sources of epidemiologic and

clinical information are critical (IOM, 1993d).
Other public health applications of HDO databases relate to preventive
care and health behaviors. For some industries, for instance, epidemiologic

information from large databases may enable analysts to identify potential

safety or health-related problems in workplace environments and to suggest

corrective steps. Immunization tracking systems, currently under development

regionally and nationally, might be incorporated into HDO databases to

simplify monitoring and recording of children's immunization status both in
aggregate and individually. HDOs might also maintain information about blood
type, organ donors, and tissue matching in their databases, as a means of

fostering improved blood banking and organ procurement and transplant

services.Promoting Regional and Community Health Planning,
Education, and OutreachHealth Planning and Education
When HDO databases are statewide, or sponsored by state health
departments, the potential uses by states and all subordinate levels of

government for health planning, health care delivery, public health, and

administrative responsibilities become quite extensive; they can involve the

health departments and social services agencies of states, counties, and

municipalities in many overlapping efforts. Planning and educational activities

that could employ HDO data might be focused on improving access to,

reducing costs of, and enhancing quality of care; on organizing provider

systems of care; or on investigating epidemiologic patterns of injury or illness.
For example, community-specific studies conducted using HDO data might
examine the kinds of cases treated by local hospital emergency departments,

whether use differs by hospital or patient characteristics, and whether patient

outcomes differ accordingly. Such information might en
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
80Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.able public agencies to target public funds or other resources in new ways to
meet previously undetected problems or needs.
Integrating data on vital statistics, epidemiologic surveillance, and local
and regional public health programs with those in the personal-health-care files

of HDOs raises the possibility of more effective public health activities for

monitoring health, attaining public health objectives at a population level, and

targeting efforts for hard-to-reach individuals. For example, researchers in

Boston have developed and operationalized a distributed health record system

for a homeless population seen at many sites by many different providers
(Chueh and Barnett, 1994).
Community OutreachIn addition to whatever public-sector agencies might do to monitor the
public health of communities, community and consumer organizations may

wish also to carry out population-based studies as a means of learning where

significant health problems exist and of making elected officials and others

more accountable for solving those problems. Another significant way that

information held by HDOs may contribute to the work of community,

voluntary, and consumer groups is in their public education and outreach

programs. Here the data may suggest emerging problems that warrant increased
attention (or waning problems that need reduced effort); data may also indicate
where (in geographic areas or population subgroups) education initiatives might

best be targeted. For example, recognition that bicycle accidents are a major

source of children's head injuries could lead to community education programs

in schools and neighborhood associations. Public-sector agencies, academic

centers, or consumer groups might pursue such public health efforts by

analyzing HDO data and developing community-specific informational

materials (e.g., public information brochures on sources of care for special

problems).Charitable groups and voluntary organizations concerned with particular
diseases and conditions have many roles: providing information to and support

for patients with particular illnesses and for their families; sponsoring research;

and lobbying for more policy attention, social acceptance, and research support

for the problem. Because they are likely to be private organizations that secure

their funds through donations from individuals and corporations, most must

engage in aggressive fund-raising campaigns. Information from health data

banks might enable them to increase their efficiency in amassing epidemiologic

information and perhaps in targeting fund-raising efforts.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
81Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Other Uses for HDO Databases
The IOM committee identified a great many other potential users and uses
of HDO databases, including agencies engaged in law enforcement at the

federal, state, and local levels; law firms and attorneys; and various commercial

entities. The more plausible are briefly described here.
Law enforcement officials can be expected to find many uses for the
information held in HDO files. They may wish to trace individuals (for

instance, to locate parents not paying child support). They may also need to

investigate alleged illegal acts; in the health context, this might extend to abuse

of illegal substances or cases of possible child abuse. Conceivably, law
enforcement agencies might want genetic information to assist them in
identification of a suspect. Finally, such agencies may be expected to monitor

providers and patients for possible fraud.
Arguably attorneys and law firms might identify many uses for HDO data,
including malpractice litigation. Plaintiffs' lawyers, for instance, might try to

access information from HDOs concerning previous quality-of-care deficiencies

of a physician or hospital; defendants' counsel might seek to demonstrate,

through analysis of HDO data, that the provider acted well within community

standards. One important application occurs in cases where the past or current
health condition of the patient is relevant to the case or is at issue in the case.
Product safety litigation may also call forth requests for data from the network,

especially when a medical device is in question. Finally, attorneys representing

health plans, insurers, medical groups, hospitals, and other providers in their

business (e.g., financial) concerns may find information contained in the

databases of use in advising their clients about risk management, taxes,

financing, and similar matters.
A wide array of other kinds of companies, organizations, and services
might well have an interest in the information available through HDOs. Among

them are direct marketing firms, financial and credit institutions, and bill

collection agencies. Such entities (especially the last named) might wish to have

person-identified information, but in general many applications of the
information might not be directed at patients but rather at providers or at
groupings such as zip codes. Financial and credit institutions might be

interested in health plan and hospital data to determine market share or estimate

solvency for a given group practice or facility. In general, this committee takes

an extremely negative view toward giving these groups access to HDO files,

particularly any data that might conceivably identify individual persons, and

thus these uses are not explored further here.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
82Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CommentThe committee emphasizes that its roster of users includes examples of
current as well as potential HDO database users;
16 it does not believe that
HDOs necessarily ought to satisfy all such claimants. It does acknowledge,

however, that the mere existence of a database creates new demands for access

and new users and uses. Consequently, those who establish health databases and

HDOs may be creating something for which the end uses cannot always be
anticipated.Because this study took place at a time of change in both health care
infrastructure and information systems, the committee tried to anticipate the

probable sources of the tension that will exist between those who create

databases and wish to protect the information and those who might argue for

access to those databases on grounds of anticipated benefits. Historically, the
creation of large databases, such as those to administer the Social Security
program and the National Crime Information Network, has been followed by

modifications in the databases themselves and in the policies and legislation

that regulate access to them
Šwhich results more often than not in relaxing
prohibitions or barriers to access. Realism dictates that large databases such as

those maintained by HDOs will be dynamic. In the committee's view, policies

regarding access to these databases should, therefore, be based on firm

principles but flexible enough to accommodate unavoidable changes and

unanticipated uses.The benefits of electronic patient records should not be overlooked,
however. These benefits include the availability of much more powerful

databases, elimination of the need for repeated requests to record subjects for

the same information, and assurance that information is available when needed.

Despite the privacy concerns described, it should be possible to improve

privacy protection and safeguard the confidentiality of health information in
HDOs through a variety of methods described in later chapters.
Moreover, information must be acted on by individuals in a position to
16 In 
The Computer-Based Patient Record: An Essential Technology for Health Care,
the IOM examined in some depth the array of users of computer-based patient records
(CPRs) and CPR systems, indicating that an ''exhaustive list ... would essentially parallel

a list of the individuals and organizations associated directly or indirectly with the
provision of health care. Patient record users provide, manage, review, or reimburse
patient care services; conduct clinical or health services research; educate health care
professionals or patients; develop or regulate health care technologies; accredit health
care professionals or provider institutions; and make health care policy decisions" (IOM,

1991a, p. 31). It is difficult to improve on that enumeration in the present context, even
though the nature of the databases themselves (CPRs versus networks based on, e.g.,
insurance billing transactions or surveys) is quite different and the emphasis (e.g., patient
care delivery versus health plan management) differently placed.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
83Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.change their own, and others', behaviors and performance. Most experts agree
that getting information to people and organizations is just the first, and perhaps

not the most important, step in the change process. Although this committee (in

Chapter 3
) places great store on information dissemination efforts by HDOs,
HDOs will not be well placed to follow up the actions taken (or not taken) by

recipients of that information.
Many of the challenges faced by the health care sector are essentially
exogenousŠfor instance, the changing demographics of the U.S. population,
problems of international competition in the manufacturing and information-

services sectors, and increasing disintegration of social and familial structures.

No amount of radical change in health care, let alone tinkering, will

demonstrably affect those problems, and HDOs similarly cannot influence them.
Further, despite the promise that HDOs hold for addressing certain health
policy issues, this committee emphasizes that information derived from the files

of HDOs and similar entities will not be 
the solution to all the ills of the health
care system. Information may be incomplete or untimely, lack critical variables

such as health status, or otherwise be imperfect. In addition, such data may be

observational, meaning that they lend themselves more to description than to
causal or inferential analysis, and more to retrospective commentary than to
prediction. In the terminology used earlier, HDOs and their constituent

databases may be neither acceptably 
comprehensive nor 
inclusive.Commentary on a related information activity is instructive. In 1992 the
IOM, in conjunction with the Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences

and Education (CBASSE) reviewed the plans of the National Center for Health

Statistics for a new National Health Care Survey. The survey is described as

having the following objective: "to produce annual data on the use of health

care and the outcomes of care for the major sectors of the health care delivery
system. These data will describe the patient populations, medical care provided,
financing, and provider characteristics" (IOM/CBASSE, 1992, p. 6). The IOM/

CBASSE report commented at some length on the ability of existing data

sources (e.g., current NCHS surveys) to provide these kinds of information and

noted (p. 38):[They] are rapidly becoming outdated and less comprehensive than is
desirable. Often they do not cover the universe of providers and sites of health
care [or] patients or potential users of health care. They lack sufficient
information on exactly what services are provided and what the outcomes of
those services are . . . are inexact with respect to financial data ... are not

timely; and ... are inaccurate, incomplete and unreliable.
These faults may well affect the data repositories and networks considered
by this IOM committee; they are discussed in greater detail below.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
84Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENSURING THE QUALITY OF DATA
The above discussion has outlined the many potential users, uses, and
benefits of HDOs. Ultimately, however, the real rewards of developing and

operating HDOs will depend heavily on the quality of the data that they acquire

and maintain. The committee considers this subject of sufficient importance that

it elected to comment on it directly.
The absolute prerequisites to successful implementation of any type of
database or HDO with the expansive goals implied by the foregoing discussion

are reliable and valid data. Developers must ensure that the data in their systems

are of high enough quality that the descriptive compilations, the effectiveness

research, and the comparative analyses envisioned can be done in a credible,

defensible manner. (McNeil et al., 1992, describe limitations of current data

systems for profiling quality of care, especially at the individual provider level.)
Mistakes, qualifications and caveats, retractions, and similar problems must be
minimized, and precision about what data are actually being sought must be

maximized. All this must be done from the outset so that the long-term integrity

and believability of the database and work based on its information will not be

undermined irretrievably.The committee did not wish to prescribe methods that HDOs might
employ for ensuring data quality, judging that approaches might differ by type

of database and HDO. It did, however, consider that success in meeting this

responsibility will call for attention on several fronts.
First, the committee held the view that information becomes more useful
when it is used. Although the characteristic of 
comprehensiveness is clearly of
primary importance in considering the value of a database, HDOs need to avoid

the trap of collecting everything that it is possible to collect, regardless of its

reliability and completeness, and thereby end up with data elements that will be

used only rarely and, worse, be of questionable value when they are used.
Part of the problem is that analysts will have little experience with such
data elements and may make incorrect assumptions about their reliability or

about how to interpret values correctly. Another part of the problem is that

some data, although currently collected routinely because an entry must be

made in a box on a form, are not used for anything by anyone. Such data will

likely have a very low level of accuracy. A commonly cited example relates to
information on hospital diagnoses in the Medicare program; diagnoses were
often doubtful before the advent of the DRG-based PPS (see Gardner, 1990).

When diagnostic data began to figure in decisions about reimbursement, studies

of quality of care, choices in clinical care, or analyses about productivity, the

situation changed. After 1983 hospitals came to be paid on the basis of DRGs

(which obviously are diagnosis based), and
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
85Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.diagnostic information improved markedly, although some problems persist.
Similar problems of suspicious (missing, wrong, or even fraudulent)

information on insurance claims forms for outpatient care exist to this day; the

underlying problem is that payment mechanisms do not depend so heavily on

outpatient diagnostic data
Šthat is, the information is not used in the same way
as inpatient data
Šso little incentive exists to record diagnoses accurately.
17 The
least that can happen in these instances is that those data elements consume
computer memory; the worst is that the data will be used in ways that

contaminate an entire study or cause unwarranted harm to individuals, groups,

or practitioners.
Second, data must be accurate and analyzable. Sometimes these points are
couched in terms of reliability and validity of data.
18 More generally, the
accuracy and completeness of data elements that will be used extensively must

be guaranteed if they are to be useful. Among the problems one must guard

against are the following: missing data; out-of-range values for quantitative data
(e.g., age of patient; charges; even laboratory values in the most advanced
databases of the future); unrealistic changes in parameters over time (e.g., the

doubling of a patient's weight between office visits); clearly erroneous

information (e.g., wrong sex); and miscoded information on diagnostic tests,

actual diagnoses, surgical procedures, medications, and the like. Analysts must

also be cautious about their interpretation of patient care events
Šfor example,
not misconstruing the reasons for or timing of a particular diagnostic procedure

when interpreting events in the course of treatment of a life-threatening

emergency.Third, the committee also believes that structural aspects of health data
17 One example of the problem of diagnostic coding for insurance claim purposes was
provided during a study site visit. A member of an internal medicine group noted that he

used essentially six outpatient (office visit) diagnoses because "they work" and because
he would otherwise be questioned or second-guessed too much by insurers if he recorded
more, or more detailed, diagnostic codes. Because reimbursement is keyed to length and
complexity of a visit, rather than to diagnosis, he had a clear conscience about this
practice.18 Reliability in this context relates to the need for data to be reasonably accurate and
completeŠthat is, essentially free of missing values, systematic bias in what data are
captured or recorded and how those data are coded, and random errors. Validity concerns
relate to the issue of whether analyses done on a given database are appropriate for the

questions being asked and whether those analyses will provide defensible answers that
are internally consistent and externally generalizable. According to Palmer and Adams
(1993), measures of quality can be reliable if the rate of random error is low, although
they may still contain systematic error (meaning that some attribute is being captured but
that it may not be the one intended); for quality measures to be valid, both random and

systematic error must be low. These considerations of random and systematic error mean
that the level of reliability of a measure (or the underlying data) place a ceiling on the
level of validity that can be attained; unreliable measures or information can never be
valid.HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
86Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.bases should be emphasized as conducive to high-quality data and information.
Databases should be built around a core of uniformly reported (or translatable)

data that is relevant and can be shown to be accurate and valid for the HDO's

intended analyses (in keeping with the comments just above). In addition, HDO

should have an easily implemented capacity to supplement core data elements.

The committee and other experts agree on the significant tension that exists
between the desire for comprehensive databases and the consequently broad
uses to which HDO data might be put and the wisdom of a certain parsimony in

the actual gathering of person-identifiable information.
Although the committee realizes that the federal government may have to
take the lead in standards development and improved coding systems, the

committee urges HDOs to foster, encourage, and work toward national

standards for coding and definitions for (at least) core data elements. 
19Government leadership is indispensable in matters of coding and data

uniformity, but widespread input from the private sector is desirable. The
reason is that the costs of momentous or frequent changes (in terms of money,
loss of comparability of data, potential incompatibility of clinical and payment

coding, and incentives for fragmentation and upcoding of services) can be

significant; consultation between the public and private sectors can help avert

excessive or unnecessary costs of these types.
Fourth, the committee takes the position that the basic structure and
content of these databases ought to be carefully designed from the beginning,

but they must have sufficient capacity for expansion and change as health care

reform, effectiveness and outcomes research, and other dynamic aspects of the

health care sector evolve in coming years. This requirement implies that due

attention will be paid to the quality of new categories of data that may become

available for HDOs in the future.
RECOMMENDATION 2.1 ACCURACY AND COMPLETENESS

To address these issues, 
the committee recommends that health
database organizations take responsibility for assuring data quality on an

ongoing basis and, in particular, take affirmative steps to ensure: (1) the

completeness and accuracy of the data in the databases for which they are

responsible and (2) the validity of data for analytic purposes for which they
are used.Part 2 of this recommendation applies to analyses that HDOs con
19 AHCPR has explored the feasibility of linking administrative databases for
effectiveness research and urged the development of uniform messages and vocabulary
standards (USDHHS, 1991). See also Aronow and Coltin (1993).
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
87Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.duct. They cannot, of course, police the validity of data when used by
others for purposes over which the HDOs have no a priori control.
Until HDOs can demonstrate the quality of their data, the committee
cautions that their proponents must guard against promising too much in the

early years, particularly in the area of improving quality of care and conducting

research on the appropriateness and effectiveness of health services. The

committee returns to this point in 
Chapter 4
 in a discussion of data protection
and data integrity.As many investigators have pointed out, the absence of sufficient clinical
information in most databases today (and likely for tomorrow) is a critical

limitation (Roos et al., 1989; Hannan et al., 1992; Chassin, 1993b; Krakauer

and Jacoby, 1993). Efforts to acquire such information through manual

abstraction of relevant information in hospital records, which is the basis of

various patient classification programs (e.g., Medis Groups or HCFA's proposed

Uniform Clinical Data Set), are costly and time-consuming. Some means of
obtaining such information more directly from patient records will be needed.
Clinical data should be obtained, whenever practical, to validate analyses.
The committee does not regard the clinical data found in medical records,

whether computerized or not, as always sufficiently comprehensive, accurate, or

legible to characterize them as a "gold standard," but they are a valuable, and

sometimes indispensable, touchstone against which to judge the less rich

administrative data on which many types of health policy and health services

research are and must be based.
The validity of elements in a database must be matched with the kinds of
inferences that can be drawn. The committee believes that the best method of

enhancing the 
comprehensiveness of HDO databases and the accuracy and
completeness of data elements is to move toward CPRs in which the desired

variables themselves, rather than high-level abstraction and proxy coding

systems, could be accessed. This committee does not wish to convey the

impression that the transition to CPR systems is anything but an extraordinarily
difficult task. Although the progress made in establishing a CPR Institute is
laudable, much remains to be done for that organization to realize even the main

objectives set forth for it in the IOM report on CPRs and CPR systems. In

addition, planning efforts by the Computer Science and Telecommunications

Board (a unit of the Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and

Applications of the National Research Council) on the national information

infrastructure and its role in health care (and health care reform) make clear that

both the health care and the computer and information sciences communities

have a considerable way to go even in agreeing on details about the directions

that policies and
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
88Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.technical advances should take in addressing major issues in this critical area.
In its April (1993) report to the Secretary of DHHS, the Work Group on
Computerization of Patient Records supported the development of national

standards for documenting and sharing patient information. It also called on the

American National Standards Institute Healthcare Information Standards

Planning Panel to coordinate the development, adoption, and use of national
information standards for patient data definitions, codes and terminology,
intersystem communication, and uniform patient, provider, and payer identifiers.
RECOMMENDATION 2.2 COMPUTER-BASED PATIENT
RECORDAccordingly, the committee recommends that health database
organizations support and contribute to regional and national efforts to

create computer-based patient records.
The committee acknowledges the importance of computer-based patient
records with uniform standards for connectivity, terminology, and data sharing

if the creation and maintenance of pooled health databases is to be efficient and

their information accurate and complete. The committee urges HDOs to

anticipate the development of CPRs and to contribute to the development and
adoption of these standards. HDOs should take a proactive stance, by joining
efforts by the CPR Institute and other organizations working to facilitate

implementation of CPRs, helping in standards-setting efforts, and otherwise

becoming full participants in the multidisciplinary effort that is now under way.
SUMMARYMuch of the thrust of this report concerns how to maximize the benefits
that this committee believes can be realized from the construction and operation

of 
inclusive and 
comprehensive health databases. In examining these questions,
the committee has focused on what it calls 
health database organizations.
HDOs are emerging entities of many different characteristics in states and other
geographic regions of the country; the committee made two key assumptions
about them: (1) HDOs have access to and possibly control considerable

amounts of person-identifiable health data outside the care settings in which

those data were originally generated and (2) the chief mission of HDOs is

public release of data and results of studies about health care providers or other

health-related topics.
The broad-based value of HDOs and their databases might be said to be
the provision of reliable and valid information in a reasonably timely man
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
89Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ner to address all the major questions in health care delivery
Šaccess, costs,
quality, financing and organization, health resources and personnel, and research

Šfacing the nation today and in the coming years. The chapter also details the
narrower benefits that might accrue to a variety of potential users, including

patients and their families, health care providers, purchasers and payers,

employers, and many other possible clients in the public and private sectors.
In assembling the data that will go into products for all such users and
uses, the committee had sobering concerns about the quality of those data.

Thus, it recommends that HDOs take responsibility for assuring data quality on

an ongoing basis, and in particular take affirmative steps to ensure: (1) the

completeness and accuracy of the data in the databases for which they are

responsible and (2) the validity of data for analytic purposes for which they are
used [by HOOs] (Recommendation 2.1). The committee also recommends that
HDOs support and contribute to the regional and national efforts to create CPRs

and CPR systems (Recommendation 2.2).
Initially, HDOs will attempt to provide data for particular users and uses to
answer particular kinds of questions. Nevertheless, advances in the creation and

operation of computer-based databases, whether centralized or far-flung, can be

expected in the coming years. The committee believes that thoughtful

appreciation of their potential and anticipation of their potential limitations will

hasten that progress. The development of HDOs
Štheir structure, governance,
and policies on disclosure as well as on protection of data
Šmust be designed
for the achievement of these long-term goals.
The next chapter takes up the major responsibilities of HDOs in carrying
out a critical mission: furnishing information to the public on costs, quality, and

other features of health care providers in a given region or community. The

committee adopted two strong assumptions as it began to consider this topic.

The first is that considerable benefits will accrue to interested consumers and to

the public at large from having access to accurate and timely information on

these aspects of the health care delivery system with which they deal; this has
been the thrust of the present chapter. The other assumption is that HDOs
supported by public funds ought to have a stated mission of making such

information available, and this will be a core element of several committee

recommendations. The committee also assumes, however, that harms can arise

from some uses of the information in such databases. For this reason, in the next

chapter the committee considers administrative and other protections that it

believes HDOs should put in place.
HEALTH DATABASES AND HEALTH DATABASE ORGANIZATIONS: USES,
BENEFITS, AND CONCERNS
90Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Public Disclosure of Data on Health Care
Providers and Practitioners
Previous chapters have discussed a wide array of users, uses, and expected
benefits of information held by health database organizations (HDOs). Such
organizations are presumed to have two major capabilities. One is the ability to
amass credible descriptive information and evaluative data on costs, quality,

and cost-effectiveness for hospitals, physicians, and other health care facilities,

agencies, and providers. The other is the capacity to analyze data to generate

knowledge and then to make that knowledge available for purposes of

controlling the costs and improving the quality of health care
Šthat is, of
obtaining value for health care dollars spent. Another benefit derived from

HDOs is the generation of new knowledge by others.
In principle, the goals implied by these capabilities are universally
accepted and applauded. In practice, HDOs will face a considerable number of
philosophical issues and practical challenges in attempting to realize such goals.

The IOM committee characterizes the activities that HDOs might pursue to

accomplish these goals as 
public disclosure.
By public disclosure,
 this committee means the timely communication, or
publication and dissemination, of certain kinds of information to the public at
large. Such communication may be through traditional print and broadcast
media, or it may be through more specialized outlets such as newsletters or

computer bulletin boards. The information to be communicated is of two

varieties: (1) descriptive facts and (2) results of evaluative studies on topics

such as charges or costs and patient outcomes or other
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS91Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.quality-of-care measures. The fundamental aims of such public disclosure, in
the context of this study, are to improve the public's understanding about health

care issues generally and to help consumers select providers of health care.
1These elements imply that HDOs should be required to gather, analyze,
generate, and publicly release such data and information:
   in forms and with explanations that can be understood by the public;
   in such a manner that the public can distinguish actual events (i.e.,
primary data) from derived, computed, or interpretive information;
   in ways that reveal the magnitude of any differences among providers
as well as the likelihood that differences could be the result of chance

alone;   in sufficient detail that all providers can be easily described and
compared, not just those at the extremes;
   with descriptions and illustrations of the steps necessary to predict
outcomes in the present or future from information relating only to past

experience; and   with statements and illustrations about the need to particularize
information for an individual in the final stages of decision making.
Acceptance of HDO activities and products relating to public disclosure
will depend in part on the balance struck for fairness to patients, the public in

general, payers, and health care providers. Fairness to patients involves

protecting their privacy and the confidentiality of information about them, as
examined in 
Chapter 4
. Fairness to the public involves distributing accurate,
reliable information that is needed to make informed decisions about providers

and health care interventions; the broader aims are to promote universal access

to affordable and competent health care, enhance consumer choice, improve

value for health care dollars expended, and increase the accountability to the

public of health care institutions. Fairness to payers may be a subset of this

category. They should receive the information that is available to the public at

large, but perhaps in more detail or in a more timely manner. Finally, fairness to

providers entails ensuring that
1 SEC. 5003 of the HSA (1993) calls for a National Quality Management Council to
develop a set of national measures of quality performance to assess the provision of
health care services and access to such services.
SEC. 5005 (1) requires health alliances annually to publish and make available to the
public a performance report outlining in a standard format the performance of each
health plan offered in the alliance and the results of consumer surveys conducted in the
alliancePUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS92Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.data and analyses are reliable, valid, and impartial; it also means that providers
are given some opportunity to confirm data and methods before information is

released to the public, and offered some means of publishing their perspectives

when the information is released.
This chapter deals chiefly with issues relating to trade-offs between
fairness to providers and fairness to the public at large (including patients)

insofar as public disclosure of information is concerned. The considerations just

noted appear simple and noncontroversial on the surface; in the context of real

patients, providers, and data, they become technical, complex, and occasionally
in conflict. The appendix to this chapter offers a brief illustration of the
difficulties that HDOs might face in discharging their duties of fairness to all

groups.PREVIOUS STUDIES
This report is not the first treatment of issues related to providing health-
related information to the public. Marquis et al. (1985) reviewed what was

known about informing consumers about health care costs
Šconsidered then
and now a less difficult challenge than informing them about quality of care
Šas a means of encouraging them to make more cost-conscious choices. In an

extensive literature review, the authors documented the wide gaps in cost (or
price) information available to consumers, especially for hospital care.
2 They
reported evidence that some programs to help certain consumer groups, such as

assisting the elderly in purchasing supplemental Medicare coverage, have had

salutary effects on the choices people make. Despite new efforts at that time by

employers, insurers, business coalitions, and states to collect and disseminate

such information, the authors concluded that, ''it remains uncertain whether

disclosure of information about health care costs will do much to modify

consumers' choices of health plans,
2 In all likelihood, people will have more, and be more attentive to, information about
their own health insurance plans than about cost or quality information on health care

providers. Marquis (1981) studied consumers' knowledge about their health insurance
coverage as part of the RAND Corporation Health Insurance Experiment. She
determined that, although most families understand some aspects of their insurance

policies, many lack detailed knowledge of benefits, especially about coverage of
outpatient medical services. Greater exposure to information about an insurance plan,
measured by the length of time the family was insured and whether the family had a
choice of plans, increased the family's knowledge, which suggests that more experience
with information or formal efforts to educate will improve the general level of

knowledge. Left unanswered, however, is the question of the extent to which people will
act on that knowledge, especially to change insurance plans. These findings raise
cautions, therefore, about what actions people might take in response to receipt of quality
and cost information.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS93Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.hospitals, or other health care providers" (p. xii). The authors emphasized that
understanding how consumers use information in making health care choices is

critical to the design of effective data collection and disclosure interventions but

that such basic knowledge was lacking. It is not clear that the knowledge gap

has been closed.
More recently, the congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA,
1988) produced a signal report on disseminating quality-of-care information to

consumers. It examined the rationales that lie behind the call for more public

information; evaluated the reliability, validity, and feasibility of several types of

quality indicators; 
3 and advanced some policy options that Congress could use
to overcome problems with the indicators. Also presented was a strategy for

disseminating information on the quality of physicians and hospitals using the
following components: stimulate consumer awareness of quality of care;
provide easily understood information on the quality of providers' care; present

information via many media repeatedly and over long periods of time; present

messages to attract attention; present information in more than one format; use

reputable organizations to interpret quality-of-care information; consider

providing price information along with information on the quality of care; make

information accessible; and provide consumers the skills to use and physicians

the skills to provide information on quality of care (OTA, 1988, pp. 40-47).
The OTA study did not wholly endorse any one quality measure or
approach, and specifically noted that "existing data sets do not allow routine

evaluation of physicians' performance outside hospitals" (p. 30). The report also

concluded that "informing consumers and relying on their subsequent actions

should not be viewed as the only method to encourage hospitals and physicians

to maintain and improve the quality of their care. Even well-informed lay

people ... must continue to rely on experts to ensure the quality of providers.
Some experts come from within the medical community and engage in self
regulation, while others operate as external reviewers through private and

governmental regulatory bodies" (p. 30). It may be said that many, if not most,

of the issues raised by the OTA report are germane to today's quite different

health care environment, including the development of regional HDOs.
3 Quality indicators in the OTA (1988) report included: hospital mortality rates;
adverse events; disciplinary actions, sanctions, and malpractice compensation; evaluation

of physicians' performance (care for hypertension); volume of services in hospitals or
performed by physicians; scope of hospital services (external standards and guidelines);
physician specialization; and patients' assessments of their care.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS94Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPORTANT PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC DISCLOSURE
A significant committee stance should be made plain at the outset: the
public interest is materially served when society is given as much information

on costs, quality, and value for health care dollar expended as can be given

accurately and provided with educational materials that aid interpretation of that

information. Indeed, public disclosure and public education go hand in hand.

Much of the later part of this chapter, therefore, advances a series of
recommendations intended to foster active, but responsible, public disclosure of
information by HDOs.
One critical element in this position must be underscored, however,
because it is a major caveat: public disclosure is acceptable 
only when it: (1)
involves information and analytic results that come from studies that have been

well conducted, (2) is based on data that can be shown to be reliable and valid

for the purposes intended, and (3) is accompanied by appropriate educational

material. As discussed in 
Chapter 2
, data cannot be assumed to be reliable and
valid; hence, study results and interpretations, and resulting inferences, cannot
be assumed always to be sound and credible. Thus, a position supporting public
disclosure of cost, quality, or other information about health care providers

must be tempered by an appreciation of the limitations and problems of such

activities. In 
Chapter 2
 the committee advanced a recommendation about HDOs
ensuring the quality of their data so as to minimize the difficulties that might

arise from incomplete or inaccurate data.
Apart from these caveats, the committee's posture in this area leads to three
critical propositions. First, it will be crucial for HDOs or those who use their

data to avoid the harms that might come from inadequate, incorrect, or

inappropriately "conclusive" analyses and communications. That is, HDOs have

a minimum obligation of ensuring that the analyses they publish are statistically

rigorous and clearly described.
Second, HDOs will need to establish clear policies and guidelines on their
standards for data, analyses, and disclosure, and this is an especially significant

responsibility when the uses in question are related to quality assurance and

quality improvement (QA/QI). The committee believes that HDOs can produce

significant and reliable information and that the presumption should be in favor

of data release. Such guidelines can help make this case to those who would
otherwise oppose public disclosure efforts with the argument that reasonable
and credible studies cannot be conducted.
Third, in line with these principles, the committee advises that HDOs
establish a responsible administrative unit or board to promulgate, oversee, and

enforce information policies. The specifics of this recommendation are

discussed in 
Chapter 4
, chiefly in relationship to privacy protections. The
committee wishes here simply to underscore its view that HDOs cannot
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS95Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.responsibly or practically carry out the activities discussed in the remainder of
this chapter without formulating and overseeing such policies at the highest

levels.IMPORTANT ELEMENTS OF PUBLIC DISCLOSURE
Several elements are important to the successful public disclosure of
health-related information. Among them are the topics and types of information

involved, who is identified in such releases, differing levels of vulnerability to

harm, and how information might be disclosed. How these factors might be

handled by HDOs is briefly discussed below.
Topics for HDO Analysis and Disclosure
In theory, virtually any topic may be subject to the HDO analyses and
public disclosure activities under consideration in this chapter. In practice, the

topics that figure most prominently in public disclosure of provider-identified

health care data thus far have been extremely limited. Perhaps the best-known

instance of release of provider-specific information is the Health Care

Financing Administration's (HCFA) annual publication (since 1986) of hospital-

specific death rates; these have been based on Medicare Part A files for the
entire nation (see, e.g., HCFA, 1987; OTA, 1988, 
Chapter 4
; HCFA, 1991; and
the discussion in 
Chapter 2 of this report).
4This activity has had three spin-offs (not necessarily pertaining just to
hospital death rates). The first is repackaging and publishing the HCFA data in

local newspapers, consumer guides, and other media. The second is similar

analyses, perhaps more detailed, more timely, or more locally pertinent, carried

out by state-based data commissions. Examples of statewide work include the

published data on cardiac surgery outcomes in New York (cited in 
Chapter 2
),the work of the Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council on
hospital efficiency (PHCCCC, 1989) and on coronary artery bypass graft
(PHCCCC, 1992), and the publication of a wide array of information on

hospitals, long-term care facilities, home health agencies,
4 As this report was being prepared, the HCFA administrator announced a moratorium
of indeterminate length on publication of hospital-specific mortality data (Darby, 1993).
The main issues appear to be the adequacy of risk adjustors in the statistical model and

the concern that mortality-related data do not provide meaningful information about the
true levels of quality of care in the nation's hospitals (or at least in certain types, such as
inner-city institutions). Some attention may thus be turned to other indicators, such as
length of stay or hospital-acquired complications. Even more ambitious goals may
involve reporting on volume of services and patient satisfaction. The ultimate desirability

of making reliable and valid information available to consumers is not in question.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS96Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and licensed clinics by the California Health Policy and Data Advisory
Commission (California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development,

1991). The files of the Massachusetts Health Data Consortium have been a rich

source of information for various health services research projects (Densen et

al., 1980; Gallagher et al., 1984; Barnes et al., 1985; Wenneker and Epstein,

1989; Wenneker et al., 1990; Ayanian and Epstein, 1991; Weissman et al.,
1992). The third spin-off is exemplified by the special issues of 
U.S. News &
World Report
 (1991, 1992, 1993) that have reported on top hospitals around the
country by condition or speciality. The underpinnings of these rankings,

however, are not HCFA mortality data but, rather, personal ratings by

physicians and nurses.Longo et al. (1990) provide an inventory of data demands directed at
hospitals, some of which originate with entities like the regional HDOs

envisioned in this study (e.g., tumor and trauma registries and state data

commissions). Those requesting data would like, for example, to compare

hospitals or hospital subgroups during a specific calendar period, to control or

regulate new technologies or facilities, and to help providers identify and use

scarce resources such as human organs.
Local activities, such as those for metropolitan areas or counties, are
exemplified by the release of the 
Cleveland-Area Hospital Quality Outcome
Measurements and Patient Satisfaction Report
 (CHQC, 1993), as described in
Chapter 2
. (Nearly a decade ago, the Orange County, California, Health
Planning Council developed a set of quality indicators for local hospitals, which

was considered at the time to be a pioneering effort; see Lohr, 198586.) In 1992
(Volume 8, Number 3), 
Washington Checkbook
 presented information on
pharmacy prices for prescription drugs and for national and store-brand health

and beauty care products; it also reported on hospital inpatient care quality

(judged in terms of death rates) and pleasantness (evaluated in terms of staff

friendliness, respect, and concern) (Hospital Inpatient Care, 1992). In October

1993 The Washingtonian
 offered a review of top hospitals and physicians
serving the Washington D.C. metropolitan area (Stevens, 1993). Another local

publication, Health Pages
 (1993, 1994), covers selected cities or areas of the
country. It tries to help readers choose doctors, pick hospitals, and decide on

other services such as home nursing care. Its Spring 1993 issue provides a

consumer's guide to several metropolitan areas of Wisconsin; included are

practitioners; hospital services, procedure rates, and prices; and an array of
other kinds of health care.
5 A similar issue released in Winter 1994 focused on
metropolitan St.5 Quality of care becomes problematic for these types of publications. 
Health Pages
(1993), for instance, states explicitly: "There is little objective information available
enabling us to judge the quality of care provided [about physicians]" (p. 3).
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS97Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Louis. Sources of the information in these publications include surveys, price
checks, and HCFA mortality rate studies; only the last approximates the uses

that might be made of the data held by regional HDOs today, but clearly more

comprehensive HDOs in the future may have price information, survey data,

and the like.The brief examples above illustrate areas in which analyses that identify
providers have been publicly released. Other calls for public disclosure,

however, may actually be intended for more private use by consulting firms;

health care plans such as health maintenance organizations (HMOs),

independent practice associations (IPAs), and preferred provider organizations

(PPOs); and other health care delivery institutions such as academic medical

centers or specialized treatment centers. Requests may include analyses of the
fees charged by physicians for office visits, consultations, surgical procedures,
and the like, and the requests may be for very specific ICD-9-CM (International

Classification of Diseases, ninth revision, clinical modification) and CPT-4

(Current Procedural Terminology, fourth revision) codes. Yet other inquiries

come from clients concerned with the market share of given institutions or

health plans in a region as part of a more detailed market assessment. Questions

may also be focused on patterns of resource utilization by certain kinds of

patients, for instance, those with advanced or rare neoplastic disease. In general,

because these applications are unlikely to lead to studies with published results,

they are not discussed here in any detail.
Some internal studies are intended for public release, however, for use by
regulators, consumers, employers, and other purchasers. These include the so-

called quality report cards being developed by the National Committee on

Quality Assurance, by Kaiser Permanente, the state of Missouri, and others. The

Northern California Region of Kaiser Permanente, for instance, has released a

"benchmarked" report on more than 100 quality indicators such as member

satisfaction, childhood health, maternal care, cardiovascular diseases, cancer,

common surgical procedures, mental health, and substance abuse (Kaiser
Permanente, 1993a, 1993b).
Who Is Identified
The main objects of such requests and the ensuing analyses tend to be
large health plans to hospitals, physician groups, individual physicians, and

nursing homes. Most of the debate in the past few years has centered on

hospitals, especially in the context of the validity and meaningfulness of

hospital-specific death rates (Baker, 1992). Generally, arguments in favor of the

principle of release of such information on hospitals have carried the day;
controversy persists about the reliability, validity, and utility of such

information when the underlying data or the sophistication of the analyses can
be called into question.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS98Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.More recently, the debate has turned to release of information on the
hospital-based activities of particular physicians
Šfor example, death rates
associated with specific surgical procedures. Here the principle of public

disclosure also seems to have gained acceptance, again with caveats about the

soundness of the analyses and results. Nevertheless, because of the much

greater difficulty of ensuring the reliability and validity of such analyses,
especially on the level of individual physicians, many observers remain
concerned about the possible downside of releasing information on specific

clinicians. This criticism is especially pertinent to the extent that this

information is a relatively crude indicator of the quality of care in hospitals or

of that rendered by individual physicians, especially surgeons.
In the future, attention can be expected to shift to outpatient care and
involve the ambulatory, office-based services of health plans and physician

groups in primary or specialty care and of individual physicians. In these cases

the stance in favor of public disclosure may become more difficult to adopt

fully, for three reasons: the problems alluded to above for hospital-based

physicians become exponential for office-based physicians; the clear, easy-to-

count outcomes, such as deaths, tend to be inappropriate for office-based care
because they are so rare; and quality-of-life measures, such as those relating to
functional outcomes and physical, social, and emotional well-being, are more

significant but also more difficult to assess, aggregate, and report.
Other types of providers and clinicians also must be considered in this
framework. These include pharmacies and individual pharmacists; home health

agencies and the registered nurses and therapists they employ; and durable

medical device companies, such as those that supply oxygen to oxygen-

dependent patients and the respiratory therapists they employ. Stretching the

public-disclosure debate to these and other parts of the health care delivery
environment may seem farfetched; to the extent that their data will appear
eventually in databases maintained by HDOs, however, the prospect that

someone will want to obtain, analyze, and publicize such data is real. This may

illustrate the point raised in 
Chapter 2
 that simple creation of databases may
lead to applications quite unanticipated by the original creators.
Finally, some experts foresee the day when HDOs might do analyses by
employer or by commercial industry or sector with the aim of clarifying the

causes and epidemiology of health-related problems. Cases in point might be

the incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome in banks, accidents in the meatpacking

or lumber industry, or various types of disorders in the chemical industry. Here

the issue is one of informing the public or specific employers in an economic

sector about possible threats to the health and well-being of residents of an area
or employees in a particular commercial enterprise.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS99Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Vulnerability to Harm
The examples above can be characterized by level of aggregation: large
aggregations of health care personnel in, for instance, hospitals or HMOs, as

contrasted with individual clinicians. The committee believes that, in general,

public disclosure can be defended more easily when data involve aggregations

or institutions than when they involve individuals. Vulnerability to harm is the

complicating factor in this controversy, and some committee members affirm
that it should be carefully and thoughtfully taken into account before data on
individuals are published.
To an individual, the direct harms are those of loss of reputation, patients,
income, employment, and possibly even career.
6 Hospitals and other large
facilities, health plans, and even large groups are less vulnerable to such losses

than are individuals. Higher-than-expected death rates for acute myocardial

infarction or higher-than-expected caesarean section rates are not likely to drive

a hospital out of business unless the public becomes convinced that these rates

are representative of care generally and are not being addressed. By contrast,
reports of higher-than-expected death rates for pneumonia or higher-than-
expected complication rates for cataract replacement surgery could disqualify

an individual from participating in managed care contracts and eventually spell

ruin for the particular physician.
How one regards harms and gains may depend in part on whether one
views public disclosure of evaluative information about costs or quality as a

zero-sum game. In a highly competitive market, which may have the

characteristics of a zero-sum game, clear winners and losers may emerge in the

provider and practitioner communities. Furthermore, in theory this is what one

would both expect and desire. Nevertheless, when markets are not highly

competitiveŠfor instance, when all hospital occupancy rates are high or when
the number of physicians in a locality is small
Šthe information may less
directly affect consumer choice, although it may well influence provider
behavior by changing consumer perceptions. In this situation, clear winners and

losers are neither expected nor likely, but establishing benchmarks that all can

strive to attain should, in principle, contribute to better performance across all

institutions and practitioners.
6 The prospect that particular institutions, health plans, or individual practitioners
might rate less well than others, but not necessarily poorly, and thereby lose patients to
others is possible (and perhaps probable), but in the committee's view it did not warrant
special attention. Similarly, the possibility of gain, when publicly disclosed data or other
ratings are superior and thereby enhance reputation or bring additional patients, seems

likely but not of sufficient weight to merit further discussion.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS100Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Methodological and Technical Issues
Several factors influence the degree of confidence one can have in the
precision of publicly disclosed analyses, and this dictates how securely one can

interpret and rely on published levels of statistical significance and confidence

intervals and generalize from published information. Two factors involve the

quality of the underlying data and the analytic effort, as introduced in

Chapter 2
. Others, discussed below, involve the level of aggregation in
published analyses, the appropriateness of generalizing from published results
to aspects of care not directly studied, and the difficulty of creating global

indexes of quality of care.
In the committee's view, proponents of public disclosure have an
obligation to insist that the information to be published meet all customary

requirements of reliability, validity, and understandability for the intended use.

Such requirements vary, to some degree, according to the numbers of cases or

individuals included in the report-that is, according to the 
level of aggregation,
from a single case or physician to dozens or hundreds of cases from multiple
hospitals. When HDOs cannot satisfy these technical requirements, they should
not publish data in either scientific journals or the public media. The committee

was not comfortable with the idea that publication might go forward with

explanatory footnotes or caveats, on the grounds that most consumers or users

of such information are unlikely to accord the cautions as much importance as

they give to the data themselves and may thus be unwittingly led to make

erroneous or perhaps even harmful decisions.
This position may not be sustainable in all cases, however. The New York
Supreme Court rejected the argument "that the State must protect its citizens

from their intellectual shortcomings by keeping from them information beyond

their ability to comprehend" 
(Newsday, Inc. and David Zinman v. New York
State Department of Health, et al.)
 and ruled that physician-specific mortality
rate information be made public pursuant to a Freedom of Information Law
request. In this particular case it could be argued that the data and analyses met

all reasonable expectations of scientific rigor. In the future, however, one

cannot assume this will be the case. One solution in problematic circumstances

may be for HDOs to disclose information only at a much higher level of

aggregation than that at which the original analyses may have been done.
77 To overcome some of these objections to public disclosure of information with weak
reliability and validity, especially stemming from small sample sizes, various statistical
disclosure limitation procedures might be considered (NRC, 1993). For example, if data
or results are in tabular form 
and if the data are themselves questionable, then
information on individual practitioners, or indeed even specific plans, hospitals, and so
forth, might be suppressed according to a "concentration rule" (an 
N, K
 rule); in this, if
"n" number of providers (e.g., a small number, such as two) dominate a given cell (e.g.,
account for 
"k" percentage of a given cell, where 
"k" is a large figure such as 80 percent),
then information on those particular providers would not be made public. This is a form
of protection against the "statistical identification problem'' as well.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS101Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Generalizability is a related methodologic matter with ramifications for the
harms and gains noted above. It refers here to the proposition that information

on one dimension of health care delivery and performance will in some fashion

predict or otherwise relate to other dimensions of performance. For hospitals,

for instance, the thought might be that information on adult intensive care can

be generalized to adult cardiac care, pediatric intensive care, neonatal intensive
care, or even to orthopedics, obstetrics, or ophthalmology. A similar proposition
might hold that information on the management of patients with acute upper

respiratory infections in the office setting can in some manner predict care of

patients with long-standing conditions such as chronic obstructive lung disease,

congestive heart failure, or even diabetes mellitus.
Those involved in public disclosure of evaluative information must take
care to reflect expert opinion on this matter-inferences about one aspect of care

cannot always successfully be drawn from information, whether positive or

negative, about another aspect of care. The point is complex because some

extrapolation or generalization may be supportable. For example, good or bad

ratings for a hospital on death rates for congestive heart failure or acute

myocardial infarction might well be generalizable to that hospital's performance
on pneumonia or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (Keeler et al., 1992b),
but they might well be completely irrelevant to ratings for asthma in children,

hip replacement, or management of high-risk pregnancies. The committee thus

believes that HDOs will have a duty to make clear the limits of one's ability to

draw conclusions about quality of care beyond the precise conditions and

circumstances reported for analyses.
A related problem involves the understandable desire to reduce several
separate measures of quality of care into a 
single, global index
 intended to
represent the performance of an entire hospital, plan, or individual provider.

The presumption is that an index measure will be easier for HDOs to report and

for the public to understand. Developing index measures is extremely difficult

for conceptual reasons, which mainly relate to the difficulty of aggregating
measures that come from a variety of sources or represent disparate variables
(essentially an "apples and oranges" or even "apples and giraffes" problem);

quantitative and statistical problems are also significant. In practice, developing

index measures for quality-of-care analyses rarely if
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS102Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ever has been successful,
8 although at least one committee member believes that
the general level of 
intrahospital correlation is probably underestimated.
How Information Is Publicly Disclosed
Assuming that some of the above issues have been adequately addressed,
one arrives at the question of the content and appearance of publicly disclosed

information. The structure, level of detail, and other properties of such

information will differ by the disclosure media used, by the nature of the

information, by the type of provider or practitioner under consideration, and by

the level of confidence that can be placed in the numbers, statistics, and

inferences to be presented. Some of the more problematic factors in presenting
data are noted here. The committee does not take a formal stand on how these
matters might be resolved, however, because it believes that those decisions

need to be governed by local considerations.
One difficulty in presenting data involves 
how and in what order HDOs
elect to identify or list institutions, clinicians, or other providers.
 The most
obvious choice is to do so alphabetically. This option has the advantage of

making it easy to find a given provider and would probably be the likely

approach when publicly disclosed information is purely descriptive. It has the

related disadvantage, however, of complicating the task of comparison when the
issues of interest involve evaluative information.
Other approaches are nonalphabetic. HDOs might, for instance, order
providers of interest on a noncontroversial or descriptive variable; for a given

region, these might be the number of beds for institutions, the number of free-

standing clinics for HMOs, or the number of primary care physicians for PPOs.

This method, however, does not have the advantages of alphabetic ordering and
still has the disadvantages noted above. A variant is to sort providers on the
basis of an essentially descriptive variable, such
8 As evidence of the difficulty of developing index measures in quality analyses,
Cleveland Health Quality Choice (CHQC, 1993) has attempted to avoid the
methodological pitfalls of trying to combine independent measures of quality. In its

recent report, the Cleveland group provides data separately for various quality measures,
which include intensive care mortality and length of stay (LOS), medical mortality (for
acute myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, stroke, pneumonia, and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease) and LOS, and surgical mortality and LOS. The group did
report global patient satisfaction measures, in addition to separate indicators of

satisfaction with such elements of care as admissions, ancillary services, billing, food,
and nursing care, but in this case the entire approach to assessing patient satisfaction
(including the estimation of a global measure) is based on known instruments with
proven reliability and validity.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS103Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as charges for a particular service, that has the potential of some evaluative
content.Yet another option is to list providers in order from high to low (or vice
versa) on a particularly sensitive evaluative variable, such as death or

complication rates. This option may be the least desirable or the most open to

misinterpretation, as exemplified by 
PrimeTime Live's referral to such an
arrangement as a "surgical scorecard" 
(PrimeTime Live, ABC, June 4, 1992).
Some choices in the category of other-than-alphabetic ordering present
special problems or considerations. For one, the distinction implied above

between descriptive and evaluative information may be incorrect or not always

applicable. What for some consumers may be purely informational,

noncontroversial, or irrelevant
Šfor instance, numbers of specialists or fees
charged for a procedure
Šmay for others be a significant or decisive matter in
choosing or leaving providers. Opting to list providers or practitioners by these

variables may thus reflect the biases or predispositions of those publicizing the
data and may not serve all consumers equally well.
RankingsŠfor instance, from highest to lowest on some variable
Šmayimply greater differences than are truly warranted, and indeed may be positively

misleading. This is especially the case when adjacent ranks differ numerically

but the differences have no clinical meaning or statistical significance (stated

degree of certainty). The committee believes that those disclosing such

information must indicate where no statistical differences exist between ranks.
Mixed approaches
Šfor instance, grouping into thirds, quartiles, quintiles,
or essentially equivalent ranks and then ordering alphabetically within the

groupsŠare of course possible. Scores, indexes, or other combinational
calculations may be appealing for publication purposes, but they often have

technical or methodologic weaknesses that will be difficult to convey to the

public.Other aspects of public disclosure involve 
whether information is
representational or symbolic.
 Data can be presented quantitatively as numbers,
rates, dollars, and so forth. Alternatively, data can be rendered qualitatively
Šfor example, as one to five stars or dollar signs; open, half-open, or closed

circles; or other symbolic figures. Combinations of such approaches are

possible. Exactly which approaches convey what kinds of information best,

with the least implicit bias, is open to question and deserves empirical study.
Another aspect of disclosure involves 
how analyses are released.
 Up to the
present time, most observers would expect HDOs to release analyses in printed

form; in the future, however, electronic outlets, such as CD-ROM diskettes or

computer bulletin boards, may come into play. A computer-based approach may

speed information to some audiences, which would be a positive outcome.

Depending on the extent to which the underlying data
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS104Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.accompany analytic results in computer-based media, however, some
opportunity may arise for unauthorized analysis of data that could distort the

original information. From the viewpoint of HDOs, this would be an

undesirable outcome.
A final set of factors concerns the 
extent of explanatory information and
technical footnotes.
 When public disclosure relies on judgmental or symbolic
approaches, more explanatory and definitional material is probably needed than

when information is given in straightforward, nonqualitative ways. Some of this

information might best be left to a technical report for researchers and other
very knowledgeable readers. In any case, the committee agrees that HDOs
involved in public disclosure must make available, in clear language, the key

elements of their methods, including discussion of possible threats to the

internal validity and generalizability of the work that analysts believe they have

dealt with adequately.COMMITTEE FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS
To this point the committee has considered issues of public disclosure of
information, particularly descriptive or evaluative data on costs or quality, by or

under the auspices of HDOs. Its views do not extend to certain other kinds of

data banks or repositories, such as computer-based patient record systems of
individual hospitals and health plans or internal data files of commercial
insurance carriers. Furthermore, the positions advanced here logically depend

on the databases in HDOs being regional in nature (i.e., serving entire states or

large metropolitan areas) and both 
inclusive and 
comprehensive within that
region as those terms were used in 
Chapter 2.The committee further believes that public disclosure of such information,
particularly evaluative or comparative data, must give due regard to the possible

harms that may unfairly be suffered by institutions and individuals. In the

committee's view, disclosure of information about larger aggregations of health
caregivers, such as hospitals, will generally be less prone to causing undeserved
losses of reputation, income, or career than disclosure of information on

individual practitioners. The committee thus takes the position that public

disclosure is a valuable goal to pursue, to the extent that it is carried out with

due attention to accuracy and clarity and does not undermine the QA/QI

programs that health care institutions and organizations conduct internally.
99 According to a reviewer of this report, the laws establishing the PHCCCC provide
that a violation of the law would occur if cost data were provided without associated

quality data, or vice versa. The committee did not consider this specific requirement in
its deliberations about disclosure policies for HDOs, but arguably the Pennsylvania
provision could be seen as an effort to strengthen the "fairness" principle.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS105Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONSThe stance favoring public disclosure presented so far includes two
requirements. One is that the HDOs 
themselves ought to carry out some
minimum number of consumer-oriented studies and analyses and publish them

routinely. That view proceeds directly from the definition of HDO developed

for this study
Šthat HDOs are entities that have as one of their missions making
health-related information publicly available. In elaborating this position, the
committee offers a series of recommendations under the general rubric of
advocacy of analyses and public disclosure of results. The second requirement

is that HDOs make appropriate data available for 
others to use in such studies
and analyses, with the expectation that the results of the work will be publicly

disclosed; that is the thrust of a recommendation on advocacy of data release.

Finally, to promote these aims, the committee has urged that HDOs keep prices

for providing data and related materials as low as possible, as noted in the

section on related issuesAdvocacy of Analyses and Public Disclosure of Results
RECOMMENDATION 3.1 CONDUCTING PROVIDER-SPECIFIC
EVALUATIONSThe committee recommends that health database organizations
produce and make publicly available appropriate and timely summaries,

analyses, and multivariate analyses of all or pertinent parts of their

databases. More specifically, the committee recommends that health

database organizations regularly produce and publish results of provider-

specific evaluations of costs, quality, and effectiveness of care.
The subjects of such analyses should include hospitals, HMOs and other
capitated systems, fee-for-service group practices, physicians, dentists,

podiatrists, nurse-practitioners or other independent practitioners, long-term

care facilities, and other health providers on whom the HDOs maintain reliable

and valid information. In all cases the identification of providers and

practitioners in publicly released reports should be only at a level of

disaggregation that will support statistically valid analyses and inferences.
In this context, 
publish or 
disclose is intended to mean to the public, not
simply to member or sponsoring organizations. This may be easier to state as a

principle than to effect in practice. For HDOs with clear public-agency

mandates, such as those created by state legislation or governmental fiat or

charter and supported with public funds, the requirement to provide information

to the public would seem clear, but the use of public funds to support private

HDOs could be made contingent on the dissemination of such analyses. Some
HDOs may be based in the private sector, operate
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS106Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.chiefly for the benefit of for-profit entities, and have no connection with or
mandate from states or the federal government. In these cases, the imperative to

make information and analytic results available to the public on a broad scale is

much less clear. This committee hopes that such groups would act in the public

interest and not just in support of parochial or member interests.
This committee assumes that policy and economic forces already exist to
encourage HDOs to conduct such studies and to release information to the

public. As implied above, however, this presupposition may be in error,

particularly if HDOs are supported largely by private interests or professional

groups that may have reasons not to want such information publicly disclosed

or that may believe that proprietary advantage may be lost by disclosure.

Professional groups may have different, but equally self-interested, reasons for
wanting information on their members to remain private.
In the committee's view, therefore, the charters of such HDOs ought to
include firm commitments to conduct consumer-oriented studies. Furthermore,

no public monies or data from publicly supported health programs (for example,

Medicare and Medicaid at the federal level, or Medicaid or various health

reform efforts at the state level) ought to be available to HDOs that do not

subscribe to such principles (except when such data are otherwise publicly

available). Where state legislation is used to establish HDOs or similar entities

(e.g., data commissions), the enabling statutes themselves should contain such
requirements.RECOMMENDATION 3.2 DESCRIBING ANALYTIC METHODS
The committee recommends that a health database organization
report the following for any analysis it releases publicly:
   general methods for ensuring completeness and accuracy of their data;
   a description of the contents and the completeness of all data files and
of the variables in each file used in the analyses;
   information documenting any study of the accuracy of variables used
in the analyses.
The committee expects HDOs to accompany public disclosure of provider-
specific information with the following kinds of information: (1) clear

descriptions of the database, including documentation of its completeness and

accuracy; (2) material sufficient to characterize the original sources of the data;

(3) complete descriptions of all equations or other rules used in risk

adjustments, including validations and limitations of the methods; (4)

explanations of all terms used in the presentations; and (5) description of
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS107Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.appropriate uses by the public, payers, and government of the data and analyses,
including notice of uses for which the data and analyses are 
not valid. When
certain disclosures are relatively routine (e.g., appearing quarterly or annually),

such information might be made available in some detail only once and

modified or updated as appropriate in later publications.
With respect to the quality and accuracy of data, HDOs that do not cover
the majority of patients, providers, and health care system encounters
Šsuch as
those operated mainly for the interests of self-selected employers
Šwill have
less to say about cost, quality, and other evaluative matters for the full range of

providers in the community. Public disclosure of the results of evaluative

investigations in these circumstances may be less important; indeed, it may

even be undesirable if the information is open to oversimplification,
misinterpretation, or misuse. As noted previously, therefore, it will be crucial to
provide explanatory material and clear caveats about how the data might be

appropriately applied or understood. Publicizing descriptive facts on providers

who do render health care services to the populations covered by these smaller

HDOs will, however, likely be a useful step.
Minimizing Potential Harms
Up to this point, the committee has taken an extremely strong pro-
disclosure stance toward comparative, evaluative data, but it sees some potential

for harm in instantaneous public release of comparative or evaluative studies on

costs, quality, or other measures of health care delivery. This might be the case,

for example, if those doing such work fail to provide information to hospitals,

physician groups, or other study targets in advance of release, even to permit

them to check the data or develop responses. Disclosure proponents assume that
such studies will be done responsibly, and the public has every right to expect
that to be the case. To the extent that is true, the generators of the work will be

believed and the public interest will have been served.
What is not clear is how well such initiatives will be carried out and what
brake or check will exist to ensure high-quality studies. One option is to require

HDOs to exercise formal oversight over their work and, insofar as possible,

over work done with data they provide. For instance, HDOs might be expected

to impose an expert review mechanism on their own analyses before public

release, or to require that such peer review be done for analyses performed by
others on HDO data, or both.
Alternatively, reliance might be placed on an essentially market-driven set
of checks and balances. This approach holds that poor, biased, or otherwise

questionable work will eventually be discovered and those carrying it out

discredited, because the "marketplace of ideas" has its own discipline to prevent

reckless analysis. Studies cost money and are likely to be done
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS108Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.only by organizations large enough to have a reputation to protect; poorly done
analyses will be criticized and discounted in the press; analysts will fear

diminishment of their professional reputations; and fear of lawsuits for

defamation can be a powerful dissuader.
The committee did not, in the end, wish to rely solely on marketplace
correctives; it believed that a more protective stance was needed.
RECOMMENDATION 3.3 MINIMIZING POTENTIAL HARM

The committee recommends that, to enhance the fairness and
minimize the risk of unintended harm from the publication of evaluative

studies that identify individual providers, each HDO should adhere to two

principles as a standard procedure prior to publication: (1) to make

available to and upon request supply to institutions, practitioners, or
providers identified in an analysis all data required to perform an
independent analysis, and to do so with reasonable time for such analysis

prior to public release of the HDO results; and (2) to accompany

publication of its own analyses with notice of the existence and availability

of responsible challenges to, alternate analyses of, or explanations of the

findings.This set of recommendations reflects what might be regarded as a fairness
doctrine. It holds that an important safeguard for providers, especially

individual practitioners, dictates that they be allowed to check their own data

and comment thereon.Meeting a fairness principle could take the form simply of giving the
subjects of analyses prerelease copies of the publication or at least of the

information about them. Such subjects would not be given a veto over whether

their data are used, nor would they necessarily be afforded an opportunity to

have their data amended in public studies, but their comments would be
maintained by the HDO so that interested parties could review them. The
committee assumed that HDOs might well choose to append such comments to

their own reports and publications. HCFA adopted this approach for its

mortality rate releases, for instance, as did Cleveland Health Quality Choice for

its first data release.
The committee actually has gone further, however, to advise that HDOs
give providers and practitioners (or their representatives) the relevant data and

sufficient time to analyze them, should such requests be made. Because such

situations will differ among HDOs in the future, the committee did not develop
specific guidance on these points. For example, it cautions that HDOs will have
to devise ways, in conveying such data to one requestor, to conceal the

identities of other providers or practitioners in the data files to be transferred,

but the committee believes that HDOs can accomplish this.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS109Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In addition, the committee did not reach any consensus on what constitutes
sufficient time, believing that this would vary by the nature, size, and scope of

the analysis in question, but common sense about the difficulties of data

analysis and fairness to all parties might dictate the length of waiting time; a

week's, or a year's, delay would doubtless fail both tests, two months might not.

The committee also thought that the time permitted for reanalysis might be
longer in the earlier years of HDO operations, when all parties are developing
procedures and skills in this area, and for approximately the first year of any

new or especially complicated analyses.
This discussion began with the premise that potential harms to institutions
and individual practitioners need to be prevented or minimized, and the steps

recommended above have that intent. The committee believes, however, that a

benefit for HDOs of requiring them to make such data available for review and

possible reanalysis is that feedback from providers may reveal problems with

data quality and study methods that HDOs would want to remedy.
Advocacy of Data Release
Promoting Wide Applications of Health-related Data
To this point, the chapter has focused on what HDOs might do internally to
analyze and publish information on providers and practitioners in their regions.

Consistent with the discussion in 
Chapter 2
, however, HDOs might well be
expected to do more in the public interest to promote responsible use of health-

related data. Specifically, they can serve as a key repository of data to which
many other groups should have access.
RECOMMENDATION 3.4 ADVOCACY OF DATA RELEASE:
PROMOTING WIDE APPLICATIONS OF HEALTH-RELATED DATA
To foster the presumed benefits of widespread applications of HDO
data, the committee recommends that health database organizations should

release non-person-identifiable data upon request to other entities once

they are in analyzable form. This policy should include release to any

organization that meets the following criteria:
   It has a public mission statement indicating that promoting public
health or the release of information to the public is a major goal.
   It enforces explicit policies regarding protection of the confidentiality
and integrity of data.
   It agrees not to publish, redisclose, or transfer the raw data to any other
individual or organization.
   It agrees to disclose analyses in a public forum or publication.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS110Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The committee also recommends, as a related matter, that health
database organizations make public their own policies governing the

release of data.
In referring to "non-person-identifiable data," this recommendation is
intended to protect the confidentiality of person-identifiable information in

HDO databases. The latter pertains to specific patients or other individuals and

might include persons residing in the community who appear in population-

based data files but have not received health care services. The distinction is

made because individual practitioners or clinicians, who might well appear in
the databases as patients or residents of the area, 
could be identified or
identifiable by their professional roles (in line with earlier recommendations in

this chapter). 
Chapter 4
 of this report explores issues of privacy and of
confidentiality of person-identifiable data in more detail.
The committee debated at length the desirability and propriety of
advocating that HDOs make data available to all requestors, rather than

constraining the transfer of data as in the above recommendation. It was

uncomfortable with flat prohibitions on all transfers of data, but it was equally

uncomfortable with the possibility of open-ended or blanket transfers of data to
a wide variety of groups who would not be expected to place public
dissemination of information high on a list of organizational objectives. To

thread a path through this dilemma, therefore, the committee advocated that

HDOs make data available to those entities that can demonstrate their clear goal

of public disclosure of descriptive or evaluative information and their ability to

realize this goal. HDOs should not place prior restraints on which entities might

receive such data simply on the grounds that others may conduct analyses or

release findings that dispute those of the HDOs themselves.
10To characterize such entities, therefore, the committee devised the criteria
in the above recommendation for two purposes. The first is to underscore its

view that databases held by HDOs (or at least those mandated by law or

supported by public funds) should be available for science and the public good.
The second is to constrain the use of such data purely for
10 One of the reviewers of this report noted that the ability of individuals and
institutions to obtain information from public HDOs under state or federal Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) legislation is going to become more problematic and
troublesome as HDO releases become more widespread, especially if courts uphold the
view that (1) anything known to the requestor is available through FOIA procedures, (2)
any analyses can be requested as long as they do not require excessive time to perform,

and (3) data can be obtained at any stage (before analysis, before cleaning or editing,
even before the end of data collection). The reviewer suggested that consideration of
federal preemptive FOIA legislation that is cognizant of new challenges posed by public
data disclosures by the HDOs might be wise.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS111Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.private gain, particularly in anticompetitive actions. Examples of this second
concern might be employers, insurers, PPOs, hospitals, or other health care

delivery organizations in a given region using data for price collusion. Thus, it

is expected that those requesting data tapes from an HDO will perform and

publish analyses that can be said to serve science and/or the public interest.
The committee recognized that a tension may develop between the
understandable desire on the part of HDOs to hold data until they have

completed studies they wish to conduct and the need to be responsive to

requests from eligible organizations for reliable, valid, and up-to-date data.

Responding to such requests might even delay or prevent studies and

publications by the HDOs themselves. The committee believes, therefore, that

HDOs might consider developing independent units; one group could be
responsible for data management and release of data to authorized recipients,
and the other could take the lead for the HDOs' own internal analyses and

public disclosure activities.
Requiring Recipients to Protect Data Privacy and Confidentiality
The committee debated at some length the advisability and feasibility of
recommending that HDOs require recipients of their data to protect the

confidentiality of the information. Ultimately, the committee elected simply to

observe that such behavior on the part of HDOs might be desirable; it is

certainly desirable on the part of data recipients. It concluded, however, that the

practical aspects of insisting that HDOs police the actions of their data
recipients were too difficult to make this step an integral part of HDO operations.
Certain kinds of database organizations, already in existence for some
years, have long experience in designing descriptive, public-use data tapes that

are consistent with all the principles of privacy and confidentiality advanced in

Chapter 4
. Thus, to the extent that any affirmative action is required of HDOs, it
should at a minimum include that they create data files according to well-known
precepts and methods for public-use tapes and transfer data only through those
means. Further steps are examined in 
Chapter 4
. In sum, HDOs can probably
not be expected to police the proper and responsible use of their data beyond

their own walls. They can, however, cut off from further access to their data any

users who have abused these principles, and the committee advises that HDOs

be authorized or empowered to do so.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS112Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Valid Analytic Techniques
This chapter has dealt chiefly with descriptive or evaluative studies and
related activities that HDOs might pursue and then release publicly; it has also

considered the responsibilities that HDOs might have to make data available to

others for private QA/QI programs and for other analytic purposes. Consistent

with the discussion of data quality in 
Chapter 2
, however, the committee wishes
to emphasize that valid studies will require valid analytic techniques, often
multivariable methods.
Such techniques are powerful, complex, and arguable in details among
experts, but they are easily understood in principle. Properly used, they provide

the best methods for comparing institutional, provider, plan, or clinician

performance. This is so because only such approaches can isolate performance

from the potentially confounding effects of differences in the prevalence of
disease, severity of illness, presence of large numbers of elderly or poor
patients, and so forth. Variables that reflect these factors are often termed

severity-, risk-, or case-mix-adjustors.
Serious criticisms can be leveled at studies with inadequate or
inappropriate adjustors and analyses;
11 such studies, and the organizations that
conduct them, can readily be discredited. The consequences could be

devastating to the entire public-disclosure effort. To help protect against such

criticisms, the committee advises that HDOs use only proper statistical

techniquesŠparticularly multivariable analyses
Šfor comparisons released to
the public.In addition, the committee holds that HDOs ought to use only severity- and
risk-adjustment techniques and programs that are available for review and

critique by qualified experts. It also believes that HDOs would do well to

require, as a condition of data release, that entities or investigators conducting

secondary analysis of these data adopt the same precept.
11 Moses (1990, p. 187) argues that such adjustments can be quite difficult, as follows:
''To be fully effective, it [such severityor risk-adjustment] requires three things: (a)
recognition of what variables are influential on outcomes; (b) measured values of these
variables for each subject; and (c) understanding of how those adjustments are to be

made correctly.... The promise of adjustment is hard indeed to realize, even in principle,
and the practical problems of unrecognized and unmeasured influential variables,
incomplete data, and necessarily ad hoc adjustment strategies compound the difficulties."
With respect to these practicalities, for example, Greenfield et al. (1988), Iezzoni (1989),
Iezzoni et al. (1992), and Greenfield (1993) all provide useful reviews of issues relating

to comorbidity, case mix, and risk adjustment. Greenfield (1993) emphasizes the
distinction between presence of a comorbid condition and the severity of that condition
in the context of analyses that might be done on data from the end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) program or from individual ESRD treatment units.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS113Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Related Issues
Privacy Protections for Person-identifiable Data
Chapter 4
 deals with the issues of privacy and confidentiality of person-
identifiable data in depth. In advocating release of data to providers,

researchers, or others, however, the committee recognizes the possibility that

information identifying patients or other persons may be inadvertently revealed

to those with neither a right nor a need to know. This brief commentary on how
privacy might be protected is intended to signal the committee's strong view
that it must be protected.
Generally, committee members believe that encrypting, encoding, and
aggregating patient data can go a long way toward protecting the identity of

patients and other persons in HDO databases. Although no one can ever

guarantee zero probability that an individual can be identified through concerted
effort and ingenious devices, these methods make it possible to issue assurances
about privacy at a reasonable level of confidence. Such assurances are stronger

regarding tabular or aggregated information than data in discrete records, but

they might still be reasonably strong at the level of tapes and other

disaggregated databases.Some committee members were not convinced that such steps will be
sufficient to ensure anonymity and protect the identity of patients. They argued

that a less ambitious goal
Šthat of protecting the identity of patients to the
extent feasible
Šis more realistic. It has the further advantage of conveying to
the public that absolute protection of the identity of individuals when their
information is in a computerized data bank is very difficult, if not impossible.
Consistent with the principles developed in 
Chapter 4
 on access to person-
identifiable information for researchers, the committee argues that appropriately

qualified, institution-based researchers with approvals from their institutions'

Institutional Review Boards can receive data with intact identifiers. The
committee suspects that most investigators will not wish to acquire data tapes
on analyses that HDOs have already performed. Rather, they will wish to obtain

data that permit original analyses on a broad array of topics relating to the

effectiveness and appropriateness of health care interventions. The committee

does make provision in 
Chapter 4
 for researchers interested in HDO data for
these purposes to receive person-identifiable information.
Constrained Staff CapabilitiesThis chapter assumes that HDOs will have an affirmative responsibility to
carry out analyses and public dissemination activities. Clearly, however,
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS114Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.what studies they choose to do and how actively they pursue communication of
results will be constrained by available resources and dictated by their own

perceptions of critical issues. HDOs, for reasons of political disinclination, lack

of staff, or other factors, may not wish or not be able to conduct certain analyses

that outside requestors, such as consumer groups or newspapers, regard as

extremely significant or timely. Such outside requestors might even be able to
pay for such work, or at least to underwrite the costs of acquiring the data;
HDOs may still find it impossible or unattractive to attempt to respond to such

requests. The committee developed no consensus on how these problems might

be addressed, beyond the points made earlier that HDO charters ought to

mandate consumer-oriented studies.
12Obligations to Correct Analyses or Retract Information
A complex issue that proponents of HDOs need to consider is what
incentives are required to ensure the accuracy of their analyses and subsequent

publications. The market for the work may act as one corrective, as discussed

earlier. In theory, if it becomes known that an HDO has published information

demonstrated to be false, wrongly interpreted, or inappropriate, then political,

economic, and social support for the HDO will falter. In practice, the committee

was not convinced a market-oriented solution like this would have much effect
on an HDO's later performance
Šthere is essentially no evidence on the point
Šand it was even less persuaded that harms to individuals could be prevented or

redressed in this manner.
An alternative, more activist approach may be to require that HDOs
publish retractions in the same way and through the same media that published

the original erroneous material. Some remedies for injury to individuals or

providers might be available through civil litigation when false
12 To overcome some of the difficulties HDOs might face in responding to outside
requests for studies (e.g., staffing constraints or inability to price analytic services

appropriately to recoup costs), one committee member proposed that HDOs might
contract with at least three "analysis consultants," who will have the same clearance to
see patient identifiers as HDO staff. These analysis consultants would compete to do

analyses for any outside requestor and to release to the requestor analysis results that do
not permit or include patient identification. The rationale for this suggestion is that
"outsiders," such as newspapers, employers, consumer organizations, or other
nonacademic organizations, will find it difficult to meet the Institutional Review Board
requirements for direct access to patient-identified data (a condition elaborated in

Chapter 4
 on privacy and confidentiality); such entities may also find it difficult to
identify experts (within academic institutions) who can or would be willing to do such
studies. The full committee was divided on whether this approach was either desirable or
feasible but regarded it as worth consideration.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS115Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information has done material harm to their reputations, incomes, or careers,
although bringing libel actions that demonstrate malicious intent or

foreknowledge of the falsity of the information may be extremely difficult. A

further drawback to this strategy is the same feeling that inhibits individuals

whose privacy has been breached from bringing lawsuits
Šthe disinclination to
make public 
again what was painful, defamatory, or otherwise harmful when it
first was publicized.
A related question is what to do when data are corrected long after they
have been processed, used in analyses, or transferred to other users. For

example, should HDOs notify users or recipients of their data when something

has been augmented, corrected, or changed? Ought they go further and insist

that the users alert the public or others to whom they have disclosed study
results or transferred data of such matters? The committee did not develop
considered opinions on these questions, but it did believe that individual HDOs

should be prepared to devise policies to address these issues in anticipation of

the day when the questions will arise in their own operations.
STRENGTHENING QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS
Data Feedback
The primary focus of this chapter has been on actions HDOs might take to
make reliable, valid, and useful information on health care providers and

practitioners easily available to the public. The committee concluded that HDOs

could help improve the quality of health care through more direct assistance to

health care institutions, facilities, and clinical groups. One technique to

accomplish this is termed 
feedback, namely, efforts to make available to
providers and practitioners
Šin as nonthreatening, nonconfrontational, and
constructive a way as possible
Šthe data used or the results of evaluative
studies about themselves and their peers.
Despite high hopes and some years of experience with public disclosure of
provider-specific information, QA/QI experts are not yet clear whether and how

an uninhibited approach to public disclosure will foster better QA/QI initiatives

in the health care community. To the best of the committee's knowledge, no

systematic or rigorous analysis of the short- or long-term effects of public

disclosure has been conducted. Anecdotal evidence suggests that some provider
groups may seize the opportunity to take a hard look at their own operations and
act aggressively on what they find, whereas others may adopt an essentially

defensive posture. Nevertheless, virtually no conclusive information indicates

whether public disclosure activities materially improve quality of care or QA/QI

programs or, for that matter, make
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS116Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.any lasting impact on the public's mind.
13 On balance, the committee believes
the risk of damage to QA/QI efforts
Šfor instance, if public disclosure forces
institutions to divert QA/QI funds to efforts to defend themselves against

negative publicity
Šis likely to be less than the gain from timely public
disclosure of such information, but this proposition remains a question for

empirical study.
To support advances in QA/QI, the committee advises that HDOs make
available to provider organizations the information they need to conduct their

own internal QA/QI programs more assertively. This might mean, for example,

that HDOs would supply hospitals with their own data and equivalent, but

probably nonidentified, data on their peers (e.g., all other hospitals in the

region, or all other hospitals of certain types). The notion is generalizable to
virtually all kinds of entities that deliver health care in a region, from small fee-
for-service practices of physicians, to large multispecialty health plans, to

pharmacies and nursing homes. Here the intent is more to transfer raw data than

to transmit results of evaluative studies, although in principle HDOs could

develop a set of reports that would personalize such results for each of the

specific institutions or clinicians included in the study.
Some HDOs may elect to take a lower-profile, less pro-disclosure position.
For example, they may opt to postpone public release of their own evaluative

studies or insist on delay by groups to whom they provide data until the

information has been made available to providers for their use in QA/QI

programs. This option would probably entail more delay before public

disclosure than is assumed for the earlier recommendation about supplying such
data for providers to reanalyze for possible challenge to or comment on HDO
studies. Consistent with its stance above, however, the committee would urge

HDOs to assess carefully the pros and cons of operating in this manner, with

particular attention to whether they are thereby supplying a useful 
publicservice or acting more in the interests of the health care community.
13 The focus here is on provider-specific information made available in lay media to
the public at large. Some experience suggests that providers identified through database
analyses as delivering poor care can be targeted for follow-up of various sorts (e.g.,
patient chart review or more intensive analysis of information in the databases) by QA/
QI programs (see, e.g., Des Harnais, 1990; Dubois, 1990; IOM, 1990). This is certainly
the philosophy underlying shifts in the Medicare Peer Review Organization (PRO)

program scope of work in the mid-1990s (Wilensky and Jencks, 1992), although the
feasibility of new plans for changing provider behaviors through applications of data,
feedback, and continuous quality improvement methods has been called into question
(Nash, 1992).
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS117Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Quality Assurance and Quality Improvement
The committee assumed that the QA/QI activity prompted by HDO data
would occur chiefly as a part of or an adjunct to the formal QA/QI process that

various providers and plans might themselves conduct. 
14 Information on
identified providers and individual clinicians concerning questionable, and

perhaps quite poor, performance would be made available to organizations' QA/

QI programs so that they could act constructively on that information;
information on superior accomplishments as well as on average performance
should also be forthcoming. Such feedback implies that health care institutions

and individual practitioners will review, analyze, and make judgments about

this information and use it to improve the quality of care.
Of course, QA/QI programs can be (and are often accused of being)
ineffective. For instance, they may not act meaningfully or in a timely way on

information about poor providers and clinicians; and efforts that should be

taken to improve performance or remove substandard providers from the scene

may be delayed. Here, it is argued, is where near-real-time public disclosure of
information can play a significant sentinel role, illuminating problems and
perhaps encouraging, if not forcing, provider groups and health institutions to

take actions they would otherwise have softened, postponed, or not initiated.
Nevertheless, the committee believes that the health care community today
is moving more forcefully toward meaningful QA/QI efforts. Contemporary

QA/QI philosophy would call HDOs to provide information that will

accomplish several tasks equally well: identifying poor providers, identifying

superior providers, 
and improving average levels of practice. The committee
would encourage HDOs to give these quality-of-care goals equal weight.
PrivilegingOn a narrower point, quality-related information can be used to grant
practitioners various kinds of privileges, for instance, to admit patients to
14 This committee was not constituted to explore issues of quality of care 
per se;
 it has
opted to use a hybrid phrase, quality assurance and quality improvement (QA/QI), to
refer to the wide set of approaches to assessing, maintaining, and strengthening the

equality of health care in this country. For a comparison of the two generic approaches,
see IOM (1990). For a recent description of industrial quality improvement systems, see
Blumenthal (1993). Other seminal publications of the past quarter-century include:
Donabedian, 1966, 1980, 1982, 1985; Brook, 1973; Brook and Appel, 1973; Williamson,
1978; Palmer, 1983; 
Inquiry, 1988; Batalden and Buchanan, 1989; Berwick, 1989;
Goldfield and Nash, 1989; Berwick et al., 1990; Couch, 1991.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS118Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.hospital and perform certain kinds of invasive, diagnostic, or therapeutic
procedures. This process can also be used to withdraw privileges in certain

circumstances, such as for specific surgical procedures. It is applied most often

to physicians but can be directed at other clinicians as well. Related applications

in this area involve various forms of selective contracting, in which physicians

or other providers are selected for or excluded from participation in certain
types of health plans.
15HDOs may be asked to provide information on specific practitioners on a
private basis to health plan and group administrators, precisely for formal

privileging or contracting purposes. Some potential for harm to physicians does

exist in this application of HDO data; the particulars depend on who actually

receives such information and the presence or absence of due process, in
addition to the quality of the information 
per se.
 The committee believes that
when privileging procedures are used creatively, they are compatible with QA/

QI efforts. It cautions, nonetheless, that HDOs need to be alert to the possible

drawbacks of making information privately available in these circumstances

and to take appropriate steps to minimize them.
Peer Review Information
Some kinds of quality-related information, developed through formal QA/
QI and peer review efforts, are not covered by this discussion. 
16 The content of
private peer review efforts, for instance, those of hospital QA committees or

other investigative or disciplinary actions, are protected from
15 Issues relating to selective contracting for HMOs, IPAs, PPOs, and other types of
health plans that may emerge in the coming years of health care reform go well beyond

those mentioned in 
Chapter 2
. Selective-contracting decision making on the part of
health plan managers is likely to differ in philosophical, operational, legal, and other
ways from steps that patients and consumers take to choose (or drop) plans, providers, or
physicians. In this context, one might speculate that patients and consumers would use
information obtained through public disclosure to make judgments or choices about

health plans, providers, or physicians, whereas plan executives might rely more on
information developed internally. Nevertheless, HDOs (and policymakers) should not
underestimate the sensitivity that health plan executives may have to public opinion and
image, however, and this factor may have a synergistic or leveraging effect on the
effectiveness of HDO disclosure activities.
16 The rules governing due process and other aspects of quality assurance and peer
review are too complex to explore here, but see the IOM report on confidentiality of peer

review information in the Professional Standards Review Organization (IOM, 1981) and
other work by Gosfield (1975). The IOM report on a quality assurance strategy for
Medicare describes the PRO program in detail and reinforces the extent to which
information on substandard performance of physicians and hospitals will be kept
confidential through many steps before a more public "sanction" step is begun (IOM,

1990).PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS119Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.disclosure.17 In 1981 an IOM committee issued a study 
(Access to Medical
Review Data)
 on disclosure policy for Professional Standards Review
Organizations (PSROs, which were the precursor organizations to Medicare

Peer Review Organizations, or PROs); it addressed several questions about the

types of information that PSROs collected and generated and the potential

benefits and harms of disclosing individual institutional and practitioner profiles
and other data. That committee concluded that the protection of patient privacy
must be a primary component of any disclosure policy and, indeed, is not really

at issue. By contrast, major problems do arise in the context of data about

facilities, institutions, systems, and practitioners that can be identified

individually. The study concluded that disclosure of utilization data about

identified 
institutions could be justified on the grounds of public benefits such
as enhanced consumer choice and public accountability of health care

institutions. Conversely, that study did not conclude that utilization data on

identified practitioners ought to be released because of concerns about

"unwarranted harm to professional reputations caused by misleading or

incomplete data, and the likelihood of a chilling effect on peer review stemming

from physician fears of data misuse" (p. 8). Finally, that committee decided that
when the data in question relate to quality of care, "the potential harms of
requiring public disclosure [by PSROs] in identified form would outweigh the

potential benefits" (p. 8).
A decade later, essentially the same approach is in place for PROs. PROs
clearly provide considerable information to individual physicians under review

and to the hospitals where they practice. PRO regulations, however, hold most

quality-related information to be confidential and not subject to public

disclosure,18 and PROs are exempted from the require
17 Privacy protections for individual practitioners are also part of the procedures
followed by the National Practitioner Data Bank, which was created by the Health Care

Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (P.L. 99-660). Providers such as hospitals and state
physician disciplinary boards are mandated to report to the data bank information on
physicians and dentists involved in cases of malpractice (judgments or settlements) or
other disciplinary actions that last more than 30 days. Organizations with a peer review
process (e.g., hospitals and medical and dental plans) must make inquiries about such

information concerning physicians or dentists who apply for employment, admitting
privileges, or additional privileges. Except for the physicians who can query the data
bank to check on the accuracy of its information about them, no others, including the
public, are permitted access. Questions have been raised about: (1) the handling of
sensitive material by the data bank (related to handling of mail and mailing to incorrect

addresses; see GAO, 1993b), and (2) requests to physicians by PPOs and insurers to
query the database and turn over information about themselves (Doyle, 1992).
18 Confidential information includes, among other things, data that explicitly or
implicitly identify an individual patient, practitioner, or PRO reviewer; reports from the
PRO on sanctions and other recommendations; and other PRO deliberations. "Implicitly
identifies" means that "the data are sufficiently unique or the numbers so small" that
identification of the patient, practitioner, or reviewer would be easy (IOM, 1990, p. 202;

also see Blum et al., 1977).
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS120Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ments of the Freedom of Information Act. PROs are required to disclose some
confidential information to appropriate authorities in cases of risk to public

health or fraud and abuse.
Public Disclosure and Feedback
Some readers may believe that a tension exists between public disclosure
and feedback, but the committee believes that both will be important tools

available to HDOs to improve quality and foster informed choices in health

care. Thus, it voices support for both functions, believing that one activity does

notŠor at least need not
Šdiscredit the other and that effective combination
strategies can be designed. It sees public disclosure as a powerful motivator for
physicians to participate more fully in their organizations' QA/QI activities.
The challenge to HDOs may be to decide on policies that will foster the
greatest improvements in quality of care, patient outcomes, and use of health

care resources. Some advances will be achieved more by public disclosure,

particularly actions that aim to get useful descriptive data to the public in a

timely way, but others may be aided chiefly by private feedback in the QA/QI
context. This clearly is not an either/or situation. Combinations of approaches
will probably be the most desirable strategy, and the exact combinations are

likely to differ by type of provider, geographic area, nature of the data under

consideration, and similar factors.
SUMMARYThis chapter has addressed the challenges posed for HDOs in two critical
sets of activities: 
public disclosure
 of quality and cost data and information and
private feedback
 of similar information to health care providers in efforts to
help them monitor and improve their own performance. The HDO will have to

have an impeccable reputation for fairness, evenhandedness, objectivity and
intellectual rigor. This will be hard to earn and hard to maintain but essential if
HDOs are to play the key roles envisioned for them.
The committee believes that public disclosure of information, particularly
evaluative or comparative data, must give due regard to the possible harms that

may unfairly be suffered by institutions and individuals. The committee thus

takes the position that public disclosure is a valuable goal to pursue, to the
extent that it is carried out with due attention to accuracy and clarity and
contributes to the QA/QI programs that health care institutions and

organizations conduct internally.
The committee identified several important aspects of public disclosure.
These included: topics for HDO analysis and release, who is identi
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS121Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.fied in material so released, questions of the vulnerability to harm of providers
and clinicians so identified, various methodologic questions about analysis,

alternative approaches to public disclosure, and specific considerations about

using quality-of-care data in QA/QI programs and the protections accorded peer

review information.In explicating its findings and conclusions, the committee advanced
several recommendations advocating analyses and public disclosure of results.

It specifically recommended that HDOs produce and make publicly available

appropriate and timely summaries, analyses, and multivariate analyses of all or

pertinent parts of their databases. The committee recommends that HDOs

regularly produce and publish results of provider-specific evaluations of costs,

quality, and effectiveness of care (Recommendation 3.1). Furthermore, the
committee recommends that a health database organization report the following
for any analysis it releases publicly: its general methods for ensuring

completeness and accuracy of their data; a description of the contents and the

completeness of all data files and of the variables in each file used in the

analyses; and information documenting any study of the accuracy of variables

used in the analyses (Recommendation 3.2).
In protecting against harms to individuals or institutions by the publication
of evaluative studies, the committee also recommended that HDOs adhere to

several principles apart from those just noted. It recommends that to enhance

the fairness and minimize the risk of unintended harm from the publication of

evaluative studies that identify individual providers, each HDO should adhere

to two principles as a standard procedure prior to publication: (1) make
available to and upon request by institutions, practitioners, or providers
identified in an analysis all data required to perform an independent analysis,

and do so with reasonable time for such analysis prior to public release of the

HDO results; and (2) accompany publication of its own analyses with notice of

the existence and availability of responsible challenges to, alternate analyses of,

or explanations of the findings. To foster QA/QI efforts, the committee argues

that HDOs ought to make available to provider organizations the information

they need to conduct their own internal programs.
Consistent with its public interest stance, the committee also states some
recommendations intended to promote wide applications of health-related data.

HDOs should release non-person-identifiable data upon request to a variety of

other entities that meet certain criteria; these criteria involve public missions to

promote public health and publicly released information and explicit policies

about data protection. The committee also recommends that HDOs make public

their policies governing data release (Recommendation 3.4).
This chapter has only tangentially touched on privacy and confidential
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS122Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ity matters as they relate to person-identified and person-identifiable data. The
next chapter presents those issues in some detail.
APPENDIX 3A
Chapter 3
 advances the proposition that an appropriate balance must be
found concerning fairness to the public and to providers in the public disclosure

of health-related information by health database organizations. The committee

notes that this balance may be more difficult to attain than is commonly

appreciated, in part because of inappropriate reliance on technical and statistical

decisions and methods. This appendix attempts to illustrate the pitfalls that may

confront even relatively straightforward public disclosure activities, using
information that is in the public domain from the statewide study in New York
State on hospital-specific deaths following coronary artery bypass graft

(CABG) in 1991.
Actual Numbers, Computed Values, and Risk Adjustment
When HDOs attempt to disseminate information about providers in ways
useful to the public, they are likely to rank providers according to data that

either report actual events or reflect computed values. The former might include

the number of patients who undergo CABG in each hospital in New York State

and the number of patients who die in hospital following CABG (Figures 
3A-1and 3A-2); these numbers describe actual events and, barring inaccurate
reporting, are certain. The computed or derived information might include the
percentage of patients undergoing CABG who died in hospital (
Figure 3A-3
).Such information is likely to be of some use to the public, but the
limitations should be clearly stated. For example, suppose that 2 percent of

patients in Hospital A and 8 percent of patients in Hospital B died in a given

year and that this information is made available to the public at large. An

individual contemplating an elective operation might conclude that she should

go to Hospital A. Suppose further, however, that Hospital A had only very low-

risk patients undergoing elective procedures, whereas Hospital B had a large
number of high-risk patients or patients undergoing emergency operations and a
mortality of only 0.5 percent among its low-risk elective patients. Suppose yet

further that this information was 
not publicly disclosed. With this additional
information, reasonable persons might well conclude that the expertise of

Hospital B for the type of operation the individual needs might be greater than

in Hospital A, despite Hospital A's lower overall hospital mortality.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS123Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 3A-1 The number of patients undergoing coronary artery bypass graft

in each hospital in New York State, 1991.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND

PRACTITIONERS124Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 3A-2 Actual (observed) number of patients who died in the hospital

after coronary artery bypass graft in each hospital in New York State, 1991.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND

PRACTITIONERS125Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 3A-3 Actual (observed) proportion of patients who died in the

hospital after coronary artery bypass graft in each hospital in New York

State,1991.PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND

PRACTITIONERS126Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Releasing data only on actual mortality rates clearly is unfair to the public;
it is equally unfair to the providers in question. For example, more and more

patients would seek care from Hospital A, and these actions collectively might

render Hospital B's cardiac surgical program sufficiently underutilized that it

would be closed. This would serve the interests neither of future low-risk

patients, for whom expected mortality would be lower in Hospital B than in
Hospital A, nor of future high-risk emergency patients, with whom Hospital A
has no experience.This kind of unfairness had led to the process generally referred to as risk
adjustment. This may be defined as a process that allows the effect of a variable

of interest on patient outcomes, such as a hospital or a surgeon, to be isolated

from the effect of all other variables believed to influence that outcome. This

commonly is accomplished by multivariate analysis to determine

simultaneously the variables that, with a stated degree of uncertainty, determine

the outcome in question in the population under study.
1 In the example just
above, the question would be the effect of hospital on the outcomes of patients
undergoing elective or emergency CABG. The analysis would be used to risk-

adjust actual hospital mortalities for Hospitals A and B so that they reflect only

Šor at least largely
Šthe effect of the expertise of the hospitals on patient
outcomes. By extension the same process can be applied to determine physician-

specific outcomes; in this example, mortality rates by surgeon.
It can be argued that properly risk-adjusted hospital mortality rates, and
their conversion by one or another means to inferences about quality of care, is

a fair method of comparing providers. Some would counter, however, that

random assignment of treatment (e.g., CABG or no CABG in the example at

hand) is the only reliable method of risk adjustment. Whether or not this

argument is persuasive in theory, random assignment is not practical in many
situations, including the one under consideration here. The conclusion to this
point might be, however, that HDOs should publicly release not just actual

numbers of events but also the results of appropriately risk-adjusted analyses.
Certainty, Probability, and Correct Inferences
Even with all these refinements all derived information and comparisons
inherently have only a degree of certainty, not absolute certainty. The
1 Risk adjustment can also be approached by polling expert opinion about indications
for an intervention
Šas for example, in the indications of appropriateness for CABG that
have been developed by the RAND Corporation (Chassin et al., 1986b; Leape et al.,
1991)Šand then stratifying groups of (actual) patients in the analysis according to those
indications.PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS127Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.reason is that such analyses yield information and inferences relating to a
hypothetical group or population on the basis of investigation of a presumably

randomly selected sample of that population. Simple ''secure" facts, such as

those cited in the figures above for Hospitals A and B, do give some of the

information required for fair comparisons, reliable predictions, and secure

inferences. Nonetheless, comparisons, predictions, and inferences require
something more, and that something more always has a degree of uncertainty.
Thus, the comparisons, predictions, and inferences must take into account both

the amount or magnitude of any differences displayed by derived information

(as well as that shown in actual information) and the related degree of certainty

(or uncertainty). This IOM committee has asserted that HDOs have a

responsibility to ensure that public disclosures of their data and analyses done

with their data clearly portray these considerations. Again, it may suffice to

include detailed warnings concerning how not to use the data.
One pitfall that HDOs should avoid is releasing only that information they
regard as critically-or statistically significantly-important. They may do this

when the multiplicity of providers and computations produces such a large

amount of information that not all of it can be published, but doing so may be

unfair both to providers and the public. For example, studies might show, with a

high degree of certainty, that in a group of 30 hospitals, hospitals X, Y, and Z

are the only ones determined to have less good results than the remaining 27
institutions. This degree of certainty, or criterion for differentiating between one
subset of the whole group and another, is conventionally defined as a "P-value

less than 0.05."
Assume, in this example, that no other members of this group of 30
hospitals are shown with a high degree of certainty to be different from one

another. A public release containing only this information is an attractive option

on practical grounds, but it may not be fair. Some readers will intuitively realize

that one or more other institutions may also have somewhat inferior outcomes,

and thus are different from the others in the group, but this conclusion will not
have as high a degree of certainty as for hospitals X, Y, and Z.
In short, the use of 
P-values and establishment of criteria using degrees of
certainty are based on arbitrary decisions. The point is illustrated in Table 3A-1,

which shows the usual tabular form of public disclosure of hospital deaths after

CABG for the purpose of identifying hospitals with poor outcomes. The single

asterisk in the figure identifies the only three institutions (here, St. Peter's, St.
Vincent's, and University Hospital of Brooklyn) that the analyses showed to be
different from all others in risk-adjusted mortality rates with a high degree of

certainty (
P < 0.05).
Although technically this portrayal may be correct, is it fair? That is,
should the public be left with the general impression
Šwhich may not be
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS128Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.accurateŠthat the other institutions were not different one from the other? As
can be seen in 
Figure 3A-4
, three other hospitals (Bellevue, Erie County, and
Upstate Medical) had less good outcomes as well, but with slightly less

certainty than the three already noted. The arbitrary designation of a 
P-value(here of less than 0.05, but it could be any a priori 
P-value) has led to the
erroneous general impression that only the first-named three hospitals are
somehow "different" and are to be regarded as outliers.
The criticism can be generalized: Why should "the ruler"
Šin this case an
arbitrary P-valueŠnot be placed so that St. Luke's, Arnot-Ogden, and Long
Island Jewish are included as outliers? Where, indeed, ought the ruler, if applied

to Figure 3A-4
, be brought to rest?
The Educational Content of Public Information Dissemination
Public release of information about the variability in the ranks of various
hospitals that is produced by different methods of analysis helps the public to

understand the degree of uncertainty in overall inferences about "the best place

to go for surgery." Much of this can be expressed in some combined index (in
Figure 3A-4
, this is the risk-adjusted percentage mortality). Depicting other
information, and displaying information in bar diagrams (see, for instance,

Figures 3A-5, 3A-6, and 
3A-7) encourages, if not forces, the public to see how
complex a matter it is to distinguish between the best and the worst (or better

and poorer) hospitals. It also portrays the small differences that sometimes

separate these facilities. Thus, this committee believes that HDOs must realize

that the fairest approach to the public release of evaluative information involves

disclosing rankings
Šof all actual data as well as derived data
Šalong with
appropriate explanations.
The knowledge base on effective ways to communicate and disseminate
quality-related information to consumers is comparatively scanty, yet much

health policy today presumes that health care policymakers and providers
understand how to carry out such efforts. To overcome gaps in this area, more
than one research agenda in the quality-of-care arena has specifically called for

work on information dissemination techniques (IOM, 1990; VanAmringe and

Shannon, 1992). The committee endorses these calls for additional research on

these topics.PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS129Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Table 3A-1 Hospital Deaths Following Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) in New York State, 1991
Hospital Deaths
Risk-Adjusted Mortality
Hospital
Patients(
n)NumberActual (Observed) % Mortality
Expected % Mortality
%95% Confidence Limits (CL)
Albany Medical Center831263.132.853.382.20-4.95
Arnot-Ogden466132.792.144.012.13-6.85
Bellevue5946.782.817.422.00-19.00
Beth Israel16942.373.052.390.64-6.11
Binghamton General32582.463.352.260.98-4.46
Buffalo General1,151262.262.522.761.80-4.04
Erie County14853.381.935.391.74-12.59
Lenox Hill507183.553.173.452.04-5.45
Long Island Jewish369133.522.704.022.14-6.88
Maimonides608223.623.633.071.92-4.64
Millard Fillmore496153.022.443.822.14-6.30
Montefiore Moses30551.642.821.790.58-4.18
Montefiore Weiler19600.002.290.00
a0.00-2.51
Mount Sinai497153.022.843.281.83-5.40
New York Hospital831232.773.772.261.43-3.39
North Shore465163.443.253.251.86-5.28
NYU Medical Center707314.385.382.511.70-3.56
Presbyterian275103.642.953.801.82-6.99
Rochester General
959222.29
3.40
2.08
1.30-3.15
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS130Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.St. Joseph's
521112.11
2.56
2.53
1.26-4.54
St. Luke's734243.272.444.122.64-6.13
St. Peter's437204.582.126.64
b4.06-10.26
St. Vincent's481224.572.136.61
b4.14-10.01
Strong Memorial331144.233.643.571.95-5.99

Univ. Hosp. Brooklyn216125.562.377.21
b3.72-12.59
Univ. Hosp. Stony Brook27793.255.271.900.87-3.60

Upstate Med. Ctr. Syracuse266124.512.715.122.64-8.95

Westchester County605182.982.663.442.04-5.44

Winthrop451112.444.241.770.88-3.17

Total
14,944
4603.08 (95% CL = 2.81%-3.37%)
NOTE: This is the usual New York State tabular form of public disclosure of hospital deaths after CABG, with each hospital bein
g identified. Although the ranking here is
alphabetical, the media often reranks the institutions according to the risk-adjusted mortality. The 
number
 of patients and the 
number
 of hospital deaths are the only
happenings depicted that occurred and about which there is no uncertainty. The 
actual
 percent mortality is a derived datum, obtained from the previous two numbers by
computation. The 
expected
 percent mortalities and the 
risk-adjusted
 percent mortalities depend 
upon computations using a mu
ltivariable logistic risk-factor equation and
have a degree of uncertainty. The uncertainty in the risk-adjusted percent mortality is expressed here in the 95% confidence li
mits. Note that the 
public's attention
 is called
primarily to three institutions whose risk-adjusted percent hospital mortalities are nearly certainly higher than those of the 
state as a whole. (This is essentially the same as
those hospitals with nearly certainly larger actual mortality than expected mortality.) The decision as to which hospital is to
 receive the designations in footnotes 
a and 
b isentirely arbitrary (although based on conventional criteria), as will be seen later.
a The only hospital whose lower than statewide risk-adjusted percent mortality is unlikely to be due to chance alone 
(P < 0.05).
b P < 0.05.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND
PRACTITIONERS131Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 3A-4 The risk-adjusted percent mortality from coronary artery

bypass graft in New York State, 1991, shown numerically in Table 3A-1. The

higher the risk-adjusted percent mortality, the less the perceived expertise of

the institution.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND

PRACTITIONERS132Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 3A-5 The computed difference between the observed (actual) and the

expected percent mortality from coronary artery bypass graft in New York

State, 1991. The hospitals with lower (negative) differences can be held to

have greater expertise than the state as a whole; those with higher (positive)

differences can be held to have less expertise.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND

PRACTITIONERS133Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 3A-6 The computed ratio between observed (actual) and expected

(computed) percent mortality. The smaller the ratios, the greater the expertise

of the institution.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND

PRACTITIONERS134Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 3A-7 The 
P-value for the difference in observed and expected
mortality from coronary artery bypass graft in each institution in New York

State, 1991. This says nothing about the amount of the difference shown in

Figure 3A-5
 and Figure 3A-6
, but speaks only to the degree of certainty
(believability) that the difference is not due to chance alone.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF DATA ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND

PRACTITIONERS135Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Confidentiality and Privacy of Personal
DataEarlier chapters introduced the Institute of Medicine (IOM) committee's
conceptualization of health database organizations (HDOs), outlined their
presumed benefits, listed potential users and uses, and examined issues related
to the disclosure of descriptive and evaluative data on health care providers

(institutions, agencies, practitioners, and similar entities). This chapter examines

issues related to information about individuals or patients
Šspecifically, what
this committee refers to as person-identified or person-identifiable data. It

defines privacy, confidentiality, and security in the context of health-related

information and outlines the concerns that health experts, legal authorities,

information technology specialists, and society at large have about erosions in

the protections accorded such information. It pays particular attention to the

status that might be accorded such data when held by HDOs.
Existing ethical, legal, and other approaches to protecting confidentiality
and privacy of personal health data offer some safeguards, but major gaps and
limitations remain. The recommendations at the end of this chapter are intended
to strengthen current protections for confidentiality and privacy of health-

related data, particularly for information acquired by HDOs.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES AND GENERAL
OBSERVATIONS ON DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION
The Privacy Protection Study Commission (PPSC) was created by the
Privacy Act of 1974 to investigate the personal data recordkeeping practices
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA136
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of governmental, regional, and private organizations. In its landmark 1977
report, Personal Privacy in an Information Society
 (PPSC, 1977a), the
commissioners noted that:Every member of a modern society acts out the major events and transitions of
his life with organizations as attentive partners. Each of his countless
transactions with them leaves its mark in the records they maintain about him.
The report went on to point out that:
... as records continue to supplant face-to-face encounters in our society, there

has been no compensating tendency to give the individual the kind of control
over the collection, use, and disclosure of information about him that his face-
to-face encounters normally entail.
The warnings implicit in the commissioners' statement are even more
pertinent today. The emergence of HDOs in the 1990s comes at a time when the

American public is expressing growing concern about threats to personal

privacy. A 1993 Louis Harris poll found that 79 percent of the American public

is "very" (49 percent) or "somewhat" (30 percent) worried about the threat to

personal privacy (Harris/Equifax, 1993).
1 This response has remained stable
since 1990 when it rose sharply from a figure of 64 percent cited for 1978.
There was agreement by 80 percent of respondents that "consumers have lost all

control over how personal information about them is circulated and used by

companies." The 1992 survey also asked about the effect of computers on

privacy. Sixty-eight percent agreed strongly or very strongly that "computers

are an actual threat to personal privacy," and almost 90 percent agreed that

computers have made it much easier to obtain confidential personal information

improperly (Equifax, 1992).
Many privacy experts have described the ready availability of personal
information (e.g., see Piller, 1993). Rothfeder (1992) asserts that about five

billion records in the United States describe each resident's whereabouts and

other personal information. He also claims that such information is moved from

one computer to another about five times a day (pp. 22-23):
Information about every move we make
Šbuying a car or a home, applying for
a loan, taking out insurance, purchasing potato chips, requesting a government
grant, getting turned down for credit, going to work, seeing a
1 In October 1993, Equifax, a credit reporting company, released the results of a Louis
Harris poll, the most recent in a series of surveys commissioned by Equifax and
conducted periodically since 1978. For the first time, the 1993 survey assessed the
beliefs and attitudes about privacy and disclosure of health information of a sample of
the public and of "health leaders." A number of the survey questions bear directly on the

issues addressed in this chapter.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA137
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.doctorŠis fed into ... databases owned by the credit bureaus, the government,
banks, insurance companies, direct marketing companies, and other interested
corporations. And from these databases it's broadcast to thousands ... of
regional databanks as well as to numerous information resellers across the
country.Rothfeder believes that such pervasive data acquisition and exchange can
lead to a feeling of powerlessness in the face of privacy intrusion. His language

is evocative (p. 30):
Increasingly, people are at the whim of not only pressure groups, but also large
organizations
Šdirect marketers, the credit bureaus, the government, and the
entire information economy
Šthat view individuals as nothing but lifeless data
floating like microscopic entities in vast electronic chambers, data that exists
[sic] to be captured, examined, collated, and sold, regardless of the individual's

desire to choose what should be concealed and what should be made public.
It may be that the increasing aggregation of personal data documenting the
details of our physical attributes and defects, behaviors, desires, attitudes,

failings, and achievements creates a virtual representation of us. Some have

called this a ''computerized alter ego" or a "digital version of each of us to go
with our public personae" (Rothfeder, 1992, p. 16, citing Miller). To the extent
this is so, the privacy of this "virtual person" requires protection.
Recently the U.S. Congress has given serious attention to reform of the
Fair Credit Reporting Act (Public Law [P.L.] 102-550; see below). It has also

looked at technology-driven privacy issues: most pertinent are legislative

proposals to restrict caller I.D. programs (S. 652; H.R. 1305; also see, House
Report No. 102-324, 102nd Congress 2d Session), junk telephone calls and junk
faxes (P.L. 102-243, "Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991"). Some

congressional efforts, such as bills related to DNA testing and genetic profiling

(S. 1355, "DNA Identification Act of 1991"; H.R. 2045, "Human Genome

Privacy Act"), were intended to protect individuals against threats posed by

medical technologies or initiatives. In October 1991, the Committee on

Government Operations of the U.S. House of Representatives, Subcommittee

on Government Information, Justice, and Agriculture, held hearings on genetic

privacy issues, and in April 1992 it issued a report calling for reforms related to

the privacy of genetic information.
Both the U.S. Congress and the Administration have undertaken activities
related to the protection of medical information. In October 1993 the Senate

Committee on the Judiciary held hearings on High Tech Privacy Issues in

Health Law, and in November, the Subcommittee on Government Information,

Justice, and Agriculture of the Committee on Government Operations held a
hearing on a report prepared by the Office of Technology
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA138
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Assessment (OTA, 1993) at the request of that subcommittee and the Senate
Subcommittee on Federal Services, Post Office, and Civil Service. The former

committee has also been drafting legislation to protect the privacy of health

information.2A Task Force on Privacy was established in 1990 by the Assistant
Secretary for Planning and Evaluation to report on the privacy of private sector

health records. Another DHHS group established at the same time, the

Workgroup on Electronic Data Interchange (WEDI, 1991) also addressed the

protection of information when medical insurance claims are handled
electronically. The recommendations of that workshop are discussed later in
this chapter.
Two of President Clinton's Health Care Reform Task Forces met during
the spring of 1993. They considered the implications of and generated plans for

the protection of health-related data that would be acquired and held under the

administration's proposal for health reform. The legislative proposals in the
Health Security Act contain specific privacy protection provisions.
32 The OTA report was released just as the IOM report was being completed.
3 The Administration's Health Security Act (HSA, 1993) calls for the development of
Health Information System Standards within two years of its enactment to promulgate
standards and security safeguards for the privacy of individually identifiable health
information that is in the health information system (see Footnote 1, 
Chapter 2
). The
proposed legislation states the following principles: (1) All disclosures of individually
identifiable health information by an individual or entity shall be unauthorized unless (a)
the disclosure is by the enrollee identified in the information or whose identity can be
associated with the information; (b) the disclosure is authorized by such enrollee in
writing in a manner prescribed by the Board; (c) the disclosure is to Federal, State, or

local law enforcement agencies for the purpose of enforcing this Act or an Act amended
by this Act; or (d) the disclosure otherwise is consistent with this Act and specific
criteria governing disclosure established by the Board. Further, disclosure of individually
identifiable health information shall be restricted to the minimum amount of information
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the information is being disclosed. It

would require that any individual or entity who maintains, uses, or disseminates
individually identifiable health information implement administrative, technical, and
physical safeguards.
It stipulates that an enrollee (or an enrollee representative) has the right to know (a)
"whether any individual or entity uses or maintains individually identifiable health

information concerning the enrollee; and (b) for what purposes the information may be
used or maintained" (Sec. 5120). It also specifies a right to access to see, copy, and have
entered a notation of any amendment or correction of his or her information. It specifies

a right to receive a written statement concerning (1) the purposes for which individually
identifiable health information may be used or disclosed by, or disclosed to, any
individual or entity; and (2) the right of access described above. The legislation also calls
for the use of a unique identifier to be used in transmitting information. It further
specifies that individually identifiable health care information may not be used in making

employment decisions.
Sec. 5121 calls for the National Health Board to sponsor (1) research relating to the
privacy and security of individually identifiable health information; (2) the development
of consentCONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA139
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.State legislatures have also been active. In the past three years, for
example, many states have adopted legislation that prohibits employers from

discriminating against applicants and employees on the basis of off-the-job,

lawful activity or some specific subset of lawful activity, such as cigarette

smoking.SOURCES OF CONCERNS ABOUT PRIVACY AND THE
CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH RECORDS
Two somewhat distinct trends have led to increased access to the primary
health record and subsequent concerns about privacy. One has to do with

primary health records regardless of how they are created and maintained; the

other involves health records stored electronically.
Health Care RecordsThe quantity and type of health care information now collected has also
increased dramatically in recent years. The participation in health care delivery

of many different individuals and groups of providers exerts strong pressures to

document in ever greater detail. The expanding numbers of available

technologies for diagnosis and therapy mean that details that a provider could at

one time recall must now be recorded and thus become available for inspection

by others. Further, information on lifestyle (e.g., use of tobacco or alcohol),

family history, and health status have become of greater interest and relevance
as we learn more about the relationship of these factors to overall health and
well-being. In addition, genetic data are becoming more readily available, not

only for prenatal testing but also for assessing an individual's degree of risk for

an inherited condition.
4The more detailed the information about an individual or class of
individuals, the more appropriate, one hopes, is the treatment they will be given.

Further, documentation of care and risk factors are essential to promoting
forms governing disclosure of such information; and (3) the development of
technology to implement standards regarding such information. It should also establish

education and awareness programs, foster adequate security practices, train personnel of
public and private entities in appropriate practices.
Sec. 5122. calls for a proposal not later than three years after enactment of the HSA to
provide a comprehensive scheme of Federal privacy protection for individually
identifiable health information that would include a Code of Fair Information Practices
and provide for enforcement of the rights and duties created by the legislation. (Health
Security Act. Title V. Part 2. Privacy of information.)
4An IOM report on assessing genetic risk explores these issues in considerable detail
and develops a strong pro-privacy stance (IOM, 1993b).
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA140
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.continuity of care over time and among providers. It is also a first defense
against charges of malpractice.
The primary health record is no longer simply a tool for health care
providers to record their impressions, observations, and instructions. Rather, it

serves many purposes beyond direct health care. Third-party payers access

patient record information to make payment determinations, and managed care

organizations access patient records for precertification and case management.
Other parties external to the healing relationship seek person-identified
information and assert socially beneficial reasons for access. What was once the

"business" only of patients and possibly their physicians has now become the

business of such groups as: (1) officers of government entitlement programs

checking on eligibility, and on patient and provider fraud and abuse; (2)

agencies granting security clearance; (3) attorneys bringing criminal or civil

charges; and (4) social service workers protecting possibly abused children, to

name only a few. Others access secondary health records or obtain portions of
the medical record when making decisions about hiring, granting a license, or
issuing life, health, or disability insurance.
Electronic Records
Other trends give rise to particular concerns about the confidentiality of
health information that is stored electronically. First is the ability to access,

transmit, and copy large volumes of data easily. Photocopying paper records is,

of course, possible, but it is hardly feasible for large numbers of geographically

dispersed medical records. Electronic storage and transmittal of data, by

contrast, enable interested parties to aggregate information for individuals over

time and across institutions and providers of care.
Second, databases were at one time discrete
Šoften held in physically
secure rooms on tape drives
Šwith identifiers that were unique to a given
institution or insurer. Now, however, data from diverse sources can be

combined and linked. Once data are stored electronically, networks of databases

can be explored almost imperceptibly from remote locations. Unless security

systems are designed to record access, the curious, entrepreneurial, or venal can
enter databases without leaving evidence of having done so.
Third, computer-based health data have become a very valuable
commodity. Some companies obtain information from physicians' computers

and pharmacy records for sale to pharmaceutical companies in return for

incentives such as low-cost computer hardware and software. These companies

gather such identifying variables as age, sex, and Social Security numbers even
if patient names are either not taken or are later stripped off (Miller, 1992).
Other companies resell information from prescription or claims data
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA141
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.bases to companies that sort it by physician for marketing purposes. For
example, Health Information Technologies, Inc., helps automate private

physicians' insurance claims. When it transmits claims and payments between

the insurance company and the physician, it retains electronic copies of these

records, and it can later sell them (presumably without physician or patient

names) for pharmaceutical and other related kinds of marketing (Miller, 1992).
In August 1993, Merck & Company purchased Medco Containment
Services, a mail-order prescription firm. The purchase price, $6 billion, was

based in part on the value of the information in its databases to influence

physician prescribing practices (Tanouye, 1993). HDOs will control a gold

mine of information, and they may find it difficult indeed to resist economic

benefits from allowing access to their data files by third parties.
Finally, because developers of HDOs have compared claims transmittal to
electronic funds transfer (EFT), it is helpful to examine how the Privacy

Protection Study Commission regarded confidentiality in EFT. The

commissioners were alert to problems that might result if records created by

EFT could not be controlled by institutions. Noting that automated

clearinghouses centralize information that would otherwise be segregated
among diverse depository institutions, their report (PPSC, 1977a) expressed
worry about threats posed by the accumulation and centralization of the

financial information that flows through such clearinghouses. The

commissioners also recognized that the resulting pools of information would

become attractive sources of person-identifiable information for use "in ways

inimical to personal privacy" (p. 121). They urged that adequate protections be

established for person-identifiable information flowing through an EFT data

communications network and that such account information be retained for as

limited a period of time as was essential to fulfill operating requirements of the

service provider. Thus, in contemplating EFT, the commissioners did not

foresee, and certainly did not encourage, the creation of an information

repository now contemplated under the concept of an HDO.
DEFINITIONSBelow, the committee offers definitions of critical terms
Šprivacy(especially informational privacy), confidentiality, security, and health-related

information.PrivacyThe most general and common view of privacy conveys notions of
withdrawal, seclusion, secrecy, or of being kept away from public view, but

with no pejorative overtones. By contrast, an 
invasion of privacy
 occursCONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA142
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.when there is intentional deprivation of the desired privacy to which one is
entitled. In public policy generally and health policy in particular, privacy takes

on special meanings, some derived from moral theories, others from legal

doctrine, and one from the widespread use of health information.
Privacy is sometimes characterized as the "right to be left alone" (Cooley,
1880; Warren and Brandeis, 1890; Elison and Nettiksimmons, 1987;

Turkington, 1987; Herdrich, 1989). Many experts, however, have objected that

such a definition is too broad to be helpful in the health context. There are

innumerable ways of not being left alone that arguably have nothing to do with
privacy (Thomson, 1975; Reiman, 1976; Parent, 1983), such as when an
individual is subjected to aggressive panhandling on a city street. Consequently,

theorists have sought to refine their conceptions of privacy. Their aim has been

to isolate what is unique about privacy, to identify what constitutes its loss, and

to distinguish among a variety of conceptually related but separable senses of

privacy (Gerety, 1977; McCloskey, 1980; Schoeman, 1984).
The development and application of the concept of privacy in American
law encompasses three clusters of ideas.
5 First, privacy embodies autonomy
interests; it protects decisions about the exercise of fundamental constitutional

liberties with respect to private behavior, such as decisions relating to marriage,

procreation, contraception, family relationships, and child-rearing. This is

frequently characterized as decisional privacy (Tribe, 1978). Second, privacy
protects against surveillance or intrusion when an individual has a "reasonable
expectation of privacy." Examples include protections against unlawful

searches of one's home or person and unauthorized wiretapping. Third, privacy

encompasses informational interests; this notion is most frequently expressed as

the interest of an individual in controlling the dissemination and use of

information that relates to himself or herself (Shils, 1966; Westin, 1967), or to

have information about oneself be inaccessible to others. This last form-

informational privacy-is the main subject of this chapter.
Informational PrivacyInformational privacy
Š"a 
state or condition of controlled access to
personal information"
 (Schoeman, 1984; Allen, 1987; Powers, 1993)
Šisinfringed, by definition, whenever another party has access to one's personal

information by reading, listening, or using any of the other senses. Such loss of

privacy may be entirely acceptable and intended by the indi
5 In the United States, privacy is restricted to real persons. In Europe, legal persons are
generally included.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA143
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vidual, or it may be inadvertent, unacceptable, and even unknown to the
individual.This definition of privacy thus reflects two underlying notions. First,
privacy in general and informational privacy in particular are always matters of

degree. Rarely is anyone in a condition of complete physical or informational

inaccessibility to others, nor would they wish to remain so. Second, although

information privacy may be valuable and deserving of protection, many

thoughtful privacy advocates argue that it does not, in itself, have moral

significance or inherent value (Allen, 1987; Faden, 1993).
Nonetheless, informational privacy has value for all in our society, and it
accordingly has special claims on our attention. In his pivotal book, 
Privacy and
Freedom, Westin (1967) described it as "the claim of individuals, groups, or
institutions to determine for themselves when, how, and to what extent

information about them is communicated to others" (p. 7). This definition

served as the foundation for the Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93579; 5 U.S.C. 
§552a). This act, arguably the most significant step to protect privacy in recent
decades, was enacted to control use of personally identifiable information

maintained in federal government databases.
Recordkeeping PrivacyIn recent decades, discussions about privacy have almost exclusively
addressed the use of information about people to make decisions about some

right, privilege, benefit, or entitlement
Šso-called "recordkeeping privacy."
This focus was of particular interest to those framing the Privacy Act of 1974.
More recently the desire for informational privacy has become an
important expectation, not because of a benefit or entitlement sought, but for its

own sake. Information may be created as a byproduct of some event
Šforexample, an individual's geographic location becomes available when he or she

uses a bank card for a financial transaction; similarly, one's preferences are
known when one buys goods by mail order or uses a check-verification card at
the local supermarket. In yet other cases, information derives from aggregating

data from many sources, including public records; such aggregation can also

include data that have been derived from computer processing (e.g., buying

profiles or dossiers).
Data subjects want informational privacy to be respected in such contexts
as well. Many people in the United States would like to believe that data

collected about them legitimately, in connection with some transaction or

incidentally through participation in the general activities of society, will not be
exploited for secondary purposes such as advertising, soliciting, telemarketing,
promotional activities, or other actions that are distinct from and unrelated to

the activities for which the data were originally collected
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA144
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(see Harris/Equifax, 1993). As should be clear from the discussion in this
chapter, however, these hopes are often not realized in general or in relation to

health information.
Privacy RightsTo assert a right is to make a special kind of claim. Rights designate some
interests of the individual that are sufficiently important to hold others under a

duty to promote and protect, sometimes even at the expense of maximizing or

even achieving the social good (Raz, 1986). Two interests are widely cited as

providing the moral justification for privacy rights: the individual's interest in

autonomy and the instrumental value that privacy may have in promoting other
valuable human goods.
With respect to 
autonomy, privacy fosters and enhances a sense of self
(Reiman, 1976). Respecting privacy enhances an individual's autonomy

(Westin, 1967; Benn, 1971; Bloustein, 1984). It allows the individual to

develop the capacity to be self-governing or "sovereign," a notion analogous to

the sense in which autonomous states are sovereign (Beauchamp and Childress,
1989). The loss or degradation of privacy can enable others to exercise an
inordinate measure of power over the individual's economic, social, and

psychological well-being (Gavison, 1980; Parent, 1983).
With respect to the value of privacy to promote other ends, its 
instrumentalvalue, privacy permits the development of character traits and virtues essential
to desirable human relationships. These include trust, intimacy, and love.

Without some measure of privacy, these relationships are diminished or may

not be possible (Fried, 1968; Rachels, 1975).
The existence of informational privacy rights means that someone is under
a duty either not to disclose information or to prevent unauthorized access to

information by others. Dworkin (1977) has argued that for a right to be

meaningful implies that any policy or law overriding such duties must

withstand rigorous scrutiny and that considerations of social utility alone are

inadequate grounds to override it. That is, to take rights seriously is to recognize

some limits on the prerogative of government or others to mandate the common
good at the expense of the individual. This is not to say, however, that rights
function as an absolute barrier to the pursuit of collective goals; indeed, the

tension between individual and social goals is reflected in the issues raised in

Chapter 3, as well as in this chapter.
Balancing Benefits of HDOs Against Loss of Informational Privacy
There cannot be much doubt that HDOs will serve legitimate societal
interests as described in 
Chapter 2
. Nevertheless, because HDOs will represent
one of the most comprehensive and sensitive automated personal record
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA145
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.databases ever established, they inevitably implicate interests protected by
informational privacy principles. Accordingly, HDO advocates will be well

served from an ethical as well as legal viewpoint if they consider what social

goods justify possible loss of privacy and such loss can be minimized or

prevented.Whether HDOs can achieve their potential for good in the face of their
possible impact on privacy will likely turn on the interplay of three

considerations. First, to what extent do the HDOs provide important (and

perhaps irreplaceable) health care benefits to their regions and perhaps to the

nation? Second, do the societal benefits resulting from the implementation of

HDOs outweigh the privacy risks? Third, to what extent have adequate privacy

safeguards been incorporated into the HDOs?
Federal and State Privacy Protection
No explicit right to privacy is guaranteed by the Constitution of the United
States; in fact, the word "privacy" does not appear. The presumed right as the

basis of a civil action is based on legal opinion written by Justice Louis D.

Brandeis in 1890, and its constitutional status derives from various amendments

to the Bill of Rights.
The issues surrounding the constitutional status of privacy protection are
too numerous and controversial to explore in detail here. Most constitutional

scholars agree that federal constitutional protections are unlikely to provide the

first line of defense for privacy of health information. The Constitution

generally has not provided strong protection for the confidentiality of individual

health care information; the constitutional protection for informational privacy

is thus very limited and derived from case law interpreting the Constitution.
The courts have made clear that, at least theoretically, information privacy
principles based on the Constitution limit a government agency's collection and

use of personal information to situations in which the use bears a rational

relationship to a legitimate governmental purpose. The government's interest in

the information program must outweigh the threat to personal privacy posed by

the program.6In 
Whalen v. Roe
 (429 U.S. 589 [1977]), for example, the Supreme Court
balanced the privacy threat posed by a New York State law against the statute's

benefits. The New York State statute required pharmacists and physicians to

report sensitive health record information to state officials, in
6 See, 
Plante v. Gonzalez,
 575 F. 2d 1119, 1123 (5th Cir. 1978). However, in 
J.P. v.
DeSanti, 653 F. 2d 1080, 1090 (6th Cir. 1981), the Sixth Circuit held that the
Constitution's right-to-privacy standard does not extend to the disclosure of personal
information.CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA146
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.this case prescriptions for controlled drugs. It required physicians to report the
names of patients receiving certain types of prescription drugs to a state agency.

The court concluded that the statute was constitutional on two grounds: the

societal interests served by the statute (combating the illegal use of otherwise

legal drugs) and extensive privacy and confidentiality protections in the law

(redisclosure of the drug information, for example, was prohibited). The court
suggested that if the statute had lacked these confidentiality protections it would
have been found to violate constitutional privacy principles (Chlapowski,

1991). Thus, privacy rights are to be considered derived and not explicit rights.
In 
United States v. Westinghouse Electric Corp.
 (638 F. 2d 570, 578 [3rd
Cir. 1980]), the Third Circuit identified seven factors that should be weighed in

determining whether to permit a government agency to collect personal

information and thus undertake a program that infringes privacy. These were

the type of record requested; the subject matter of the information; the potential

for harm in a subsequent nonconsensual disclosure; the damage to the
relationship in which the record was generated; the adequacy of safeguards to
prevent unauthorized disclosure; the degree of need for access; and whether

there is an express, statutory mandate, articulated public policy, or other

recognizable public interest tilting toward access.
Various state constitutional provisions offer more protection. For one to
have a claim for a violation of a constitutional privacy right, however, the

individual generally must show that state action caused the violation.

California's constitution (Cal. Const., Art. 1, 
§ 1) is an exception to this general
rule because it makes privacy rights explicit. California courts have held that
the state's constitutional privacy provision can be asserted against private parties
who infringe on citizens' privacy; see, for instance 
Heda v. Superior Court,
 225
Cal. App. 3rd 525 (Cal., Dist. Ct., App. 1990) and 
Soroka v. Dayton Hudson
Corp., 1 Cal. Rptr. 2nd 77 (1991). Other common law and statutory remedies,
as well as institutional policies and practices, will be of greater immediate

importance. This and the relevance of existing laws to HDOs is discussed in the

next section.
ConfidentialityConfidentiality relates to disclosure or nondisclosure of information.
Historically a duty to honor confidentiality has arisen with respect to

information disclosed in the context of a confidential relationship, such as that

between an individual and his or her physician, attorney, or priest. In such

relationships, the confidante is under an obligation not to redisclose the
information learned in the course of the relationship. Now the law applies such
duties to some holders of information who do not have a confidential

relationship to a patient. In the health sector, this includes such holders as
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA147
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.utilization management firms in many states and local, state, or federal health
agencies that receive reports of communicable diseases.
When one is concerned about data disclosure, whether or not any
relationship exists between a data subject and a data holder, an essential

construct is that of 
data confidentiality.
 Data confidentiality is the status
accorded data indicating that they are protected and must be treated as such. In

the federal Freedom of Information Act (FOIA, 5 U.S.C., Section 552), certain

categories of data are specified as confidential and thus not disclosable; for

instance, Exemption 6 states that FOIA is not applicable to ''personnel and
medical files and similar files, the disclosure of which would constitute clearly
unwarranted invasion of personal privacy." Data confidentiality is discussed in

more detail in a later section.
Confidentiality Obligations in Health Care
Professional obligations to privacy and confidentiality.
 The importance of
confidentiality to the medical profession is reflected in the physician's "Oath of

Hippocrates." Adopted in roughly the fourth century B.C.E., it remains a

recognized element of medical ethics:
Whatsoever things I see or hear concerning the life of men, in my attendance
on the sick or even apart therefrom, which ought not to be noised abroad, I will
keep silence thereon, counting such things to be as sacred secrets (Bulger,

1987).In similar fashion, the American Medical Association 
Principles of
Medical Ethics
 (AMA, 1992, Section 5.05) states that "The information
disclosed to a physician during the course of the relationship between the

physician and patient is confidential to the greatest possible degree . . . The

physician should not reveal confidential communications or information

without the express consent of the patient, unless required to do so by law."
Within the healing relationship, four justifications may be offered for
medical confidentiality (adapted from Faden, 1993). First is a respect for

privacy and patient autonomy. In the earliest practice of medicine, physicians

treated patients in their homes, and medical privacy was an extension of the

privacy of the home. The Hippocratic Oath, for instance, does not justify

confidentiality on any ground other than respect for privacy. If information

concerning a patient's mind and body are viewed as extensions of the patient,

than the concept of autonomy requires that the patient be able to control

disclosure and use of that information. The value placed on personal autonomy

gives rise to the notion of informed consent. As Justice Benjamin N. Cardozo
wrote in his opinion in 
Schloendorff v. Society of New York Hospital,
 211 N.Y.
125, "Every human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to

determine what shall be done with his body."
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA148
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A second justification related to respect for privacy is the implicit and
sometimes explicit expectation or promise of confidentiality. Third is the

special moral character of the doctor-patient relationship, which is characterized

by trust and intimacy. Confidentiality can be instrumental in fostering patients'

trust in their physicians; when this trust encourages patients to speak freely and

disclose information they would otherwise keep secret, it facilitates diagnosis
and treatment. Fourth, respecting confidentiality protects patients from harm
that might befall them if the information were to become widely available and

indiscriminately used.
Legal obligations of confidentiality.
 Various federal and state laws impose
a duty to preserve the confidentiality of personal health information. These laws

can be divided into two categories: those imposing confidentiality obligations

on recordkeepers and those protecting health information that is deemed highly

sensitive. Examples of the former include general confidentiality statutes about

health care information such as the Uniform Health Care Information Act
(National Conference, 1988) and the California Confidentiality of Medical
Information Act (Cal. Civil Code 
§§ 5656.37 [1992]), as well as various state
laws and Medicare and Medicaid regulations. Laws and regulations imposing

confidentiality requirements for sensitive personal health information include

those related to alcohol and drug abuse records and laws governing

nondisclosure of records of patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome

(AIDS), the results of antibody tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),

psychiatric and developmental disability records, and information concerning

results of genetics screening and testing.
Courts have also recognized a legal obligation to maintain the
confidentiality of personal health care information. In response to harm

resulting from unauthorized release of personal health information, courts have

granted legal relief under a number of theories: breach of trust, breach of

confidence, breach of implied contract, invasion of privacy, defamation, and

negligence (Waller, 1992).
Disclosure of Health Information
As one looks beyond the protected sphere of the patient-provider
relationship, it is not always clear who is rightly in the community of

"knowers," nor is there universal agreement on principles that ought to control

disclosure. With the growth of managed care, utilization review, third-party

payment systems, and claims administration for self-insured health plans,

information sharing for purposes of adjudicating claims and managing high-risk
or high-cost cases has become part and parcel of the provision of health care.
Westin has described these supporting and administrative activities as
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA149
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved."Zone 2" in comparison to "Zone 1," which refers to information flow to
support direct medical care (Westin, 1976; Harris/Equifax, 1993). These wide-

ranging claims of need for sensitive health information, which are emblematic

of modern health care, raise difficult problems for the preservation of privacy

and maintenance of confidentiality.
Patients generally understand that, with consent, information in their
medical records will be shared widely within a hospital and for insurance and

reimbursement purposes. They also expect that data collected about them will

be used only for the purpose of the initial collection and that such data will be

shared with others only for that same purpose. Outside the health care

institution, patients expect that confidential data will not be shared with people

or organizations not authorized to have such information and that legitimate
users of the data will not exploit such access for purposes other than those for
which the information was originally obtained (e.g., see Harris/Equifax, 1993).
Consent. Such exceptions to the rule of confidentiality as described above
are rationalized as being conducted by consent of the patient or a patient

representative. A patient may be asked to accede to disclosure by signing a

blanket consent form when applying for insurance or employment. In such

cases, however, consent cannot be truly voluntary or informed. Such

authorizations are often not 
voluntary because the patient feels compelled to
sign the authorization or forego the benefit sought, and they are not 
informedbecause the patient cannot know in advance what information will be in the
record, who will subsequently have access to it, or how it will be used.
Although consent may be the best-recognized way to permit disclosures of
private information, consent is so often not informed or is given under

economic compulsion that it does not provide sufficient protection to patients.

As will be seen in the recommendations section of this chapter, this committee

generally does not regard "consent" procedures as sufficient to protect sensitive

information from inappropriate disclosure by HDOs, although they are a

necessary adjunct to other autonomy protections.
Mandatory reporting and compulsory process.
 Other situations exist in
which sensitive health information about individuals 
must be disclosed to third
parties. Such sharing of health information for socially sanctioned purposes

may be truly voluntary; it may also be required through mandatory reporting or

coerced by court order.Mandatory reporting requirements are justified by society's need for
information; these include filing reports of births and deaths, communicable

diseases, cancer, environmental and occupational diseases, drug addiction,

gunshot wounds, child abuse, and other violence-related injuries. Some
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA150
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.statutes requiring that records be retained for 10 to 25 years in some cases make
past diagnoses retrievable long after they no longer accurately describe the

patient. Another type of reporting requirement involves the expectation that

third parties require warning about threats to their life.
7Physicians and others may also find themselves compelled to divulge
patient information when they would otherwise choose not to do so. Such

requirementsŠsometimes termed "compulsory process"
Šmay take the form of
subpoenas or discovery requests and may be enforced by court order. In some

instances personal health care information may be protected from disclosure in
court and administrative proceedings by virtue of the physician-patient
privilege, which may be mandated by statute or derive from the common law.

Information that is so privileged cannot be introduced into evidence and is

generally not subject to discovery.
Weaknesses of Legal Protection for Confidentiality
Legal and ethical confidentiality obligations are the same whether health
records are kept on paper or on computer-based media (Waller, 1992). Current

laws, however, have significant weaknesses. First, and very important, the

degree to which confidentiality is required under current law varies according to

the holder of the information and the type of information held.
Second, legal obligations of confidentiality often vary widely within a
single state and from state to state, making it difficult to ascertain the legal

obligations that a given HDO will have, particularly if it operates in a multistate

area. These state-by-state and intrastate variations and inconsistencies in

privacy and confidentiality laws are well established among those

knowledgeable about health care records law (e.g., see Powers, 1991; Waller,
1991; WEDI, 1992; Gostin et al., 1993; OTA, 1993; for examples ranging
across many types of professionals, institutions, and ancillary personnel). This

is important because some HDOs will routinely transmit data across state lines.

Interstate transmission already occurs with data such as claims or typed

dictation. When confidential data are transmitted across state lines, it is not

always clear which state's confidentiality laws apply and which state's courts

have jurisdiction over disputes concerning improper disclosure of information.
Third, current laws offer individuals little real protection against redisclosure
7 In a California case, 
Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California,
 17 Ca. 3d
425,551 P.2d (1976), a psychiatrist who was told of a patient's homicidal fantasies

regarding the patient's girlfriend did not warn her because he believed that confidentiality
constraints prevented him from doing so. Soon after, the patient killed the woman. The
court found that the physician had a duty to warn third parties in such circumstances.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA151
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of their confidential health information to unauthorized recipients for a number
of reasons. Once patients have consented to an initial disclosure of information

(for example, to obtain insurance reimbursement), they have lost control of

further disclosure. Information disclosed for one purpose may be used for

unrelated purposes without the subject's knowledge or consent (sometimes

termed secondary use). For instance, information about a diagnosis taken from
an individual's medical record may be forwarded to the Medical Information
Bureau in Boston, Massachusetts (MIB, 1989; and see Kratka, 1990) and later

used by another insurance company in an underwriting decision concerning life

insurance. Redisclosure practices represent a yawning gap in confidentiality

protection.As a practical matter, policing redisclosure of one's personal health
information is difficult and may be impossible. At a minimum, such policing

requires substantial resources and commitment. With the use of computer and

telecommunications networks, an individual may never discover that a

particular disclosure has occurred, even though he or she suffers significant

harmŠsuch as inability to obtain employment, credit, housing, or insurance
Šas a result of such disclosure. Pursuing legal remedies may result in additional
disclosure of the individual's private health information.
8Fourth, in some instances federal law preempts state confidentiality
requirements or protections without imposing new ones. For example, the

Employment Retirement Insurance Security Act (ERISA) preempts some state

insurance laws with respect to employers' self-insured health plans, yet ERISA

is silent on confidentiality obligations. Because 74 percent or more of

employers with 1,000 or more employees manage self-insured health plans

(Foster Higgins, 1991, in IOM, 1993e), such preemption is particularly

troublesome.Last, enforcing rights through litigation is costly, and money damages may
not provide adequate redress for the harm done by the improper disclosure.
SecurityIn the context of health record information, confidentiality implies
controlled access and protection against unauthorized access to, modification

of, or destruction of health data. Confidentiality has meaning only when the
8 A suit brought by an AIDS patient under the name John Doe against Shady Grove
Adventist Hospital resulted in the hospital's trying to force the patient to reveal his true
name to the press and public 
(John Doe v. Shady Grove Adventist Hospital, et al.,
 89
Md. App. 351, 598 A.2d 507 [1991a]).
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA152
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.data holder has the will, technical capacity, and moral or legal authority to
protect data-that is, to keep such information (or the system in which it resides)

secure (NRC/CBASSE, 1993). Data security exists when data are protected

from accidental or intentional disclosure to unauthorized persons and from

unauthorized or accidental alteration (IOM, 1991a).
In computer-based or computer-controlled systems, security is
implemented when a defined system functions in a defined operational

environment, serves a defined set of users, contains prescribed data and

operational programs, has defined network connections and interactions with

other systems, and incorporates safeguards to protect the system against a

defined threat to the system, its resources, and its data. More generally,

protective safeguards include:
   hardware (e.g., memory protect);
   software (e.g., audit trails, log-on procedures);
   personnel control (e.g., badges or other mechanisms to control entry or
limit movement);
   physical object control (e.g., logging and cataloging of magnetic tapes
and floppy disks, destruction of paper containing person-identifiable

printouts);   disaster preparedness (e.g., sprinklers, tape vaults in case of fire, flood,
or bomb);
   procedures (e.g., granting access to systems, assigning passwords);
   administration (e.g., auditing events, disaster preparedness, security
officer); and   management oversight (e.g., periodic review of safeguards, unexpected
inspections, policy guidance).
The collective intent of these safeguards is to give high assurance that the
system, its resources, and information are protected against harm and that the

information and resources are properly accessed and used by authorized users.
Health-Related Information
In a study that focuses on the protection of health-related data about
individuals, defining which items are health related is more difficult than one

might initially think. The most obvious categories are medical history, current

diagnoses, diagnostic test results, and therapies. Other pieces of information are

more distantly related to health
Šbecause of what one might infer about a
person's health. Examples include type of specialist visited, functional status,
lifestyle, and past diagnoses. Nevertheless, not everything in a medical record is

relevant to health status or is health related.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA153
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Insurance coverage and marital status are cases in point. Some elements
could nevertheless be considered sensitive because of the social stigma that

could result if they are revealed. Examples include sexual preference, address,

or the receipt of social services.
The same disclosure might be harmful to one individual but not another, or
harmful to an individual in one circumstance but not in another. Personal data,

particularly health-related personal data, are not inherently sensitive, but they

become so because of the harmful way(s) in which they might be used. Thus,

any data element in medical records, and many data items from other records,
could be considered either health-related or sensitive, or both. Where the
boundaries for the protection of personal health information lie is not at all

obvious. In considering the actions of HDOs, this committee takes a relatively

broad view of health-related data; it proceeds from an assumption that 
allinformation concerning an individual and any transactions relating directly or

indirectly to health care that HDOs access or maintain as databases must be

regarded as potentially requiring privacy protections.
9EXPANDED DEFINITIONS
The foregoing discussions of confidentiality are based on historical,
ethical, and legal usage and have served to guide legislators and practitioners.

Legally and medically, confidentiality has been treated as arising from a

relationship such as that between physician and patient or attorney and client.

Such usage may not be as useful to administrators, vice presidents for data
processing, or system designers who must design HDO systems and are
working not with relationships but with access to secondary records.
The committee suggests, therefore, that an expanded interpretation using a
taxonomy that is not derived from interpersonal or interprofessional

relationships might be more helpful to those responsible for protection of

information in these HDOs. In this taxonomy one begins with 
dataconfidentiality, defined as the status accorded 
data that have been declared to
be sensitive and must be protected and handled as such.
 The rationale for the
statement about sensitivity is based on potential harm to people, potential

invasion of privacy, and potential loss of entitlements or privileges.
Two consequences flow from defining data as sensitive and requiring
protection. First, the data must be made secure; second, access must be

controlled. As described earlier, data security includes system and network
9 Waller (1991) provides a detailed discussion of legal considerations affecting
computer-based patient records, including privacy rights.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA154
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.protection and assures the integrity of data-such that they are not altered or

destroyed accidentally or intentionally. Some system security safeguards (e.g.,

control of personnel) also assure data integrity.
FIGURE 4-1 A new taxonomy of data confidentiality, security, and

informational privacy.
The second consequence of declaring data sensitive
Šthe need for access
controlŠis related to the concept of informational privacy described above.
Access control can be operationalized by HDO planners and legislators in a

form that this committee would term "information-use policy." Information-use

policy in the automated system context gives rise to decisions about who can do

what, with which data, and for what purpose. It leads to policymaking about

who may be allowed to use health-related information and how they may use it.

It also requires decisions about how health information can be used as a matter

of social policy and might also include consideration of whether some data

should be collected at all.
The three issues
Šdata confidentiality, security, and information use
Šareobviously related (
Figure 4-1) They overlap to some extent and collectively
represent the area of direct concern in this report. One reason to keep the three

issues separate is that different remedies are relevant to each.
Data confidentiality is a matter of law and regulation. Legislation would be
required to establish that health-related information is confidential, to spell out

the rationale for the position, and to clarify the ramifications and consequences

of attaching protection to health data.
Security is a matter of technology, management controls, procedures, and
administrative oversight. In the public sector, the action agents are regulators; in

the HDO, a policy and oversight board could establish security policies.

Implementation and management would be provided by technical and system

design personnel.Informational privacy (information use)
 is the most difficult to sort out.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA155
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The nation needs to agree on the proper use of health-related information.
It is not yet clear how this will or can be done, nor is it obvious who the action

agents will be. At the level of the HDO, information use would be decided by

the governing board. At a regional or national level, federal agencies,

legislators, professional bodies, consumer advocates, and industrial lobby

groups are all likely to be involved.
In the remainder of this chapter, the terms 
confidentiality (rather than the
more cumbersome 
data confidentiality), privacy
 (rather than 
informationalprivacy), and 
security continue to be used, but the committee intends that they
be understood in the context just described. The committee believes this

conceptualization will make it easier to translate recommendations into policies

and procedures that can be implemented and enforced.
HARM FROM DISCLOSURE AND REDISCLOSURE OF
HEALTH RECORD INFORMATIONVery little systematic or empirical evidence supports the widespread
perception of the threat or the reality of harm from disclosure and redisclosure

of health-related information. This is because the origins of the information may

not be known by the person harmed, because of the natural preference not to

further publicize confidential information about oneself, and because inquiry in

this area has been to date more anecdotal than systematic.
This section presents examples of the potential confidentiality and privacy
problems that might be encountered with health data, either in patient record

form or in databases accessed or held by HDOs. Although these concerns

cannot easily be quantified, reports to the committee during this study, cases

mentioned in media such as the 
Privacy Times
 and the Internet-based 
PrivacyForum Digest,
 incidents known to or recounted to committee members, and
similar inputs make clear that the threats and potential harm are real and not

numerically trivial.Health leader respondents to the 1993 Harris/Equifax survey showed that
71 percent were somewhat or very concerned about threats to the confidentiality

of medical records, and 24 percent were "aware of violations of the

confidentiality of individuals' medical records from inside an organization that

embarrassed or harmed the individual." Respondents identified test results and

diagnostic reports as the most frequently disclosed information.
Of the responding public, some 27 percent believed that their own medical
records had been improperly disclosed. That group identified health insurers

most often as having been responsible (15 percent). Fewer respondents

identified hospitals or clinics (11 percent), public health agencies (10 percent),

and employers (9 percent).
This section describes three categories of disclosure of patient informa
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA156
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tion common today and the problems and harm that may result: (1) common
disclosures that are breaches of confidentiality; (2) covert, illegal, or unethical

acquisition and use of information; and (3) harm from disclosure of inaccurate

data. It also raises questions about unforeseen uses of databases accessed by

HDOs."Common" Disclosures
Three types of common disclosures pose threats: inadvertent, routine, and
rerelease to third parties.
Inadvertent Release
A form of disclosure that the committee has termed "unthinking" often
occurs within medical institutions. Examples include discussions with or about

patients within earshot of other patients in waiting areas and discussions of

cases in elevators, halls, cafeterias, and social settings. Disclosure related to the

human penchant for gossip and carelessness in leaving medical records "lying

around" or leaving information displayed on computer terminals is common.

Westin (1972) concluded that such disclosures (sometimes to patients' relatives

or friends) were less likely to be related to automated databases than to common
indiscretion by hospital workers and health care providers. As the nation moves
into yet more sophisticated telecommunication systems, such disclosure can

include leaving detailed patient information on answering machines, sending

information on fax transmissions that accumulate in common areas, or holding

conversations about patients or dictating patient histories or notes about patient

visits over cellular telephones.
If the diagnosis stigmatizes or indicates a disabling or fatal condition, harm
can be especially serious. The harm can be great both to the famous and "VIP"

patient and to noncelebrities, especially for coworkers or patients in a small

community. One well-known case involved a staff physician whose HIV status

became known in his hospital when his diagnosis was discussed by hospital

personnel (Estate of Behringer v. Medical Center at Princeton,
 249 N.J. Super.
597, 592 A.2d 1251 [1991]).
The committee believes many safeguards exist that can and should be put
in place in any health care institution or HDO to anticipate and prevent

disclosures of this sort. Preventing disclosure requires greater sensitivity to

confidentiality issues and better training of health care workers. The Mayo

Foundation, for example, has successfully developed and maintained a culture

of adamant protection of the confidentiality of its patients' health information

(Mayo Foundation, 1991).
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA157
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.''Routine" Releases or Uses in Accordance with Prevailing Practices
Health information is frequently shared 
without knowledge of the
individual based on "uninformed" or "blanket" consent. In addition to the

consent to disclose information routinely obtained from a patient before care is

administered or when enrolling in a health insurance plan, another example of

data disclosure is the wholesale photocopying of medical records that are

forwarded to insurers, when much of the information does not pertain to the
given insurance claim. The committee believes that the ability to prevent
inappropriate release and use (misuse) must be strengthened. Such protections

for data in HDOs are at the heart of this report and its recommendations.
Rerelease to Third Parties Without the Subject's Knowledge or Consent
(Secondary Use)The "secondary use" principle is an important component of fair
information practices. It reflects the notion that when personal information is

collected for a particular purpose the information should be used for only that

purpose or a compatible one.
10An especially troublesome problem is the difficulty of confining the
migration of information to third, fourth, or fifth parties without the individual's

knowledge or consent. Examples include the sharing of health record

information within organizations in one industry (e.g., between the health

insurance and life insurance division of a company or between the personnel

benefits division and the personnel or supervisory unit of an employer). Other

examples include sharing between organizations in one industry (e.g., between
the Medical Information Bureau and a second insurer). Yet a third sort of
sharing can occur between organizations in two different industries (e.g.,

between insurer and credit bureau or between a current employer and a potential

employer). A final example involves sharing genetic information with relatives

who are at risk of an inherited disorder.
A major concern among commentators writing about the collection and
storage of genetic information is that there will be increased pressure on the

holders of such information to reveal to other patients and their physicians
10 The report of the Secretary's Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data
Systems, 
Records, Computers and the Rights of Citizens
 (USDHEW, 1973) was a
ground-breaking report of the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare that
articulated five fair information practice principles, including the secondary use
principle. The Federal Privacy Act at 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552a(b) reflects the secondary use
principle by permitting nonconsensual secondary uses of personal data only for purposes

that are consistent with the purpose for which the data were first collected.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA158
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information gained about family members. These individuals might want to
assess their own genetic risks of inheritable disease or use the information when

making reproductive decisions. Some indeed have argued that there is an

exception to physician duties of confidentiality analogous to that of duties to

warn (or protect) people at risk from those with psychiatric disorders or HIV

infection.Given the growth in fringe benefits offered by employers and their
subsequent stake in managing the costs of such benefits, there are few

limitations on information that can be gathered for use in administering health,

disability, and pension plans. Committee members were told repeatedly that

self-insured employers are given access, when they insist, to patient-identified

health claims information. Indeed, some third-party administrators (TPAs)
provide human resources personnel with dial-in capability to perform their own
analyses of data concerning a firm's employees and dependents (personal

communication, third-party software and services vendor, 1993). Whether

employers have the right to data incident to the health care for which they have

paid is highly debatable, but this rationale is commonly accepted by TPAs

under the pressure of competition, and there is great risk that data will not be

partitioned from use in personnel actions. The 1993 Harris/Equifax survey

confirmed the public's concern about this problem. Forty percent were

somewhat or very concerned that their job might be affected if their medical

claims information was seen by their employer. Another example of

information that is in some ways mandated and also creates a database of

problematic information is that which is compiled by medical review officers in
connection with employee drug-testing programs.
Although corporate and professional ethics tend to discourage abuse, few
barriers exist to an employer's use of its employees' medical and insurance

claims records. The threat of liability under the Americans with Disabilities Act

has served as a brake on some employers' access to and use of their employees'

health records. In addition, some state laws limit access. Employers, however,
may be required by federal or state regulations to access records in order to
identify employees who pose threats to security. Information available under

such permission may pertain to spouses and dependents as well as employees.
The committee believes secondary use of medical information by
employers is common and may be increasing as employers seek to find ways to

manage high-cost cases, to adjust their benefit packages to control their health

care exposure,
11 and perhaps even to identify or terminate high-cost
11 A recent case upheld the right of any employer to change (and thereby reduce) its
health insurance benefits to reduce exposure. In 
McGann v. H&H Music Co,
 742 F.
Supp. 392, 
affd 946 F.2d 401, after a current employee was diagnosed with AIDS, his
employer changed the health benefit plan to become self-insured and subsequently
established a $5,000 limitation on AIDS-related medical expenses.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA159
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.employees or those with high-cost dependents. Real or potential harm ranges
from the inconsequential to the calamitous. It is likely that the ability to limit

secondary use can be strengthened, and ways to accomplish this are at the heart

of the committee's concerns.
Covert Acquisition and Use of Data for Illegal or Unethical
PurposesAnother problem involving acquisition and use of medical information
occurs covertly through illegal or unethical means. Examples include

information brokers who tap into computerized systems by using false names or

by bribing database employees to supply information about celebrities or the

names of individuals with certain characteristics. In health care institutions,

there is also a risk that employees will browse through medical records out of

curiosity (as tax and credit bureau employees have done).
The character of the threat to confidentiality posed by the aggregation of
databases is altered. Celebrities have long been vulnerable to loss of privacy

through both paper and computerized searches as documented by Rothfeder

(1992). The new vulnerability posed by computerized searches is to those who

until now have been (relatively) anonymous. That is, information brokers seek

to identify information not about an identified individual but about the identities
of individuals with given characteristics (e.g., those with a diagnosis of AIDS or
women who have had an abortion).
Isikoff (1991) describes the growth of the information-broker industry,
which boasts instant access to a range of confidential computer data
Šcreditreports, business histories, driver's license records, Social Security records, and

criminal history backgrounds. Some of these records are public, but some are in

government and private computer databases; in the latter, illegal access may

involve insiders (e.g., employees of the Social Security Administration, police

and other law enforcement employees). Of particular concern is the problem of
unauthorized disclosure by often low-paid individuals who have legitimate
access to information but who use it to facilitate illegitimate searches or to

profit from the sale of records
Ša practice some have termed "insider
information trading" and known to data system security specialists as the

"insider threat."Hendricks (1992) described a recently published hacker's manual for
penetrating TRW's credit bureau database; it was complete with dial-up

numbers, codes, and methods for persuading credit bureau subscribers to

divulge their passwords over the phone. He described how the traditionally

youthful hackers have been supplanted by profit-oriented criminal enterprises

and the emergence of individuals who, in this case, proclaim the right of the

individual to conquer and destroy the "system" and its laws and to damage
individuals for excitement and profit. Those who are determined to
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA160
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.break into a system can be thwarted only with thoughtful and comprehensive
system safeguards.
Although harm from this source is likely to occur rarely in comparison
with others, the harm can be great because so many individuals are affected.

Further, the data holder can be severely damaged in the public's eye. One goal

for an HDO must be to assure the public of reasonable, if not absolute, safety.
Release of Inaccurate Data
A different harm can result from release of information when data are
incomplete, inaccurate, or out of date. Examples are medical records or

insurance claims on which diagnoses are listed or coded incorrectly (e.g.,

mastectomy for myringotomy). Other problems involve diagnoses that were

considered at one time and ruled out but are still listed as a final diagnosis,

incorrect inferences drawn from diagnostic tests, and clinical distortions that
result from coding limitations. Data inaccuracies also arise from actions that are
intended to be beneficial
Šfor example, to protect the patient from a
stigmatizing diagnosis, to permit insurance reimbursement for a test or

procedure that might otherwise not be covered (as in the case of preventive and

screening tests), or to allow a frail patient to be treated on an inpatient rather

than outpatient basis.
The committee does not know how often these irregularities occur. Studies
of the accuracy of medical records consistently show unintentional and

sometimes intentional errors (Burnum, 1989), and medical records personnel

and researchers report that errors and omissions are extremely common in all

health records. Harm from such problems may range from trivial to severe. Any

reliance on databases for such social benefits as credit ratings or life insurance
means that data that are incomplete, inaccurate, or false (for example, when
records of several different people are combined) are not merely useless, they

are pernicious. Such errors and omissions were not a major focus of the study

committee. It should be noted, however, that the converse of this problem is that

the more accurate and comprehensive the databases, the more pressure there

will be for access, which in turn raises the chances of harm in the other

categories already discussed.Harm resulting from inaccurate or out-of-date data can be mitigated or
prevented in a number of ways, including adequate and regular attention to the

reliability and validity of database contents as described in 
Chapter 3
. Allowingindividuals to obtain, challenge, and correct their own records can also help to

improve their accuracy.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA161
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY INTERESTS AND HDOS
HDOs may pose a threat to privacy interests in four ways. The first arises
through harm from secondary use. This includes the potential for stigmatizing

and embarrassing patients; adversely affecting their opportunities for

employment, insurance, licenses, and other benefits; undermining trust and

candor in the health care provider-patient relationship; and defeating patients'

legitimate expectations of confidentiality. Second is the unpredictable effect
that will be produced by the mere existence of HDOs as described. Third,
HDOs may exacerbate societal concerns about the emergence of national,

centralized personal record databases, which may be perceived as a national

identification system or dossier. Issues concerning the Social Security number

and its analogs are especially pertinent here. Finally, HDOs will need to be

mindful of the possible effect that research uses may have on privacy.
Foreseen and Unforeseen Circumstances
In addition to the current risk of breaches of confidentiality and the risk of
harm from inaccurate data inherent in the paper record, the existence of any

accumulation of valuable data will spawn new users, new demands for access,

and new justifications for expanded access.
HDOs may unintentionally create a heightened risk of disclosure resulting
with the new forms of data becoming available through the HDOs, new

inquiries and types of inquirers, new uses, and new legal and governance

structures. The mere presence of the HDO may, over time, encourage new

practices or changes that may be harmful to at least some segments of the
population.HDOs must also realize that the more information it holds or can access,
and the more valuable that information, the greater the temptation will be for

others to acquire and covertly use the information. An HDO database becomes,

in some sense, like a swimming pool or an abandoned refrigerator to a child-an

overwhelming opportunity or, in legal terms, an attractive nuisance.
Computerization poses problems for the protection of privacy and
confidentiality, but it also offers new opportunities for protection. For example,

access to records and to defined parts of records can be granted, controlled, or

adapted on a need-to-know (or function-related) basis; this means that users can

be authorized to obtain and use only information for which their access is

justifiable. It will also be possible to implement authentication procedures
(discussed below) and to implement and publicize the use of methods to permit
the HDO to know if anyone has browsed in the databases, who has done so, and

which data were accessed. Automa
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA162
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tion could also greatly mitigate the disclosure that now occurs when, for
instance, an entire medical record is copied to substantiate a claim for a single

episode of care, and software could prevent the printing or transfer of database

information to other computers.
A National Identification System or Dossier
Privacy advocates can be expected to express sharp concerns about the
potential for HDOs to be linked with one another or with other types of personal

databases such as the financial, credit, and lifestyle databases maintained by

consumer reporting agencies and information services. One particular threat is

the possible contribution of linked databases to development of a 
de facto
national identification (and data) system. Such a system would comprise a
comprehensive, automated dossier on virtually every citizen.
Conventional wisdom holds that after a personal information database is
established, some consequences are inevitable (Gellman, 1984): expansions in

permissible uses of the database; demands to link the database with

complementary databases to improve the database product; and relaxations of
confidentiality restrictions. With respect to HDOs, privacy advocacy groups and
the media are likely to be concerned that over time various regional HDOs will

establish telecommunications links and that these entities will become a

national network linkable to other financial and government records such as

those serving the Social Security Administration or the Internal Revenue Service.
As potential 
users of HDO data files, many persons in these groups might
regard this scenario as desirable and beneficial; as potential record 
subjects,however, most would probably be uncomfortable with this threat to their

privacy. Once such a system were in place, some fear that both those with and
without bona fide access would be able to call up a remarkably comprehensive
and intrusive dossier comprising detailed biographic information, family history

information, employment information, financial and insurance information, and,

unless prevented, of course, medical record information about every citizen

participating in the system.
In the view of many, this development would bring the nation perilously
close to a national identification database. Indeed, at that point the "national"

network would lack only a means of positive identification and a requirement

that all citizens participate to constitute such a national identification system.
12HDOs will need to take steps to be certain that they do not contribute to these

developments.12 For a history of the national identification debate in this country, see Department of
Justice, 1976; Burnham, 1983; U.S. Senate, Subcommittee on Courts, Committee on the
Judiciary, 1983; and Shattuck, 1984; Eaton, 1986.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA163
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Although many people carry credit or health insurance cards and have no
objection to doing so, others would view any requirement that a special

identification card must be carried by participating consumers with special

alarm because such an instrument is thought to connote totalitarian values. In

the former Soviet Union, for instance, all Soviet citizens were required to carry

an internal passport and to produce this passport upon request. In this way, the
passport served not only to regulate internal travel but as a means of
identification and social control (Pipko and Pucciarelli, 1985). The Harris/

Equifax survey found that the great majority of the public (84 percent) is

willing to accept a personal identity card but had mixed feelings about being

assigned a number
Šperhaps reflecting concern about whether such a number
could be used to link their health information to other databases.
Admittedly, a few Western democracies employ national population
registries and automated and centralized personal record data banks, but

virtually all these systems are principally statistical and research systems, rather

than systems that are used for administrative or investigative purposes.

Moreover, even these primarily statistical and research systems "inspire fears

about the expanded power of central government, vis-
à-vis the legislature, the
local administration, the private sector and most especially the citizen"
(Bennett, 1992, p. 49). In Sweden, for example, the press harshly criticized the

linkage of cancer registry databases and abortion record databases for medical

research purposes (Stern, 1986).
Moreover, European democracies that use unique personal identification
numbers assigned at birth for each citizen have a history of the use of personal,

numerical codes. Even in Sweden and Germany, two European democracies

that make extensive use of personal identification numbers to track individuals

and link databases, personal identification numbers are not used as a standard
universal numeric identifier for participation in all aspects of the society. In
addition, reports are increasing of popular resistance in these countries to the

use of universal numeric identifiers (Stern, 1986). As Bennett (1992) comments

in Regulating Privacy:
The issue in these countries [Sweden and Germany] has been the incremental
and surreptitious use of these numbers for ends unrelated to those for which
they were created. Where proposals have been introduced for a new universal

identifier accompanied by a personal identification card, such as in Germany
and Australia, they have been met with strong resistance because of the belief
that non-uniformity and non-standardization with all the attendant problems
for administration, are vital to the maintenance of personal privacy. (p. 51)
Over the years the Congress, the press, and privacy advocates have fiercely
resisted any proposal for the development of databases that appeared to

facilitate establishment of a national identification or database system.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA164
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Some observers urge that entities like HDOs eschew the use of any type of
positive identification, such as a biometric identifier, and avoid the use of the

Social Security number. The aim is to minimize the likelihood that HDOs will

contribute intentionally or unintentionally to a national identification system or

to the development of a standard universal identifier (USDHEW, 1973). If the

HDO initiative is viewed by opinion leaders as a precursor to the establishment
of any type of automated, national identification or dossier system, the initiative
will likely fail.
HDO proponents should take every practicable step to assure advocacy
groups, the media, legislators, and the American people that the emergence of

HDOs will not contribute to the development of a centralized, automated

national dossier system or a national identification system through linkage with

non-health-related databases or the gradual relaxation of confidentiality policies.
Personal Identifiers and the Social Security Number
The personal identifier (ID) used by an HDO to label each of the
individuals in the database is a crucial issue. It is related not only to past

practices but will also be strongly influenced, if not mandated, by the health

care reform actions now under way in the nation.
Of necessity, identifiers are used in present health care systems. For
practical purposes the identifier in many systems is either the person's Social

Security number (SSN) or, as in Medicare, the Social Security number of an

individual with a letter appended. Issues relating to the Social Security number

are examined below (see also USDHEW, 1973).
An Ideal Personal Identifier
The ideal personal identifier must, whatever its design, minimize or
eliminate the risk of misidentification. An ideal identifier would meet certain

requirements, including the six discussed below.
First, it must be able to make the transition easily from the present
recordkeeping environment to one that will prevail in HDOs (and under

national health care reform). Further, organizations will need to know where to

apply for new numbers, to verify numbers that patients give verbally, to track

down uncertainties in identification, to find current mailing addresses, and to be

able to backtrack errors and correct them. This requirement also has technical

dimensions. For example, if a new identifier contains more digits or characters

(or both) than the 10 used for the Medicare identifier, there will be software
repercussions in many systems, and redesign of data-capture forms may be
necessary.Second, the identifier must have error-control features to make entry
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA165
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of a wrong number unlikely. Control implies that errors of many kinds are
detectable and possibly correctable on the basis of the digits and characters in

the ID alone. Ideally it will protect against transpositions of characters and

against single, double, or multiple errors. At a minimum the error-control

features must be able to indicate whether the ID is valid and to do so with high

confidence (USDHEW, 1973).
Error control is certain to be a system-wide requirement in any automated
system. It will involve not only the structure of the ID itself, but also the

processing software (or the residual manual processes) in every system that will

have to use and verify the ID.
13Third, the ID will have separate identification and authentication ele
13 The term 
check digits
 is often used as short hand for error correcting and detecting
codes used extensively in modern computers and communications systems. It is
sometimes suggested, almost casually as though it were a magic solution, that the
addition of a check digit to the Social Security number would allow the verification of its
accuracy. The addition of extra characters could in principle accomplish a number of

tasks, including:
1. Identifying that something is wrong, but not indicating the error,
2. Detecting and locating a single error,

3. Detecting and locating multiple errors,

4. Detecting, locating, and correcting single errors, and

5. Detecting, locating, and correcting multiple errors.
The number of additional characters needed depends on the degree of error detection
and correction that designers think is necessary for the circumstances. For example, a
single check digit can identify an error but does not locate which digit is wrong or how.
Moreover, it would not catch the common manual error of transposed characters. A
simple single-digit check can sometimes say a bad message is good. For such reasons, a

single check digit is not a very strong error control mechanism.
The issue of designing error codes becomes complex rapidly. It is essential, however,
to realize that any error correction feature added to an established number such as the
SSN will have hardware and software consequences
Šor both. The data fields in storage
will have to be longer; the software will have to be modified to handle the longer data
fields; additional software
Šor hardware or both
Šwill have to be added to do whatever
calculations the particular error-detection/correction scheme requires.
Error control is a system-level problem, not just an issue of the identifier per se. If one
can arrange procedures so that the identifier is always known to be correct at the time it

is entered into the automated system, then the problem within the system itself becomes
simpler. The method of providing the identifier will result in higher or lower assurance
of its accuracy: an individual's memory is probably the least assurance of correctness; an

embossed card is better; and an electronic reader for the card is better still.
The present health care information infrastructure runs largely without external visible
error controls. Although mainframes and communications equipment almost certainly

have error controls to catch equipment malfunctions and communication faults, there is
no error control on some, possibly much, of the data in the data base. It relies, instead, on
people outside the system to detect errors
Šproviders and patients
Šand risks major
mistakes in processing.CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA166
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ments. The distinction between identification and authentication is made where
strong security is required. "Identification" implies that (in this case) an

individual indicates who he is, but authentication is a separate process with

different parameters (known only to the individual) that allow the system to

verify with high confidence that the identification offered is valid. Banks, for

example, sometimes require an individual to provide his mother's maiden name;
a personal identification number (PIN) is another authenticator. In many,
perhaps most, medical systems this distinction is not made, and a simple

identifier (e.g., insurance plan identification number) is presumed to be correct.

In the future, however, some consideration should be given to separating these

functions.Fourth, the ID must work in any circumstance in which health care
services are rendered, whether or not the situation was anticipated in the design

of the system. At a minimum, the ID must never be an impediment to the

prompt, efficient delivery of health care. For example, it must work when the

patient requiring health care is not able to cooperate (e.g., is unconscious or

does not speak the same language as the health care personnel) and regardless

of the patient's mental and physical abilities.
Fifth, the ID must function anywhere in the country and in any provider's
facilities and settings. By extension, it must also be able to link events that have

occurred at multiple providers.
Sixth, the ID must help to minimize the opportunities for crime and abuse
and perhaps help to identify their perpetrators.
Issues Relating to the SSN
When the initial Social Security law was passed in 1935, the SSN was
called the SSAN, the number of one's "account" with the Social Security

Administration (SSA). The SSA has always held that the SSN is not to be used

as a personal identifier.
14In 1943 President Franklin Roosevelt signed an executive order requiring
federal agencies to use the SSN whenever a new record system was to be

established. The Department of Defense adopted it as a military identification

number during World War II, and in 1961 the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)

adopted it as the taxpayer identification number. When Medicare legislation

was passed in the 1960s, the government adopted the SSN plus
14 The most comprehensive treatment of the SSN as a recordkeeping personal
identifier in the government is in the PPSC report (1977a) and the report of the
Secretary's Advisory Committee (USDHEW, 1973). An examination of the latter also
examines the role of the SSN in some commercial and private-sector circumstances.
Hibbert (1992) gives a brief overview of the SSN in recordkeeping with advice for the

individual in controlling its use.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA167
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.an appended letter as the Medicare health insurance number. Many experts
regard this as a serious undermining of privacy protection because the many

recordkeeping activities associated with health care delivery act to disseminate

a piece of information that differs from the SSN by only an appended letter.
In the Privacy Act of 1974
Šlargely in response to the position of a
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (USDHEW, 1973) committee

that had studied the issue
ŠCongress prohibited states from using the SSN for
enumeration systems other than by authority of Congress; however, states

already using it were allowed to continue. The Tax Reform Act of 1976
undermined this position, however, by authorizing the states to use the SNN for
a variety of systems: state or local tax authorities, welfare systems, driver's

license systems, departments of motor vehicles, and systems for finding parents

who are delinquent in court-imposed child-support payments (OTA, 1986).
In short, the government has caused the proliferation in the use of the SSN,
sometimes by positive actions but sometimes by indifference or congressional

failure to act. Some government decisions, notably to use the SSN as the

taxpayer identification number and as the basis of the Medicare number, forced

its wide diffusion throughout the private sector through financial transactions
and benefits payments. In this way
Špartly deliberately and partly inadvertently
Ša very sensitive item of personal information has become widely disseminated.
SSN Uses for Other Than Medical Payments
Organizations that use the SSN as a personal ID and that most citizens will
deal with frequently include federal government agencies (e.g., the Social

Security Administration for benefits, the Internal Revenue Service for taxes and

withholding, the Health Care Financing Administration and its contractors for
Medicare payments, and the Securities and Exchange Commission); educational
institutions, which frequently use it as a student identifier for campus-wide

purposes; state governments (e.g., for state taxes, property and other local taxes,

driver and vehicle registrations, real property records, financial transactions,

and Medicaid payments); and private organizations (e.g., providers for health

care services, industry-support databases such as the Medical Information

Bureau, mortgage and loan agencies, credit reporting organizations, real

property records, and banks).
Organizations, especially those in the private sector, choose to use the SSN
for a number of pragmatic reasons and for expediency. Organizations already

hold the number legally in connection with tax, financial, and wage matters.

Moreover, there are no prohibitions against its use as a personal identifier in the
private sector. Individuals usually have an SSN, or they
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA168
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.can get one easily. In addition, people have become accustomed to willingly
providing an SSN when asked; hence, its acquisition is a matter of merely

asking, not legal compulsion.
15 Finally, administration of an enumeration
system can be burdensome, and the choice of SSN shifts that consequence onto

the government.Although federal, state, or local governments usually require the SSN
under law, private-sector requests serve the purposes and motivations of the

organization. The essential point is that the SSN is in extraordinarily wide use

as a personal identifier. As a result, any given person is indexed in a huge

number of databases by his or her SSN, and an unknown number of linkages

and data exchange among such databases are routine business.
If health care reform were to mandate a patient ID that is either the SSN or
a closely related number, it will in effect have forced the last step of making the

SSN into a truly universal personal ID. This is the issue that launched the

DHEW committee in 1970 (PPSC, 1977a).
Shortfalls of the SSN as an Identifier
The choice of a personal ID that is satisfactory for the operational needs of
health care delivery, but at the same time assures the confidentiality of medical

data and the privacy of individuals is neither easy nor casual. Superficially, the

choice would be the SSN, Medicare number, or something similar simply

because people are accustomed to using them, systems are used to handling

them. The government would bear the burden of administering the enumeration
system but would avoid the cost of creating a new one. For information
management, however, the shortfalls of the SSN are well known. The following

list is representative of the problems.
1. Any 9-digit number rendered with hyphens in the appropriate places
Šthat is, XXX-XX-XXXX
Šhas a high likelihood of being a
legitimate SSN that belongs to someone or at least appears to. This

provides little security, and data commingling can occur that would

result in erroneous records, mistaken conclusions and actions, and
incorrect payments.
2. The allowable entries in each of the three groups in a SSN are well
known. Thus, it is easy to counterfeit an SSN and have a high

probability that it will not be challenged.
3. It has no error correcting features. It is fallible to transpositions and
single- or multiple-digit mistakes.
4. The SSN is not coupled to an authenticator. Some organizations,
15 For example, some large-volume retail stores in the Washington, D.C., area
routinely ask for a customer's Social Security number when he or she pays for any
purchase by check.CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA169
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.such as banks, attempt to provide such a feature by using some ad
hoc data element that an individual is likely to remember but is not

common knowledge (e.g., mother's maiden name).
5.The SSN circulates widely, particularly in the finance industry. It is
relatively easy to acquire someone's number and to parlay it into a

false identity that supports fraud or other malicious or illegal actions.
6.There are often multiple holders of the same SSN, which introduces
errors and clouds the records. Especially among less well-informed

or immigrant households, the purpose of the number is not well

understood or is colored by the role that a number might have

played in another country or society. For example, all members of a

household might use the same SSN because they believe it is
intended to apply to all of them. Some numbers have achieved very
wide use. The most famous is the ''wallet incident" in which a

replica of an SSN card complete with a number was included in an

inexpensive, widely sold wallet; an appreciable number of people

improperly believed that this SSN was to be used.
7.The SSN is closely related to the Medicare identifier, which
identifies virtually all members of the population over age 65. For

married people who receive SSA Title II benefits paid to an

individual and the spouse on the basis of one person's earnings, the

Medicare number of the primary beneficiary is the SSN followed

by an A; for the spouse, the Medicare number is that same SSN

followed by a B.
8.Not everyone needing health care has an SSN; for instance, foreign
visitors, newborn infants, and the indigent or homeless are all likely

to lack SSNs. This would require that health care providers be

prepared to assign substitute numbers.
9.The crucial, almost overwhelming, objection to the SSN as a
medical identifier, however, is that it has no legal protection, and

because its use is so widespread, there is no chance of retroactively

giving it such protection. As a data element, it is not characterized

by law as confidential; hence, organizations that use it are under no
legal requirement to protect it or to limit the ways in which it is
used. For all practical purposes its use is unconstrained, this makes

the risk of commingling health data with all other forms of personal

data enormously high.
Confidentiality of Research Uses of HDO Databases
Through expenditures for medical research, the government and private
sector indirectly contribute to third-party intrusions. Although epidemiological

research was originally concerned with the causes and prevention of infectious

diseases and focused chiefly on populations, such research has expanded to

include chronic, noninfectious diseases with low rates of occurrence (PPSC,
1977a). Progression of such ailments may be slow, and
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA170
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.because their causes are frequently insidious, their study often requires medical
surveillance of a substantial population at widely disparate times.
In some cases, HDOs may serve research and statistical uses, and this
raises consideration of how privacy interests might be affected. First, the

benefits of such databases generally accrue not to the individual data subject but

to society; this makes assessments of risks and benefits more complex because

the person at risk is not the same as the beneficiary. Second, research databases

depend on the voluntary cooperation of subjects, providers, or both in providing

accurate and reliable information. If patients or clinicians distrust the ability or
willingness of HDOs to protect the confidentiality of information, they may
intentionally withhold or distort information. Third, it will become extremely

important to understand the implications of differing methods of data collection

and sources of data
Šfor instance, abstraction of primary records and analysis
of claims databases compared with patient responses to surveys fielded by the

HDO. Each will have different sources of bias in the population reached,

reasons for missing data, and accuracy.
With respect to research and statistical studies, Congress and agencies of
the federal government have acted to protect the interests of individuals who are

subjects of research and statistical records developed under federal authority or

with federal funds (PPSC, 1977a). A report from the National Research Council

(1993) analyzes available technical and administrative procedures that can be

taken to protect confidentiality of data while permitting legitimate data use. A

number of such disclosure limitation techniques are described: (1) collecting or

releasing a sample of the data; (2) including simulated data; (3) "blurring" of the
data by grouping or adding random error to individual values; (4) excluding
certain attributes; (5) swapping of data by exchanging the values of certain

variables between data subjects; (6) requiring each marginal total of the table to

have a minimum count of data subjects; (7) using a "concentration rule"

(described in 
Chapter 3
); and (8) using controlled rounding of table entries
(NRC, 1993). Whether these steps are sufficient in the HDO context requires

reexamination.Because HDO databases will include many elements of personal
information collected for single, specific purposes and subsequently used for

multiple, diverse purposes, they have the potential to conflict with the

secondary use principle. If such secondary use does not, however, involve a

decision about the individual, then the privacy threat is by no means as acute as

it would be if the information were used to make a decision directly affecting

the individual (USDHEW, 1973). Individuals' interests have not been

compromised, for example, when these data are used anonymously for
statistical or research purposes and not for administrative decision making that
will affect them directly. Although the Harris/Equifax survey (1993) found that

respondents objected to such use of their medical
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA171
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information without their express consent (64 percent of respondents), the IOM
committee believes that individuals
Šand collectively, the public
Šmay need to
better understand the benefits of health services research using non-person-

identifiable data and protections that are available for research use of person-

identifiable data. Researcher access to HDO databases is addressed in the

committee's recommendations.
RELEVANCE OF EXISTING LAWS TO HDOS
The committee examined existing law-constitutional, statutory, and
common law-for its relevance to HDOs and its adequacy for protecting patient

privacy. The committee also examined the way these laws might affect the

design, establishment, and operation of HDOs.
It concludes that most of this body of law is unlikely to apply to HDOs.
With the exception of laws regulating information considered sensitive, existing

laws regulate recordkeepers and their recordkeeping practices; they do not

regulate on the basis of either the content or the subject matter of a record.

Current law thus seeks to regulate the information 
behavior of health care
providers, government recordkeepers, insurers, consumer reporting agencies,
quality assurance organizations, and researchers. For this reason, it is important

to understand how HDOs are likely to be viewed by the legal system-that is, in

what legal context their recordkeeping will be seen.
The committee believes that HDOs are unlikely to be treated as health care
providers, payers, or quality assurance organizations. If they are treated as

medical researchers, very little in the way of standards would apply. Some

possibility exists that they will be subject to regulation as 
consumer reporting
agenciesŠand they will probably want to avoid this
Šor as 
insurance support
organizations, at least in states that have passed The National Association of
Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) Information and Privacy Protection Model

Act of 1981 (NAIC Model Act). Implications of being treated as either are

described briefly below. HDOs may well have 
governmental status,
 and the
legal implications of that status are described in more detail, with particular

attention to the Privacy Act of 1974.
Laws Governing Insurance Support Organizations
The NAIC Model Act defines an insurance support organization as "any
person who regularly engages, in whole or in part, in the practice of assembling

or collecting information about natural persons for the 
primary purpose of
providing the information to an insurance institution or agent for insurance

transactions" (emphasis added). Because HDOs will likely provide information

to insurance institutions on a regular basis in connection
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA172
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.with insurance transactions (defined in the NAIC Model Act as a determination
of an individual's eligibility for insurance coverage, benefit, or payment), it is

possible they will be considered insurance support organizations.
In states that have passed the NAIC Model Act, an HDO would be subject
to the following six requirements. First, the HDO could not disclose personal

information about an individual without the written authorization of the

individual or 
unless the disclosure was needed: to further an insurance function,
provided there is no redisclosure; to a health care institution or health

professional; to an insurance regulatory authority; to a law enforcement
authority; in circumstances otherwise permitted or required by law; in response
to compulsory process; for the purpose of a 
bona fide
 research study, provided
that no individual can be identified in any subsequent research report; for

marketing purposes; to consumer reporting agencies; to a group policyholder; to

a professional peer review organization; or for a licensing activity.
Second, when subject consent is obtained, the HDO would have to assure
that the consent has several properties: that it (1) is written in plain language;

(2) is dated; (3) specifies the types of persons authorized to disclose

information; (4) specifies the nature of the information authorized for

disclosure; (5) names the institution authorized to disclose; (6) specifies the

purposes for which the information is being disclosed; (7) specifies the length

of time for which the authorization is valid; and (8) advises the individual
whose information is the subject of the consent that the individual has a right to
a copy of the consent form.
Third, the HDO would have to provide record subjects with a right of
access to their records, either directly or through a health care professional

designated by the individual. Fourth, the HDO would be required to provide

individuals with rights of correction, amendment, and deletion. Fifth, the HDO

could not maintain information concerning any previous adverse underwriting

decision relating to the individual. Sixth, the HDO would be subject to the

regulatory and investigatory powers of the state commissioner of insurance.
In states that have not adopted the NAIC Model Act, there is little or no
statutory regulation of the information practices of insurance institutions or

insurance support organizations (Trubow, 1991) to apply to HDOs. In theory,

the above requirements might not apply at all in those states, or they might

apply piecemeal by virtue of state-specific situations.
Laws Governing Consumer Reporting Agencies
It is possible, but by no means likely, that HDOs could be viewed as
consumer reporting agencies under the federal Fair Credit Reporting Act
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA173
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(FCRA) or state versions of the FCRA. These statutes regulate the collection,
use, and dissemination of personal information by consumer reporting agencies.

Federal law defines a consumer reporting agency as an organization that

"regularly engages in whole or in part in the practice of assembling or

evaluating consumer credit information or other information on consumers for

the purpose of furnishing consumer reports to third parties" (FCRA 15 U.S.C. 
§1681a[f]) for fees or on a cooperative, nonprofit basis. "Other information on
consumers" includes medical record information.
The FCRA defines "consumer report" as any written or oral
communication that bears on consumers' credit worthiness, credit standing,

credit capacity, character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode

of living when that report "is used or expected to be used or collected in whole

or part for the purpose of serving as a factor in establishing the consumer's

eligibility for: credit or insurance to be used primarily for personal, family or

household purposes" or used "in connection with a business transaction
involving the consumer'' (FCRA 15 U.S.C. 
§§ 1681a(d) and 1681b(3)(E)).
If data from an HDO are used only in connection with insurance claims
determinations, the HDO should not, at least by virtue of the insurance claims

function, be classified as a consumer reporting agency. The Federal Trade

Commission (FTC), which is charged with enforcing the FCRA, has stated that

supplying data for insurance claims purposes does not constitute a consumer

report.If, however, HDOs were to acquire and supply personal financial
information to health care providers to assist providers in making

determinations about a patient's payment of a medical bill (including the

acceptance of a consumer's credit card or check or the allocation of charges

between the patient and various health care payment programs), HDOs would

be providing information for use "in connection with a business transaction

involving the consumer." Courts have held, for example, that providing

financial information for point-of-sale determinations of whether to accept a
consumer's check represents a disclosure in connection with a business
transaction involving a consumer. This kind of action brings the party making

the disclosure within the scope of the FCRA.
If, though highly unlikely, the FCRA were judged to be applicable to
HDOs, then they would be subject to its provisions. These include limitations of

the kind of personal information that could be collected and maintained;

requirements with respect to consumer access to the database; restrictions on

the disclosure of the information from the database; and a variety of

administrative, civil, and criminal sanctions. Given the reach of the FCRA, the

committee judged that HDOs will want to avoid action and responsibilities that

will put them within the purview of the FCRA.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA174
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HDOs as Governmental Entities: General Confidentiality
Protections in Public Law
The governmental or private status of an entity that maintains or uses
personal record information is particularly significant for recordkeeping.

Constitutional principles, legislative charter, statutory law, and regulations must

be considered separately.
Constitutional Law
If an entity has a governmental status, whether federal or state,
constitutional privacy standards apply to the entity's handling of personal

information. As noted earlier, various provisions of the U.S. Bill of Rights are

aimed at protecting citizens from governmental abuse, and privacy rights are

derived from limited case law (e.g., 
Whalen v. Roe).
 For federal or state
constitutional protections to apply, an HDO would have to be operated by a

governmental entity or pursuant to a governmental charter.
Legislative Charter
Even if HDOs are not operated by federal governmental entities,
constitutional information privacy standards can affect their operations in two

ways. First, HDOs may well operate under a state legislative charter. If that

charter were to 
require the submission of personally identifiable medical record
information (on the part of record subjects, providers, or others), this statutory

requirement provides a basis for a challenge on constitutional privacy grounds,
just as did the reporting requirements in 
Whalen.Second, even if the HDOs are not statutorily chartered, constitutional
information privacy concepts are used by the courts as benchmarks for

assessing whether a privacy violation has occurred under common law or

statute. Accordingly, if an HDO were challenged on tort or other common law

or even statutory privacy theories, the extent to which the HDO violates
constitutional informational privacy rights could well be influential in
determining the outcome.
Freedom of Information Acts
In addition to any constitutional protections (which will be limited at best),
a body of statutory law would also apply to HDOs if they were considered to be

public agencies. For example, federal agencies and agencies in every state are

covered by freedom of information (FOI) or public records acts. These statutes
are intended to make records held by government agencies available to the
public. The federal FOIA, however, contains
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA175
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.express language that exempts from disclosure "personnel and medical files and
similar files the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted

invasion of personal privacy" (5 U.S.C. 
§ 552[b][6]). Most state freedom of
information statutes include a similar exemption. Washington State's FOIA, for

example, includes an exemption for medical records, pharmacy records, client

records held by domestic violence programs, and various types of research data.
The Washington courts have also held that medical records are exempt from
disclosure under Washington's FOI statute.
16Fair Information Practices
In addition, the federal government and approximately one-third of the
states have adopted fair information practices and statutes covering

governmental agencies within each jurisdiction. The federal Privacy Act

prohibits federal agencies, or contractors acting on behalf of an agency, from

disclosing information accessible by personal identifiers and contained in a

system of records without the prior written consent of the individual

concerned.17 The federal government and states that have adopted
comprehensive privacy laws are also required by statute to make records
relating to a record subject available upon request to that individual. Federal

agencies and those in some states can, however, adopt special procedures that

bar direct access to medical record data when officials have reason to believe

that such access would be harmful to the subject (Cleaver, 1985; Andrussier,

1991).The right to know about, challenge, control, and correct information about
oneself are hallmarks of American privacy law. The elements of fair

information practices derive from the report of the Secretary's Advisory

Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems (USDHEW, 1973). The five

principles in the original code are enumerated in that report (p. 41) as a Code of

Fair Information Practices:1. There must be no personal data recordkeeping systems whose very
existence is kept secret.
2. There must be a way for an individual to find out what information
about him is in a record and how it is used.
16 Note, however, that FOIA would not necessarily exempt physicianor provider-
specific information as discussed in 
Chapter 3.17 The federal Privacy Act contains 12 exceptions that permit disclosures without
obtaining subject consent. One such exemption is for research purposes 
(FederalRegister, 1991b). Personally identifiable health record information held by Medicare
peer review organizations can be shared with authorized researchers without subject

consent.CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA176
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3. There must be a way for an individual to prevent information about
him obtained for one purpose from being used or made available

for other purposes without his consent.
4. There must be a way for an individual to correct or amend a record
of identifiable information about him.
5. Any organization creating, maintaining, using, or disseminating
records of identifiable personal data must assure the reliability of

the data for their intended use and must take reasonable precautions

to prevent misuse of the data.
The Privacy Act of 1974.
 The Privacy Act of 1974 (P.L. 93-579; 5 U.S.C. 
§552a) concerns databases held by the federal government.
18 Along with FCRA
and the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, this act invests

record subjects with rights to see, copy, and correct their records, as well as

with limited rights with respect to authorizing the collection and disclosure of
information.The Privacy Act of 1974 incorporated the five elements of the Code of Fair
Information Practices as eight principles that are manifest as specific

requirements (PPSC, 1977a):1. There shall be no personal data recordkeeping system whose very
existence is secret and there shall be a policy of openness about an

organization's personal data recordkeeping policies, practices, and

systems (The Openness Principle).
2. An individual about whom information is maintained by a
recordkeeping organization in individually identifiable form shall

have a right to see and copy that information (The Individual
Access Principle).
3. An individual about whom information is maintained by a
recordkeeping organization shall have a right to correct or amend
the substance of that information (The Individual Participation
Principle).4. There shall be limits on the types of information an organization
may collect about an individual, as well as certain requirements
with re18 Other federal laws address the use of personal information in an immense array of
circumstances and settings: criminal justice information systems; student records and
tests; tax information; financial information held by banks and other financial institutions

including electronic transfers of funds; press offices; and identification of intelligence
officers, bad debtors, cable service users, renters of videotapes, and rape victims.
Confidentiality provisions also appear in statutes pertaining to the national census, Social
Security, child abuse information, and federally supported drug and alcohol treatment
facilities (OTA, 1986). Such protections are often filled with lists of exceptions,

however, sometimes to the point of effectively negating the purpose of the legislation.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA177
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.spect to the manner in which it collects such information (The
Collection Limitation Principle).
5. There shall be limits on the internal uses of information about an
individual within a recordkeeping organization (The Use

Limitation Principle).
6. There shall be limits on the external disclosures of information
about an individual a recordkeeping organization may make (The

Disclosure Limitation Principle).
7. A recordkeeping organization shall bear an affirmative
responsibility for establishing reasonable and proper information

management policies and practices that assure that its collection,

maintenance, use, and dissemination of information about an

individual is necessary and lawful and the information itself is

current and accurate (The Information Management Principle).
8. A recordkeeping organization shall be accountable for its personal
data recordkeeping policies, practices, and systems (The

Accountability Principle).
In addition to establishing privacy guidelines for federal databases, the
Privacy Act also created the Privacy Protection Study Commission (PPSC),

whose charter required it to examine recordkeeping practices in the private

business sector and in selected federal domains (e.g., tax records). The PPSC

revisited the Fair Practices doctrine and reoriented the thrust of the Fair

Practices somewhat by placing emphasis on promoting consent and
participation rights, which it referred to as "fairness protections for individuals"
(PPSC, 1977a, pp. 17-18). In fact, the majority of the commission's

recommendations relate directly to fairness in recordkeeping. In the case of an

individual, essential fairness protections include a right of access to records

about oneself for reviewing, copying, and correcting or amending them as

necessary, plus some control over the collection and disclosure of information

about oneself.The PPSC offered an illustrative revision of the Privacy Act to incorporate
changes it suggested in its report. These modifications included steps in the

following areas: amending records; limitations on disclosure; collecting and

maintaining information; "propagating corrections" (which involves taking

positive steps to correct information); uses for research or statistical records;
notices about agency systems; policies and practices; rights of parents and legal
guardians; agency implementation; civil remedies and criminal penalties;

application to government contractors and grantees; archiving records; giving

notice of new systems or alterations to old systems; reporting to the U.S.

Congress; the effect of other laws; and prohibitions on selling or renting

information for mailing lists (PPSC, 1977b).
A decade later, the Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act of
1988 (P.L. 100-503) amended the Privacy Act to include a new section of
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA178
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.conditions that must be met before computer matching would be permitted.
Another new section pertained to computer matching and required: (1)

verification of adverse administrative actions and provision for individuals to

contest findings and (2) notification of the public and evaluation of the effect of

new systems or matching programs.
OPTIONS FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY AND
CONFIDENTIALITY OF HEALTH-RELATED DATA IN HDOS
Two assumptions should drive the policymaking process with respect to
privacy protection strategies and options for the establishment and operation of

HDOs. First, from both a public policy and a legal standpoint, privacy

protection will be a material issue. Accordingly, the issue warrants careful
attention. Second, because HDOs are not health care providers or federal

entities, HDOs will escape the reach of most existing privacy law. Nevertheless,

many of the entities contributing data 
to HDOs will be bound by confidentiality
obligations, and these obligations may affect their ability to submit person-

identifiable data to HDOs, particularly if HDOs do not adopt stringent
protective measures. That is, entities contributing information to HDOs will 
notescape existing privacy law.
19The committee's prevailing assumption is that HDO policymakers will be
under pressure to develop effective privacy protection safeguards. They will

also enjoy some degree of flexibility in the development and implementation of

those safeguards and will have a striking opportunity to develop internal

safeguards in advance of public or legislative pressure. The development of

computerized databases can be seen as
Šor can evolve into
Ša way of giving
people greater confidence about and real control over their personal

information. When considering policies about privacy that might be

implemented, Gostin (1993) posed seven questions about the human rights

impact of disclosure of information that should be addressed even before data
are collected.1. What is the purpose of the information?
2. Will collection achieve a compelling public health purpose?

3. Will collection result in effective health policy; that is, might it
drive people underground if they fear the consequences of

disclosure?19 Some state and federal laws will restrict the ability of providers to disclose medical
record information 
to HDOs, at least in the absence of patient consent or a legislative
mandate. In addition, in some states it may be difficult or impossible to word a patient
consent to such disclosure that does not result in waiver of the physician-patient privilege.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA179
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4. Who will have access to the information? Can it be disclosed by
force or law? What will be the effect of negligent disclosure?
5. What impact will it have on human rights-is there a stigma to
individuals or communities?
6. Are there less invasive alternatives?

7. What safeguards are available to reduce the risks?
The committee views these points as useful considerations for fashioning a
sensible approach to privacy protections and choosing among a range of options

for protecting privacy and confidentiality. Threats to confidentiality and privacy

might be seen as posing options within a series of "layers" of protection. Such

layers could include: (1) uniform state or federal preemptive legislation; (2)
enabling legislation and organizational articles of incorporation and bylaws; (3)
limiting categories of information acquired or accessed by HDOs; (4)

administrative rules and regulations including institutional and user codes of

conduct and employee training; (5) comprehensive security safeguards in all

automated systems and networks; (6) controlled access to databases; (7)

techniques to reduce the risk of inferential identification, such as suppression of

small cell sizes; and (8) enforceable administrative, civil, and criminal sanctions

and penalties for misuse. At each level, more stringent efforts at security incur

trade-offs of inconvenience for users and costs born by the parties-patients,

users, supporting organizations, providers, researchers, and (perhaps) taxpayers.
In the remainder of this section, several options for addressing privacy
protections are presented. The committee's recommendations
Šin effect,
judgments about the seven questions posed by Gostin and choices among a set

of options
Šappear in the next section of this chapter. They address uniform
legislation establishing a clear set of rights, duties, administrative procedures,
and remedies for all persons and institutions affected by the implementation and
operation of HDOs. The recommendations also address administrative policies

and procedures that HDOs should adopt.
Uniform Legislation
Federal Preemptive Legislation
The committee considered one important option to be enactment of federal
preemptive legislation. Federal preemptive legislation refers to federal law that

supersedes any state law or legislation that either covers the same matter or

conflicts with the federal legislation. Such preemptive legislation in this area

could establish uniform requirements for the preservation of confidentiality and
protection of privacy rights for health data about individuals because health
data, particularly in electronic form, will cross state boundaries when accessed

and disclosed by HDOs.CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA180
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.As noted earlier, existing state laws pertaining to the actions of
recordholders will likely not apply to HDOs, but HDOs might wish to comply

with them. Yet, state protections for confidentiality of data contributed to HDOs

may be lacking, inconsistent, or even in conflict from state to state. Where they

exist, they create an extraordinary patchwork of regulations embedded in laws

pertaining to a variety of recordkeepers such as hospitals, HMOs, nursing
homes, state health departments, insurers, employers, and so forth. A brief
review of state statutes indicated that in one state more than 50 different statutes

and regulations pertain to the confidentiality of medical information.

Compiling, understanding, and complying with conflicting or arcane regulations

for each state would be virtually impossible for HDOs operating in numerous

states. Making such policies clear to the public would likely be even more

hopeless.During the period of this study, a number of groups were examining the
questions of privacy rights with electronic transfer of health information.

Among the more significant was the Workgroup on Electronic Data Interchange

(WEDI).In its 1992 report, WEDI identified three principles for databases
containing sensitive personal information that could be associated with

identifiable persons; these principles involved computer system security, fair

information practices, and privacy protection. To satisfy these principles, WEDI
recommended federal preemptive legislation. Its proposals referring to the
collection, storage, handling, and transmission of data were intended to

facilitate and ensure the uniform, confidential treatment of person-identifiable

information in electronic environments.
WEDI recommended that federal legislation include the following steps
and provisions:   establish uniform requirements for preservation of confidentiality and
privacy rights in electronic health care claims processing and payment;
   apply these requirements to the collection, storage, handling, and
transmission of individually identifiable health care data, including

initial and subsequent disclosures in electronic transactions by all

public and private payers, providers of health care, and all other

entities involved in the transactions;
   exempt state public reporting laws;
   delineate protocols for secure electronic storage and transmission of
health care data;
   specify fair information practices that ensure a proper balance between
required disclosures, use of data, and patient privacy;
   require publication of the existence of health care data banks;
   establish appropriate protections for highly sensitive data, such as data
concerning mental health, substance abuse, and communicable and

genetic diseases;CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA181
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   encourage use of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms where
appropriate;   establish that compliance with the act's requirements would be a
defense to legal actions based on charges of improper disclosure;
   impose penalties for violations of the act, including civil damages,
equitable remedies, and attorneys' fees where appropriate; and
   provide for enforcement by government officials and private,
aggrieved parties.
As described earlier in this chapter, protections for data independent of the
recordholder is an important option to consider, and federal legislation provides

an opportunity to establish such protections.
Privacy advocates see two possible drawbacks to federal legislation. First,
such legislation could 
weaken rather than strengthen protections if the federal
legislation is less stringent than good state legislation
Šhence the need for
strong federal law. If federal legislation leaves room for states to implement
more stringent standards, multistate HDOs will still, however, be subject to

conflicting requirements, and this may add to, rather than decrease,
administrative cost and complexity.
Second, to the extent that federal legislation encourages uniform standards
that foster interlinkage and creation of a national database, it will contribute to

the development of national databases and, by linkage, to non-health-related

databases, dossiers, and national identification systems. The committee's dim

view of the development of national identification systems has already been
noted.Uniform State Legislation
The main alternatives to federal legislation would be the status quo or
enactment of model state acts. Adoption of uniform state legislation would

undoubtedly involve a lengthy and cumbersome process and would not ensure

adoption by all states. Even if a uniform law were adopted by all the states, it

would likely be adopted with variations by some states, much as in the case of
the Uniform Commercial Code. Hence, the committee was not sanguine about
the utility of this approach.
Options for Consent and Participation Rights
The discussion above related mainly to federal preemptive legislation.
Whether or not such legislation is adopted, HDOs will need internal policies,

although such organizational, administrative, and governance approaches would

be informed by existing (if not new) federal or state law.
Consent and participation rights for record subjects are essential ele
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA182
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ments of the Privacy Act. They provide individuals with rights to see, copy, and
correct their records, as well as grant limited rights to authorize the collection

and disclosure of information. State statutes routinely give persons a right of

access to data about themselves and a role in authorizing (or limiting) third-

party disclosures. HDO designers will be able to select from a range of consent

and participation options that run from weak to quite stringent, with middle-
range strategies possibly a useful approach.
HDO Access to Data
Notification. At a minimum, HDOs could publish or give record subjects
notice that information about them
Šincluding information that the individuals
provide directly to participating health care providers, insurers, and employers
Šwill be accessible by the HDO. They might also require notification by entities

submitting data to HDOs. Presumably this notice would provide individuals
with at least a cursory description of the manner in which HDOs or their agents
might use their data.
20 They would have no further rights, however, in terms of
access to the data. Under current law in many states, patient consent will be

required to transmit data to or allow access by the HDO (see footnote 18).
General releases.
 HDOs could be designed so that individuals would
simply be notified about their data being accessible to HDOs, but would also

sign a general release authorizing participating providers, payers, and

employers to share personal data with HDOs. The presumption, of course, is

that such a release (and its implications) is well understood by those signing it.
Such a general release might also be crafted to give the HDO a blanket
authorization to redisclose.
From a 
legal standpoint, this approach, however modest it may seem,
would be adequate except in the case of extremely sensitive health information

such as alcohol and drug abuse, mental health treatment, and AIDS information.

Extremely sensitive health record data (e.g., that just noted) generally could not
be shared with the HDOs or redisclosed by the HDOs pursuant to general
release under existing federal and state law.
Another option is for individuals to receive a complete and detailed written
description of an HDO's permissible disclosures and other information practices

and a complete description of their information rights.
Stronger options would allow individuals the right to revoke their
authorization and, in any event, the authorization would be effective only for
20 Notification is included as one of the recommendations of the IOM committee
studying privacy and confidentiality protections in the genetics testing environment
(IOM, 1993b).CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA183
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.a limited period. Even stronger options would require that individuals sign a
specific consent form (described below) 
each time
 they provided data accessible
to an HDO or to HDO participants. In this case, each data element might require

separate authorization and expiration dates.
Other Consent and Participation Rights
Even if this approach were to meet minimum legal requirements, however,
it is likely to be 
politically unacceptable for issues of database maintenance and
disclosure by the HDO. Given the 
comprehensiveness and sensitivity of HDO
databases and the high level of public concern about privacy, the committee

expects that privacy advocacy groups, legislators, the media, and other public
opinion leaders will insist that HDOs be brigaded with substantial consent and
participation rights.
Participation. An HDO offering participation rights at the high end of the
''protection spectrum" would have all or most of the following characteristics:
   Individuals would receive a complete and detailed written description
of an HDO's permissible disclosures and other information practices

and a complete description of their information rights.
   Record subjects would have a right of access to all data about
themselves that are held in the HDO at a nominal charge. Access rights

would include the right to receive a copy of their records, not merely a

right to review their record.
   Persons would have a right to correct and amend their records and to
add a rebuttal statement if the HDO refused to make a requested

correction or amendment.
   Record subjects would have a right to inspect an "audit trail" that can
identify all uses, disclosures, and other access events involving their

own files.   Alternatively, record subjects would receive notice in the mail each
time the HDO discloses their data to third parties or, at the least, each

time HDO data are used to make an adverse decision affecting the
individual. This latter formulation is not dissimilar to current notice
requirements in FCRA.
Disclosure Options
Rules about disclosure and confidentiality are at the heart of any
information privacy policy. Here HDOs will enjoy a significant degree of legal

flexibility. Under existing law, HDOs could adopt confidentiality policies that

span a spectrum from a disclosure-oriented policy at one end to a strict
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA184
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.confidentiality policy at the other. From a political standpoint, however, HDO
proponents are likely to see advantages in opting for a confidentiality-sensitive

policy for person-identifiable data.
Disclosure-Oriented Options (Weak Options)
Under a disclosure-oriented policy, all person-identified or person-
identifiable data accessible to HDOs would be available to participating parties

for any purpose and without specific subject authorization. Exceptions would

apply to particularly sensitive kinds of data, such as records on substance abuse,

AIDS, and genetic tests. Even under existing law most of these records cannot

be made available without specific authorization. Adopting a disclosure-
oriented approach would also make most person-identifiable information
available to third parties, as long as the user had a legitimate business purpose

for accessing the information.
Furthermore, under a disclosure-oriented policy HDOs would routinely
make person-identifiable information available in response to subpoenas, other

forms of compulsory process, or formal, voluntary requests from law

enforcement or regulatory authorities. If a disclosure-oriented policy were

adopted, the principal confidentiality restrictions would relate to the handling of

sensitive subsets of health record information and to wholesale disclosures of
identifiable information to the general public. The committee rejected this broad
disclosure-oriented option as incompatible with its values and the effective

implementation of HDOs.
Confidentiality-Oriented Options (Strong Options)
In contrast, a confidentiality-sensitive approach to disclosure would
include some, if not all, of the elements listed below.
21   HDOs could release information only in non-person-identifiable
formats except under very restricted circumstances.
21 The Health Care Authority of Washington State issued draft recommendations for
health information systems in September 1992 (6.7[4]; pp. 78-79). Among the draft
recommendations were seven related to access to person-specific information. Access

would be permitted only for the following specified purposes: use by the individual
affected; use by service providers in the course of providing health services (subject to
standards of client consent); use in payment, utilization review, and eligibility or plan
membership processes; legally required reporting of births, deaths, communicable
diseases, and other information; to carry out or cooperate with epidemiologic

investigation of disease outbreaks by state or local public health authorities; for
confidential research, when properly authorized by an institutional review board; and to
establish linkage among data sources necessary to avoid duplicative data collection
burden.CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA185
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   HDOs could not release any information in personally identifiable
form from an HDO database to third parties without a specific

authorization, either signed or given electronically by the person in

question.   HDOs could opt never to release person-identifiable information even
with subject consent, or to release information in a customized format

that blocked parts of a subject's record, depending upon the user and

use for which it was requested.
22   HDOs could refuse to provide person-identifiable information to third
parties that intended or could use the information to make decisions

about an individual's access to particular benefits (standard processing

of health insurance claims would be an exception to this policy).
   HDOs could require users to sign "confidentiality agreements." These
agreements would obligate users to safeguard information obtained

from the HDO and use it only for the purpose for which it was
provided. Violations of the agreement would give the HDO (and
perhaps record subjects) a claim of either breach of contract or of

confidentiality (or both) against the offending user.
   They would adopt a policy of refusing to comply with voluntary
requests for access from law enforcement or regulatory agencies.
   In legal matters, HDOs could resist compliance with subpoenas or
other forms of compulsory process, assert all available privileges, and

notify record subjects of an access request so that they could contest

production. (The Uniform Act noted earlier takes a similar approach
with respect to compulsory process.)
Governance Options as an Approach to Privacy Protections
Issues relating to the structure and governance of an HDO will be critical
to both the substance and the appearance of privacy protection and, therefore, to

the HDO's political acceptability. In this context, the principal question will be

the extent of government involvement in the operation of the HDOs. In the

absence of federal preemptive legislation, state legislation might include a
number of options. Although the laws in this section are all state oriented, if
federal preemptive legislation is enacted, it would set confidentiality standards

for HDOs and possibly preempt state statutes.
22 Even if HDOs chose never to release person-identified or -identifiable data, and
notwithstanding that the record subject had authorized release, HDOs would still be

obliged to provide the person directly with a copy of his or her record. Nothing would
stop that individual from personally delivering a copy of the record to a third-party
requestor.CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA186
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.State-Based Systems
At one end of the governance spectrum, HDOs could be operated by state
or local (but not federal) agencies. This kind of structure has privacy benefits.

Constitutional privacy protections, for example, would attach if the HDOs were

operated by public agencies. Further, governmental operation would increase

the likelihood of effective public and regulatory oversight and accountability.

Under this formulation, legislative hearings for budgetary and policy purposes
could be expected to be a regular feature of the HDO process.
State or local agency operation of an HDO also carries significant dangers
to privacy. This level of government involvement would exacerbate concerns

about the linkage of HDOs with other sensitive government databases and the

creation of a dossier system. Pressure for public access to HDO health record

data means that HDOs will need to be exempted from state FOI laws.
Were an HDO to be operated by a state agency, it would resemble in
several ways health data commissions now in place in a number of states.

Because some of these have operated for some time, typical characteristics are

worth reviewing here.
Iowa, for example, created a health data commission as a "statewide health
data clearinghouse for the acquisition, compilation, correlation, and

dissemination of data from health care providers, the state Medicaid program,

third-party payers, and other appropriate sources." The Iowa statute gave the

commission authority to require providers, payers, and others to submit medical
record information in a person-identifiable format to the commission. It also
provided that medical record data furnished to the commission would not

constitute a public record and that all of the confidentiality protections available

under the laws of Iowa would apply. Data releases suppress patient identifiers

and suppress data in small cells. Early in 1993, bills introduced in the Iowa

Senate and House called for implementation of a community health

management information system (CHMIS) by the Health Policy Corporation of

Iowa through its subsidiary, the Health Information Management Center. The

main elements of CHMIS entities were given in 
Chapter 2
.Private-Sector Systems
At the other end of the governance spectrum, HDOs could be operated by
purely private, for-profit or not-for-profit entities with no governmental status

or legislative charter. Even in this posture, an HDO could take steps in structure

and governance to maximize privacy protections. These steps could include:
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA187
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   establishing a privacy ombudsman to respond to patient problems or
complaints;   establishing an advisory committee of representatives of organizations
affected by the HDOs, including consumer, patient, and privacy

advocacy groups;
   adopting a comprehensive privacy code to regulate all aspects of the
collection, maintenance, use, and dissemination of person-identifiable

data;   designating a high-level employee to assure compliance with
applicable privacy policies and standards and to prepare an annual

"privacy status and compliance report" for submission to the boards of

directors or advisory committees of HDOs;
   initiating a program of periodic audits to gauge compliance with
privacy standards and a privacy impact audit of all new programs or

functions; and
   creating an employee privacy training program.
Mixed Governance Systems
For privacy, an attractive governance approach is a middle ground,
wherein the entity operating the HDO would be a private, not-for-profit

organization with a legislative charter. Such an approach is under way in

Washington State. A legislative charter could serve at least nine purposes in the

protection of privacy.
First, a legislative charter could bring constitutional privacy protections to
bear in some circumstances. Second, it could spell out a statutory cause of

action for record subjects, which included remedies such as attorneys' fees and

liquidated damages. Third, it could give statutory effect to the HDOs'

confidentiality and other privacy standards. Fourth, a legislative charter would

affect how federal law characterizes HDOs and help to dispel any confusion
about the legal status of an HDO (by stating that the entity is not a health care
provider, a payer, or a consumer reporting agency). Fifth, it could establish a

"shield" to immunize the HDO databases from discovery and other forms of

compulsory process in state courts and administrative proceedings. Sixth, it

could criminalize egregious information practices such as intentional breaches

of security or willful, unauthorized releases of information. Seventh, such a

statute could charge the attorney general or some other appropriate state agency

or official with oversight and enforcement responsibilities. Eighth, the statutory

charter could institutionalize privacy safeguards such as auditing and training.

Finally, it could require an annual report to a legislative committee detailing the

HDO's compliance with privacy safeguards or otherwise establish an effective

oversight mechanism for assisting the HDO in complying with privacy
safeguards.CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA188
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.State charter and mixed governance options will continue to be hampered
by the possibility that HDOs will operate in multistate areas. In the absence of

federal legislation, this lack of uniformity of requirements or predictability of

legal consequences of system design and operational characteristics would be

major problems.
Other Administrative Options to Protect Privacy and
ConfidentialitySecurity risks may be exacerbated for HDOs that have large numbers of
remote on-line terminals. HDOs will need to implement comprehensive, state-

of-the-art administrative, personnel, physical, and technological security

safeguards; of special interest are employment agreements and security systems

design. Whatever confidentiality policies HDOs adopt or are imposed by law,

HDOs must be able to implement them and assure their effectiveness.
Employee agreements
 would, at a minimum, require employees to observe
guidelines related to hard-copy reports, diskettes, and downloaded data and

would instruct them about the dangers of altering, destroying, or revealing data

and the penalties attached to infractions. For employees such steps include:

requesting only reports needed for a given job; notifying a security

administrator of changes in duties; safeguarding confidential materials; sharing

information only with authorized users; using only approved user codes and

passwords when requesting system access; not sharing such codes and

passwords with anyone, employee or not; disposing of reports and materials in a
secure manner; logging off and securing equipment when leaving a terminal;
and reporting data and system misuse.
Features to limit insider and outsider threats include providing systems to
conduct audit trails, having full-time security officers to enforce overall policy

and monitor the system, employing expert systems to note unusual patterns of

requests or employee behavior, assigning personal identification numbers

(PINs) and passwords, and granting access to parts of records only on a need-to-

know basis.One option among many for addressing some of these problems is
encryption (see OTA, 1993); in this process data are electronically coded so that

only the dataholder and authorized users can decode the data. Medical records

may require secured
Šthat is, encrypted
Šcommunication because the inherent
value of the records is very high.
Another option is the creation of a data integrity board. The Computer
Matching and Privacy Protection Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-503) specified the

creation of data integrity boards for federal agencies to oversee the

implementation of computer matching programs. These boards were charged

with overseeing a number of administrative requirements, which include the

following: to issue annual reports on matching activities and any violations
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA189
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that have occurred; to serve as a clearinghouse for receiving and providing
information on the accuracy, completeness, and reliability of records; to provide

interpretations and guidance on requirements; and to review agency

recordkeeping and disposal policies. These tasks illustrate what HDOs will need

to oversee in their own operations.
COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS
Overview and General Principles
In arriving at its set of recommendations concerning privacy and
confidentiality protections, the committee reviewed federal and state statutes

and regulations and common law that might apply to HDOs; it also took under

advisement parallel studies related to these topics at the IOM and elsewhere.

The committee ultimately arrived at a set of preferences among the various

options described above, presented in the form of recommendations.
If HDOs are government entities or established by legislative charter,
patients' rights embodied in federal, state, and local laws and statutes may apply

to the acquisition and disclosure of person-identifiable data. Given: (1) the

unprecedented comprehensiveness and 
inclusiveness of information in the files
held by HDOs (as those terms were used in 
Chapter 2
), (2) the generally scanty
and inconsistent legal protections across geopolitical jurisdictions, and (3) the
current public interest in and concern about privacy protections, 
the committee
believes that HDOs have both an obligation and an opportunity to fashion well-

delineated privacy protection programs that will, at the same time, foster the

realization of HDO goals.
 Some of these protections, such as the establishment
of data protection boards and organizational policies regarding security and

access control, can be implemented in the short term. Others, such as passage of

federal preemptive legislation, will likely require longer-term efforts.
Preemptive Legislation
RECOMMENDATION 4.1 PREEMPTIVE LEGISLATION
The committee recommends that the U.S. Congress move to enact
preemptive legislation that will:
   establish a uniform requirement for the assurance of confidentiality and
protection of privacy rights for person-identifiable health data and

specify a Code of Fair Health Information Practices that ensures a

proper balance among required disclosures, use of data, and patient
privacy;CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA190
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   impose penalties for violations of the act, including civil damages,
equitable remedies, and attorney's fees where appropriate;
   provide for enforcement by the government and permit private
aggrieved parties to sue;
   establish that compliance with the act's requirements would be a
defense to legal actions based on charges of improper disclosure; and
   exempt health database organizations from public health reporting laws
and compulsory process with respect to person-identifiable health data

except for compulsory process initiated by record subjects.
The committee believes that both processes in the last item
Špublic health
reporting and responding to compulsory process such as subpoenas
Šshouldremain the continuing responsibility of the provider, as is now the case.
Arguments for Federal Legislation
The committee concludes that federal preemptive legislation is required to
establish uniform requirements for the preservation of confidentiality and

protection of privacy rights for health data about individuals because health

data, particularly in electronic form, will cross state boundaries when accessed

and disclosed by an HDO. In general, the committee subscribes to the positions
laid out in the WEDI report (1992) and thus advocates federal preemptive
legislation in preference to model state legislation or similar nonfederal

approaches. It further advises that Congress enact such legislation as soon as

possible. At a minimum, federal legislation should establish a floor and allow

states or HDOs to implement more stringent standards so that it does not

weaken state-imposed safeguards.
Attaching Privacy Protection to Data
Although current state protections often apply duties of confidentiality to
the recordkeeper (e.g., the hospital), this protection is no longer in effect once

the data have left the recordkeeper's control. This means that health data can be

deprived of legal protection unless such protection is specified by another law;

furthermore, such protection is likely to be left to the discretion of the

organizations or individuals who acquire such information as secondary data.
At the present time, that is little shelter indeed.
Therefore, legislation should clearly establish that the confidentiality of
person-identifiable data is an attribute afforded to the data elements themselves,

regardless of who holds the data. There is precedent for attaching umbrella

protection to sensitive data either by regulation or by law. Examples include

Executive Order 12356 (April 12, 1982), which gives de
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA191
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.fense agencies authority to establish levels of sensitivity and classify
information in them; the Tax Reform Act of 1976 (P.L. 94-455), which

stipulates that tax information is considered confidential, requires that the IRS

and states protect it as such. According confidentiality protections to data, not to

holders, would help to remedy the current lack of protections and to simplify

the establishment of, compliance with, and communication of health
information practices.
Uniform Requirements
The committee has concluded that ensuring an appropriate balance
between the protection of confidentiality of health data about individuals and

disclosures of database information requires several important features in

legislation or implementing regulations. The first is the inclusion and

observance of selected fair information practices, such as those found in the
Privacy Act of 1974.
23 These practices
Šnot yet available or understood in the
health sector
Šare described in more detail in the following recommendation on
data protection boards. Their significance lies (apart from historical precedent)

in promulgating uniform expectations and protections for health data.
Second, federal legislation can be expected to encourage standard setting
(e.g., connectivity and transmissions standards). As noted in 
Chapter 2
, the lack
of standard setting is a major obstacle to the development of automated medical

records (GAO, 1991, 1993a); it will be no less a problem for advanced HDOs.

Thus, the committee sees federal legislation as one more mechanism for
addressing this problem for all computer-based systems dealing with health data.
Specific Elements of Federal Legislation
Good information practices
24 include the collection, transmission, and
storage of only the information that is needed. They imply (if not explicitly

demand) that data not be collected for unlawful purposes. Thus, proper

preemptive legislation should also provide for enforcement by government
23 When capitalized, the phrase "Fair Information Practices" refers to procedures
established in the Privacy Act of 1974. When used without capital letters it is a generic

phrase with a broader or narrower meaning, depending on the context.
24 Good information practices include good security practices. A strong stance on
privacy requires strong and comprehensive system and network security. Whether

federal legislation would establish security practices and procedures or whether such
policies would be left for promulgation by the HDOs, however, was considered by the
committee to be beyond the scope of its charge.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA192
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.officials and private aggrieved parties and should impose penalties for
violations of the legislation. These might include civil damages, equitable

remedies, and attorney's fees where appropriate. It will be important that the

legislation clarify whether individuals have standing to bring suit.
HDOs may find themselves in complex legal thickets as demands mount
for disclosure of various types of information, some of which may well include

protected person-identifiable data. If it is likely that such disclosure will be

deemed improper, HDOs may be understandably unwilling to release or

disclose much information. This stance may in turn stifle the very contributions
that HDOs can offer (as discussed in Chapters 
2 and 
3). To overcome this
possible aversion to risk on the part of HDOs, the committee argues that

compliance with requirements of any federal legislation in this area ought to be

a straightforward and sufficient defense against legal actions based on charges

of improper disclosure. In taking this position, however, the committee further

stipulates its expectations that federal legislation will have strong privacy and

confidentiality protections that meet, if not exceed, the usual provisions of fair

information practices statutes or regulations.
Exemption from Compulsory Reporting and Compulsory Process
A special aspect of the committee recommendation concerns federal, state,
and local public health reporting laws and compulsory process. Federal

legislation should exempt HDOs from these types of requirements on the

grounds that the primary dataholders or originators are the proper target for
such laws and regulations. The issue may be especially acute where state laws
specify reporting by providers or by "anyone who has knowledge of certain

events" (e.g., a reportable communicable disease, a gunshot wound, or child

abuse). The committee believes that HDOs ought not to be considered, for these

purposes, either a provider or an "anyone" with knowledge of reportable events.

To make this clear, the committee believes that HDOs should be directly

exempted from such reporting requirements. It should be noted, however, that

electronic transfer of such data from health providers to an HDO or its

databases would facilitate independent reporting to the appropriate health

agency by the provider
 and thus improve the completeness of those agencies'
records.In much the same way, the committee agrees that data that are essential for
conduct of authorized activities by, for instance, the Internal Revenue Service,

the Federal Bureau of Investigation, or legal authorities through subpoena or

court order should be obtained from the primary recordholder, not the HDO.
The committee believes that exemptions from compulsory reporting and
compulsory process regarding third-party disputes will strengthen the claims

regarding, and the actual protections accorded, the confidential
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA193
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.person-identifiable health data held by HDOs. Compulsory process should
apply, however, in disputes between HDOs and record subjects.
If federal (or state) legislation does not grant such exemptions to HDOs,
then the committee's view is that HDOs should adopt a policy of refusing to

comply with requests for access from law enforcement or regulatory agencies to

the extent permitted by law, and it should actively seek exemptions in future

federal and state legislation. They should also adopt policies of resisting

compliance with subpoenas or other forms of compulsory process, asserting all

available privileges, and notifying record subjects of an access request so that
subjects would have an opportunity to contest production of such data.
Data Protection Units
HDOs will need clear, enforceable, written organizational policies and
procedures in several areas: patients' rights regarding their own data; how to

protect medical information and materials; how to ensure the accuracy of data;

and how to know they have gained compliance with their policies. Members of

the public should be able to request and receive clearly written materials

describing these policies. Although precise policies cannot be written to cover

every eventuality, they must be broad enough to address the most common

situations, such as types of data, and potential requestors.
If an HDO is chartered by legislation, legislative language will
undoubtedly describe its goals. HDO policies implementing these goals,

however, must emanate from the top leadership of the organization. Leadership

must delineate an ''enforceable expectation of confidentiality" (as advocated by

the PPSC, 1977a) and make clear that breaches will be rigorously addressed.

Organizations should also make considerable efforts to educate (and reeducate)

staff and the public (i.e., potential requestors) about these policies.
RECOMMENDATION 4.2 DATA PROTECTION UNITS

The committee recommends that health database organizations
establish a responsible administrative unit or board to promulgate and

implement information policies concerning the acquisition and

dissemination of information and establish whatever administrative

mechanism is required to implement these policies. Such an administrative

unit or board should:
   promulgate and implement policies concerning data protection and
analyses based on such data;
   develop and implement policies that protect the confidentiality
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA194
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of all person-identifiable information, consistent with other
policies of the organization and relevant state and federal law;
   develop and disseminate educational materials for the general
public that will describe in understandable terms the analyses and their

interpretation of the rights and responsibilities of individuals and the

protections accorded their data by the organization;
   develop and implement security practices in the manual and automated
data processing and storage systems of the organization; and
   develop and implement a comprehensive employee training program
that includes instruction concerning the protection of person-

identifiable data.
Establishing a Data Protection Board
The commitment of the governing body and executives of the HDO to
protection of confidentiality will be critical, and these objectives should be

written at the outset into the organization's bylaws. One useful mechanism for

accomplishing these goals is to establish a policy and oversight "data

protection" and "data integrity" unit or units to promulgate, publicize, oversee,

and enforce formal policies and procedures concerning access to and release of

data. Such an entity within an HDO might be known generically as a data
protection board, and that is the term employed in this report.
25 (Implementation
of such policies and procedures would be the responsibility of specific

operational arms of the organization, not the policy units themselves.) Such

policy boards and their formal policy statements should be in place before

HDOs begin operations, and regardless of whether such policies are specified

and enacted in federal preemptive legislation. Policies and procedures should

explicitly deal with authorized and unauthorized access to and authorized and

unauthorized release of information from HDO databases.
Functions and responsibilities.
 A data protection board would have full
authority to monitor data protection activities, intervene in potentially harmful

situations, make exceptions to privacy and confidentiality policies on a case-by-

case basis, address questions of new uses and new users of information over

time, and undertake other responsibilities that will fulfill the spirit and the letter

of the organization's policies.
25 This term is used by some privacy advocates, and particularly in Europe, to mean a
top-level federal entity. It is also described in the proposal for the Health Security Act
(1993). It is used here in a more general sense and intended to refer to units that any type
of HDO, of any size, might create and support.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA195
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In terms of actions that HDO data protection boards might undertake, they
should: (1) promulgate a code of fair 
health information practices (or
implement one if included in federal or state legislation) and make that code

available on request to any member of the public; (2) monitor compliance with

such a code, audit for breaches of confidentiality, and respond in a timely way

to public concerns; (3) establish, publicize, and implement formal policies and
procedures concerning access to and release of data before full operation of
their databases begins; and (4) ensure that such policies and procedures deal

explicitly with authorized and unauthorized access to and authorized and

unauthorized release of information from the database.
Drawbacks and limitations.
 The committee acknowledges that data
protection boards will not provide a full solution without external (and probably

federal) legislation and commitment from the governing boards and top

leadership of HDOs. Moreover, this stance raises the issue of whether a data

protection board should be a function of an HDO
Šwhich may be private, quasi-
public, or public
Šor a governmental function applicable to all HDOs. Because
of the limited powers of an HDO, particularly if it is private or quasi-public, the

data protection board will be able to enforce its policies rigorously only within

the organization; externally it can merely track the compliance of others that

have contractual obligations to the HDO, but it will not have jurisdiction over

them. In the absence of a law giving it added powers, the most that such a board

could do about breaches of confidentiality by a party that received information

would be to pursue legal remedies for breach of contract or any violation that

may have occurred.
An additional problem with relying solely on contractual protections is that
the real harm from improper disclosure of information will be suffered not by

the HDO, but by persons who in all likelihood will not be a party to the contract

with the HDO. (The exception might be when all such contracts name as third-

party beneficiaries individuals whose information is on the system, but the

committee regarded this as a remote possibility.) In the absence of legal action
by such third-party beneficiaries, the liability for improper redisclosure may be
minimal.Developing Administrative Policies and Procedures
General administrative points.
 HDOs should develop and promulgate
strong internal policies and procedures concerning the protection of health

information with policies on public disclosure of information and evaluation

studies. The committee further advises that such policies, which it assumes will

be set by the data protection boards, specifically address the following

administrative points:CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA196
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   who in the organization has final responsibility for setting, monitoring,
and enforcing policies and procedures;
   who inside the organization is authorized to have access to which data,
and under what circumstances;
   who has authority to override policies (i.e., what are the unusual
circumstances, to be decided on case-by-case basis, and who will make

these decisions); and   what are the penalties for unauthorized access or disclosure of
protected information, and whether they will differ if disclosure is

inadvertent, undertaken for financial gain, or for other inadmissible

purposes.26Implementation of such policies would likely be spread throughout the
operating organization. For example, the electronic data processing department

would be responsible for implementing security procedures, and the personnel

department would likely carry out employee training in appropriate conduct.

Some blend of oversight and operational officers would determine authorized

uses of the data and rule on the exceptional case.
Policies should cover topics such as types and sources of data over time,
notice to individuals about the databases accessed by the HDO, and similar

matters. As a broad principle, the committee believes that HDOs must draw on

the Privacy Act of 1974 and its principles of Fair Information Practices. This

code and other significant issues that HDOs should address are discussed below.
Fair Health Information Practices.
 The committee strongly advises that
HDOs include in their policies and procedures fair health information practices

such as those provided for in the Privacy Act; it further urges that HDOs

consider applicable revisions of the Privacy Act suggested by the PPSC and

others. Any HDO should consider this code as the foundation of its privacy

framework and depart from it only after careful consideration and explanation.

There will be a direct relationship between, on the one hand, the extent to which
record subjects are assured of notice, access, consent, and other rights with
respect to information maintained in an HDO and, on the other hand, the

political acceptability of HDOs as a concept or a reality in a given location. The

committee thus sees such fair health information practices as critical elements

in the eventual success of HDOs.
One procedural element of fair information practices is notice to subjects
of their inclusion in a database. HDOs might provide for public notification in a

variety of ways. At a minimum, periodic published notices
26 If the HDO is not a governmental agency and is not authorized by law to do so, it
cannot impose penalties.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA197
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in newspapers or public interest broadcast spots could alert individuals, indicate
how more information could be obtained, and serve a public education function

in explaining what HDOs do. Notice might also be given at the time a health

service is provided or when enrolling in a health insurance or provider plan; a

case in point is when authorization to access the HDO is given.
Types and sources of data.
 The committee believes that HDOs should
collect only personal information that is necessary to achieve their publicly

stated purposes and that they should identify, in writing, specific categories of

personal information that they will not obtain under any circumstances.

Information relating to an individual's exercise of First Amendment rights might

be an example.
HDOs should agree to collect personal information to the fullest extent
possible directly from record subjects and their health care providers. This

stance reflects the approaches of both the Privacy Act and the PPSC.
Management of records over the long term.
 Databases cannot be permitted
to grow without bounds. Given that the committee cannot foresee how the

HDOs will function, it cannot be more specific than to urge that HDOs adopt

policies and procedures for archiving records. HDO data protection boards will

need policies to respond to an individual's request to purge or seal a record.
27Confidentiality agreements.
 HDOs should require those who are given
access to HDO data to sign confidentiality agreements. These legal agreements

would obligate users to safeguard information obtained from HDOs and use the

information only for the purpose(s) for which it was provided. Violations of the

agreement would give the HDO (and perhaps record subjects) a breach of

contract and confidentiality claim against the offending user.
The effort to require recipients to protect confidentiality brings one
squarely up against the limitations of contract provisions in this area. Without

preemptive federal legislation that requires data recipients to protect the data

they obtain in the same way that the HDOs are required to protect those data, no

protection can be assured. First, HDOs would have to police the uses made of

data by all recipients, and they would have to police
27 This committee has proceeded on the assumption that HDOs will not be the
repository of the primary medical record. If they were, then they would need to retain
records for longer periods of time in order to defend against malpractice suits and, in
some cases, to comply with state record retention requirements.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA198
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.redisclosures. As a practical matter, these steps are impossible. Second, no
mechanism such as a notarized affidavit would suffice, because such an

instrument is merely a sworn statement and has no special status as a contract.

A representation of intended use in a confidentiality agreement should be

sufficient as a contract. In short, contractual protections are weak, so they

should be used only as an adjunct to, and not as a substitute for, appropriate
new federal legislation to protect the confidentiality of sensitive patient
information held by HDOs.
Routine blocking of sensitive data.
 Legislation and organizational policies
have sometimes distinguished among levels of sensitivity of various elements of

health-related data in the belief that it is possible to identify categories of data

that warrant special protection (IOM, 1991a; WEDI, 1992). For instance, laws

protect data related to treatment in federal drug abuse treatment facilities that

receive federal funds.
Despite precedent for adopting such a stance, this committee has decided
otherwise. It has concluded that a given data element cannot always be reliably

designated as inherently sensitive; rather, the sensitivity of data depends on the

kinds of harm to which individuals are or believe themselves to be vulnerable if

the information were known to others. Such assessments could differ

dramatically from one person to another, one circumstance to another, one place

to another, and over time as cultural attitudes change. Rather than
recommending special protections for certain categories of data, the committee
prefers that all data accessed by HDOs be afforded stringent, and essentially

equal, protection.
Blocking divulgence by individuals of sensitive data.
 If no data are
routinely to be considered "sensitive" and thus more stringently protected than

other types of data, then might it be reasonable to permit individuals to block

divulgence of particular kinds of information? That is, should persons be able to

flag or label certain data as special or sensitive, so that those particular facts,

specific to those individuals, would not be divulged to anyone? This could be
accomplished either by: (1) permitting individuals to block information from
disclosure without flagging that information as being so blocked or (2) by

letting them block the information but labeling it as blocked. The committee

concluded that neither of these options, although perhaps attractive from the

point of view of autonomy and empowerment, was desirable as a means of

protecting privacy.The main reason for this position is that, unless care is taken in designing
the system, flagging information as having been blocked might in some

circumstance defeat or even exacerbate the challenge to privacy; such a label or

flag would alert anyone reviewing the material that it includes sensitive data.

More insidious from the viewpoint of a treating physician
ŠCONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA199
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for whom this information may someday be a proxy medical record (as when
information is unavailable by some other means)
Šit would compromise his or
her ability to care for the patient. Furthermore, if blocked material is not so

flagged or labeled, the consequences for treating physicians could be even more

disastrous if that blocked information (e.g., the existence of a serious chronic

condition or use of a particular medication) is directly relevant to clinical
decisions. Although it is true that patients can always omit information in a face-
to-face encounter, it would seem to defeat one of the purposes of a database to

allow it to be intentionally incomplete. Thus, the committee does not subscribe

to the view that specified material could be blocked (masked), whether labeled

that way or not.
Overseeing Data IntegrityHDO data protection boards would oversee safeguards to prevent health
information from being disclosed to unauthorized recipients. They may also

need to be responsible for oversight of the protection of data from unauthorized

alteration and for data accuracy and completeness. (These tasks might,

alternatively, be assigned to a "data integrity" unit, board, or committee.)
At a minimum, this board would need to ensure that data and programs are
changed only in a specified and authorized manner, and it would be responsible

for assessing and reporting the accuracy of the HDO's data. Data integrity may

be maintained by implementing security measures, by implementing procedural

controls, by assigning responsibility, and by establishing audit trails as

described earlier in this chapter.
Security requires proper 
system design
 driven by policies that have been
determined and approved by the governing board, chiefly because software and

hardware vendors are likely to implement only the level of security specified by

the HDOs. Access must be limited to authorized users. Mechanisms and

procedures must also be developed and implemented before the network

becomes operational. These should address how data integrity will be

maintained by preventing alteration or loss of data and what steps will be taken

for authenticating users and maintaining records of communications with users.
Procedures to ensure availability and recovery after unanticipated disruptions
(e.g., power loss, fire) are also crucial, including assurance that the systems

resume operation in a secure state and that data integrity is guaranteed.
Security in these environments presents special challenges, in part because
it is only as adequate as that provided for the least secure database on the

network. Further, remote access to computer systems, the possibility of

accessing information over public telecommunications systems, and advances

in standardization of data elements and transmission requirements will enhance

the opportunities for data linkage, but they will also magnify the need
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA200
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for security protections. Data networks will become increasingly attractive to
sabotage and access for financial gain and thus require special attention to

manage these risks.The basic intent is to provide assurance that the system, its resources, and
information are protected against harm and that the information and resources

are properly accessed and used by authorized users. The board should ensure

that, at a minimum, the following list of security safeguards would be in place

internally for a defined operational system and environment:
   a defined set of users;
   prescribed data and operational programs;
   defined network connections and interactions with other systems; and
   protection against defined threats against the system, its resources, and
its data.
Safeguards might include policy guidance in several areas: procedures for
granting access to systems and assigning passwords; administration and training

of security officers for conduct of audits and disaster preparedness; and

oversight of management review of safeguards and inspections.
28HDOs' resources will probably never be sufficient for all the activities and
responsibilities envisioned for them. Long-term success is likely to be

predicated in part on their ability to protect confidentiality of personal health

data, and the committee believes that they will therefore have to devote

adequate resources to some form of data protection board. It may well be that
monetary or human resources sufficient to maintain 
independent data protection
and data integrity units will not be available; those resource allocation

decisions, however, are best left to individual HDOs.
Release of Person-identified Data
Policies Relating to Access and Disclosure
It is clear that the question of who 
outside the HDO has access to which
data, under what circumstances, is supremely important; this is directly
28 Specific concerns include physical risk management for disasters (e.g., fire, flood);
memory protection and backup in case of hardware failure; design and use of audit trails,
log-on procedures, antivirus protection for software; assignment and monitoring of
badges and other mechanisms to control personnel access; logging and cataloging of
magnetic tapes and floppy disks; destruction of paper containing sensitive printouts and

other documents; and monitoring the system for unauthorized access.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA201
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.related to questions of disclosure and is the essence of the privacy issue from
the patient's point of view. The committee takes up these matters in a series of

recommendations (presented below) that refer to person-identified or person-

identifiable information only. As laid out in 
Chapter 3
, this committee
recommends release and disclosure of information that protects patient identity

but provides reliable, valid, timely, and useful descriptive and evaluative
information on a full range of health care providers and clinicians. It also
acknowledges that some HDOs will have claims processing and payment

functions that will require transmittal of person-identified claims information

between the provider and payer.
RECOMMENDATION 4.3 RELEASE OF PERSON-IDENTIFIED
DATAThe committee recognizes that there must be release of patient-
identified data related to the processing of health insurance claims. The

committee recommends, however, that a health database organization 
not release person-identifiable information in any other circumstances 
except the following:   to other HDOs whose missions are compatible with and whose
confidentiality and security protections are at least as stringent as their

own;   to individuals for information about themselves;
   to parents for information about a minor child except when such
release is prohibited by law;
   to legal representatives of incompetent patients for information about
the patient;   to researchers with approval from their institution's properly
constituted Institutional Review Board;
   to licensed practitioners with a need to know when treating patients in
life-threatening situations who are unable to consent at the time care is

rendered; and
   to licensed practitioners when treating patients in all other (non-life-
threatening) situations, 
but only with the informed consent of the
patient.Otherwise, the committee recommends that health database
organizations not authorize access to, or release of, information on

individuals with or without informed consent.
ConsentIn the last item, the committee has specifically recommended that consent
for access to the database be a necessary and sufficient condition in
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA202
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.only one circumstance: when needed by the treating practitioner. In such a
situation it will be important that specific consent techniques be in place. The

following requirements, similar to those in the Uniform Health Care

Information Act, are based on PPSC recommendations for medical record

information consent forms. Patient consent must:
   be in writing or electronically provided in an acceptable manner;
   be signed or authorized electronically by the individual on a date
specified;   be clear about the entities being authorized to disclose information;
   be specific about the nature of the information to be disclosed;
   be specific as to the institutions or persons to whom the information
may be disclosed;
   be specific about the purposes for which the information may be used,
both at the time of the intended disclosure and at any future time; and
   be specific as to the date when the authorization expires.
Requirements of signed and written consent, which arose at a time when
all records were kept on paper, are still valid, but they will require modification

to permit consent by computer, such as by keypad attached to a terminal in a

treating physician's office.
The Uniform Act expressly states that the signing of an authorization is 
nota waiver of any privacy rights that the patient may have under other statutes,

rules of evidence, or common law. It further requires that providers (or, in this
case, HDOs) retain a copy of each authorization and provides that an
authorization may not permit the release of health record information relating to

health care that is to be provided more than 90 days in the future. (Exceptions

are made for disclosures to third-party payers, but they would be irrelevant for

HDOs.) Finally, the Uniform Act states that a patient may revoke a disclosure

authorization in writing at any time. Even if consent and participation rights are

in place, privacy protection is not ensured, because strategies used to obtain

consent, in particular, are fallible. As discussed earlier in this chapter, for

example, patients experience substantial pressure to sign authorizations and

waivers in order to facilitate both access to and payment for health care.
Release of Person-identified Data
In the seven cases listed in Recommendation 4.3, the committee believes
that values other than confidentiality justify access to person-identifiable
information with or without consent, and that there exist adequate safeguards
for the protection of data in these very limited circumstances. Those values

include autonomy for patients in accessing their records, fiduciary responsibility

for those unable to care for themselves or make health
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA203
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.decisions for themselves, beneficence in providing health care in acute
situations, and the social benefits of epidemiologic and health services research.

The rationale for each case is described below.
The Standing of Other HDOs
HDOs will need to acquire information about out-of-area care provided to
persons in their databases and should be able to do so for those specific

circumstances. For example, one HDO might ask another to provide

information for state residents of given zip codes who have been hospitalized in

other states. The committee concludes that if the requesting HDO has

confidentiality and security protections that are at least as stringent as those of
the HDO that would be releasing the information, the data should be released.
Such HDOs might be in adjoining states (e.g., when Vermont residents are

hospitalized in New Hampshire) or within a single state; in other cases they

might include overlapping geographical areas such as one or more states and a

metropolitan area. In all such cases, individuals might be expected to be found

in several different HDOs, and in their best interest (insofar as needed health

care is concerned), their data ought to be shared or transferred.
The Standing of Persons, Parents, and Legal Representatives
The second case cited in Recommendation 4.3 is self-evident-when
Šinformation about themselves is sought by individuals. The third and fourth

cases reflect the need to care for minors and persons who are legally

incompetent to give consent for themselves.
One important case concerns the parents of a minor child except when
certain actions are protected by state law. Such exceptions include, for instance,

family planning services. 
Emancipated minors
 are those who live away from
home or are in the armed forces and manage their own financial affairs. 
Matureminors, although still dependent on their parents, are judged to be mature
enough to understand the treatment or issue in question and to give informed

consent for their own care. The committee believes that privacy and

confidentiality for emancipated and mature minors should have the same

protection as that given to adults. Parental involvement should be related to the

age and development of the minor. Current state laws regarding emancipated or

mature minors do not consistently protect such information, and uniform federal

legislation is desirable.
The other important case involves legal representatives of incompetent
patients. Such legal or personal representatives include guardians as well as

individuals who are named in advance directives and granted durable power of

attorney.CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA204
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Special Standing of Research
The fifth case in Recommendation 4.3
Šresearchers with approval from
relevant human subjects committees or institutional review boards (IRBs)
Šis a
different category. In this case person-identified information is not being sought

by the patient 
or for care of
 the patient, but to conduct studies that in some
fashion are regarded to be in the public's interest. Such uses of the databases are

considered by this committee to be central and vital to the effective
implementation of HDOs. For this reason, researchers whose research design
and study plans are deemed appropriate and approved by a review panel
Štypically but not necessarily an IRB at the lead researcher's university or

institution-should be permitted access to person
Šidentified or person-
identifiable data in the HDO files.
An IRB is a specially constituted review body established to protect human
subjects, usually those recruited for biomedical and behavioral research, when

that research is conducted under the auspices of the institution (USDHHS,

1993b). Review and approval by an IRB is required for research that is

conducted by investigators supported by a department or agency subject to

federal policy. IRBs function under policies set by federal legislation (45 CFR

46 for Department of Health and Human Services; 
Federal Register,
 1991a) and
by policies of the institution. Members of the IRB carefully weigh the likely
risks and benefits of the proposed research and the procedures and protections

for the research subjects.
When research involves only the review of records, such as those in
HDOs, the IRB is encouraged to determine that an institutional approval or an

expedited review is sufficient. It may do so if it is persuaded: (1) of the

significance of the research and that use of data in personally identifiable form

is necessary, (2) that any risk of harm to subjects is minimal, (3) that adequate

safeguards will be implemented to protect the record or information from
unauthorized disclosure, and (4) that removal and destruction of identifiers will
be carried out when the research is complete. The committee urges institutions

to review applications when requested by serious investigators who many not

be affiliated with an institution. Alternatively, such requests might be

considered as exceptions by the Data Protection Board on a case-by-case basis.
The committee believes it will usually 
not be necessary for researchers to
obtain consent from record subjects for access to 
person-identified or 
-identifiable material, but methods should be incorporated for protecting a record
subject's privacy, including notification by the HDO of the uses that may be

made of the records.
Contacting potential subjects to obtain further information is a more
sensitive matter. It requires careful attention and sensitivity to who would make

initial contact and what information would be conveyed to potential
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA205
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.subjects or their relatives in the course of the contact. The information
conveyed should include the purpose of the study and the kind of data that

would be collected, the identity of the persons who will have access to the data,

the safeguards that will be used to protect the data from inappropriate

disclosure, and the risks that could result from disclosure. Such negotiations

should also give written assurance that any publications that result will present
the data only in aggregate form so that individuals are not identifiable. Research
subjects should also be told if they will be contacted in the future (USDHHS,

1993b).Special Patient Care Considerations
The sixth case in Recommendation 4.3 involves treating licensed
practitioners with a need to know in life-threatening situations, whom the

committee believes ought to be able to access data about a patient. This requires

that the patient be unable to consent at the time care is rendered. A patient in a

situation that threatens loss of life or limb sometimes cannot provide coherent

but needed medical information because of mental impairment, stress, or
substance abuse and is not considered to be a ''reliable historian." In such cases
the committee believes it appropriate to access such data, if available, through

the HDO. When the patient cannot be identified, access to the HDO might be

particularly helpful if biometric (nonvolitional) identifiers are part of the

database.The committee has chosen the term "licensed practitioner" advisedly, a
broader concept than "physician." Circumstances justifying access might occur

in a hospital emergency department, in an intensive care unit, or outside the

hospital when a health care professional is present and determines that in his or

her judgment obtaining certain health information is crucial. All such cases

presume that a primary medical record is not available and that no one (patient,

family, or friend) can reliably provide needed health information in a timely way.
The seventh case
Šthe release of data to licensed practitioners when
treating patients in all other (non-life-threatening) situations, but only with the

informed consent 
of the patient
Šis the only case in which the committee has
recommended the use of informed consent to release of person-identifiable

information. Such a circumstance might occur when a treating physician wishes

to access the HOD database in addition to the medical records he or she keeps.
For example, information on medications prescribed by other practitioners
might be pertinent. In such cases, the treating practitioner should obtain explicit

consent of the patient. As discussed earlier, consent might be given

electronically and might be time limited.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA206
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Prohibition on Access to Person-identifiable Data
The committee recommended that HDOs not authorize access to or release
of health information on individuals, with or without the informed consent of

the individual, in any situation or to any requestor other than those stated above.
To ensure that individuals (i.e., patients, parents of minor children, or legal
representatives) are not placed in an untenable situation concerning release of

information, the committee has opted for a position that does not rely on

consent procedures in most uses or disclosures of data. It prefers to rely on

stringent policies against disclosure or release of personal information on

individuals. It should be noted that the consent procedures described in this
recommendation are for release of information by the HDO. Patients will
always be able to consent to release of information by each of their care

providers. Nevertheless, in some circumstances the committee envisions that

consent procedures will be invoked before HDOs will release person-

identifiable information.
The importance of consent as a concept, and adequate procedures for
implementing consent, is accentuated by the multiplicity of uses of HDOs.

Given this multiplicity, it is difficult to argue that, by providing information,

record subjects have implied their consent to subsequent uses and redisclosures.

It may well turn out that record subjects will have little or no idea of the number

or variety of disclosures that could be made from an HDO.
Implications of Recommendations Denying Access
The reason for prohibiting broad disclosure following patient consent is
that HDOs may contain a longitudinal record about all health care delivered to a

patient and many personal details about the patient. Permitting the same ritual

of consent to authorize disclosure of this information will result in an increased

abridgment of patient privacy.
The prohibition on access to person-identifiable information is very broad.
If this limitation is enacted into law or such a policy is promulgated by the

HDO, it would have several consequences. For example, employers could not

obtain information about "out-of-health-plan" use by their employees even for

case management purposes. No access for law enforcement would be

permissible through compulsory process (if prohibited by federal preemptive

legislation). Attorneys could not access the database to build a case on behalf of

clients except through compulsory process in accordance with governing law.
Secret service agents seeking information about a person suspected of being a
security threat to an elected official could not seek information from the HDO.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA207
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Prohibiting access could result in some disadvantage or inconvenience to
the recordholder as well as possible harm to society. Nevertheless, the

committee believes that risks to individual privacy and the importance of a clear

and unambiguous policy for HDOs outweigh such possible disadvantages.
In some circumstances, the committee foresees difficult situations that
seem to present a conflict between policies. For example, an individual might

wish to obtain a copy of his information in the database that he could then

supply to an attorney who needs it for a malpractice case or to an employer who

demands it for determining new assignments or for case management purposes.
The committee, as noted elsewhere, sees little way to "protect" patient
information when the individual requests the information from an HDO and

then transfers it as he or she sees fit.
Employer AccessRECOMMENDATION 4.4. RESTRICTING EMPLOYER ACCESS
The committee recommends that employers not be permitted to
require receipt of an individual's data from a health database organization

as a condition of employment or for the receipt of benefits.
Special circumstances exist in the health sector of particular concern to the
committee. One involves the current practice of extensive exchange of medical

information between employer and payer, with little control by providers or

patients. This practice has dramatic implications for patients whose information

is accessed by an HDO if the employer and payer are readily able to tap into
data in the network. HDOs could make such exchanges of information more
harmful to patients because the information exchanged could cover all

encounters the patient has with the health care system (not just those covered by

insurance or by the employer's health plan).
The committee acknowledges the danger and inappropriateness of these
practices. It thus concurs with a recent IOM report (IOM, 1993e) that urged that

access to information collected in connection with employment-based health

benefits be limited through provisions analogous to those contained in the

Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (P.L. 101-336).
In Recommendation 4.4, the committee attempts to prohibit the use of
HDOs by employers for employment-related decisions about employees. In

particular, it seeks to constrain access to person-identifiable data and prevent

employers from coercing employees to provide such data about themselves or

their families as a condition of employment (e.g., promotion, placement,

retention, or termination). This recommendation applies only to
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA208
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the HDO and would not, of course, prevent employers or others from acquiring
health information from other sources
Šexamination, a treating physician, an
insurer, and so forth.Employees might wish, however, to provide access to their records to their
employer's case managers in circumstances relating to needed health care. To

account for this, the committee advises that there be a clear and enforceable

division of functions between employment and personnel decisions of an

employer and the employer's health benefits administration and case

management. In the absence of state or federal legislation limiting access and
threatening liability, employers should at least promulgate and enforce such
internal policies.
Universal Person Identifiers
Unique, individual person identifiers are essential to facilitate the efficient
operation and data interchange of HDOs. The committee also recognizes the

strong arguments against the use of the SSN as that unique identifier. The great

majority of the committee agreed on the need for a 
new unique identifier of the
grounds that the SSN offers too many opportunities to breach confidentiality.

The creation of a new number would: (1) permit legislative protection of that

number, (2) offer the possibility of greater protection for health information
than is possible with the SSN, and (3) could occur at the time of implementation
of universal health care coverage, which will, if enacted, require some scheme

for unique identification.
COMMENTIn this report the committee has addressed its views and concerns about a
new entity in health care delivery and recordkeeping
Šthe HDO. Little is really
understood about how HDOs will function, what effects they will really have as

opposed to the benefits they are expected to offer, and how they will evolve

over the next decade or so. These matters will be worked out in an environment

of change and stress, as the nation sorts out its posture toward health care and
health reform. This report, therefore, must be seen as laying the groundwork for
the context in which HDOs come into being and function. It cannot be read as

providing answers to all HDO issues that may arise, but neither could the

committee ignore the future completely.
In matters of privacy, the unique aspects of the HDO are two: (1) the
concentration of medical information about very large numbers of individuals,

coupled with (2) the large number of end users who have authorized access to

some or all of an individual's record. The HDO will inevitably
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA209
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.lead to much more varied use of health care information, and therein is a
privacy issue of substantial significance for the future.
Undoubtedly, both anticipated and innovative uses of HDO databases will
be evolutionary. In an operational sense, this is probably wise and unavoidable;

in matters of privacy, it is risky because a small number of seemingly innocuous

uses can cumulatively create a substantial privacy risk. Some uses that arise will

prove repugnant to society and will be impermissible; others will be considered

annoying, but will be tolerated. Some could be so discriminatory or otherwise

distasteful that they might well be proscribed by law.
The committee notes that the privacy dimension of medical records,
regional databases, and HDOs is not a matter that can be examined once and

thereafter ignored. New dimensions of privacy will arise, as will extensions of

old concerns, new threats to privacy, and new uses of data that prove unwise.

From time to time, perhaps every few years in the beginning of the "HDO

movement," the privacy issue needs to be revisited and reevaluated. New
mechanisms for assuring privacy may need to be invented; new actions by
Congress may be needed.
Security safeguards that protect the confidentiality of data and the
automated systems themselves have similar characteristics. New threats will

materialize; penetrators will become more skilled; new motivations for

surreptitiously acquiring health data will appear. From time to time, the

safeguards will need upgrading and strengthening.
The New Privacy
Privacy concerns have centered historically on the use of information
about an individual that governs some decision about her (e.g., a right,

entitlement, or privilege) or some action taken for or against her. The benefit or

harm as well as the risk of information misuse applies to the same individual.
With the growth of an information industry that deals widely with
information about people, the benefit-risk aspect has changed; the benefit has

turned toward organizations and society, but the risk has remained for the

individual. The traditional recordkeeping characterization of privacy is far too

limited given the intense pace of automation in recordkeeping and the electronic

linkages of systems of all kinds.
Conflicts have already begun to appear with regard to medical data. The
most frequently quoted anecdote is that of the pharmaceutical company that

uses patient drug use as the basis for targeted mailings and advertising. Some

people will tolerate such nonmedical use of health data as an annoyance; others

will feel strongly about it; some will be harmed because a mailing can reveal a

medical condition that was being concealed. Employer
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA210
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.use of health data also brings two motivations into conflict: that of the employer
who, having paid for the health care in whole or in part, feels it is entitled to

have the data for more efficient management of the organization and that of the

individual who considers that health data are personal and to be shared only as

he sees fit.
Other conflicts will arise, and the concentration of so many kinds of
information in an HDO will be a stimulus to their further creation. Looking well

to the future, therefore, a Code of Fair 
Health Information Practices is likely to
be necessary. It need not be exactly like the one in the federal Privacy Act;

indeed, it would probably have additional provisions for controlling the use of

health data.
For example, society has not yet expressed its view on how very sensitive
kinds of medical information can be used; genetic data is a case in point. It may

be decided that prohibitions against particular uses of information will be

accepted. If so, then one mechanism for implementation is incorporation of the

prohibition, possibly stated in a very general way, into a fair code; another is to

cast it into law. There is precedent for such prohibitions; for example, personnel

forms cannot ask certain kinds of questions such as those dealing with religion
or sexual orientation.
For the most part, privacy law in this country has been formulated under
the assumption that holders of information about people may generally do with

it what they please, constrained only by corporate ethics and the good taste of

business, societal acceptance (or outrage), occasional attention by the

government, pressures of consumer activist groups, and the consequences of

legal actions brought by individuals or consumer groups. This historical view

may prove inappropriate or even dangerous in regard to health data. There is

now evidence that the American public agrees. Westin has found high medical
privacy concerns among 48 percent of respondents and high privacy concerns in
general among 25 percent of survey respondents whom he terms Privacy

Fundamentalists. This group would seek sharp limits on organized data

collection and legal protection for privacy. Another 57 percent of the public has

been termed Privacy Pragmatists. He describes this group as examining each

situation to see whether information is really needed for a legitimate societal

function and whether safeguards are being followed. The final group he calls

Privacy Unconcerned. This small group is not apprehensive about the use of

personal data (Harris/Equifax, 1993).
Our society and country are designed to operate with what the engineer
would call feedback, or what society would call controls, weakly defined and

often ad hoc
 or 
de facto.
 The country, its people, its government, and its
institutions have survived thus far under this paradigm. With the coming

concentration of health information about huge numbers of people in the
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA211
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HDO, is this an acceptable national posture for information that is potentially
the most sensitive of all data ever collected about people?
It is difficult to attempt answers to a question such as this because the near
future of health care is so poorly defined. Events under way
Šfor example,
national health care reform
Šwill have a major impact on the motivations of
managers in charge of health care providers.
The country might be safe with the perception and handling of privacy as it
has been done for over two decades, but it might not. There can easily arise

distasteful practices in the way health care information is exploited for other

than delivery and payment of care. It is simply not known which uses of health

care information will be acceptable to society, will wisely serve the needs of

society and the health care industry, and will strike an acceptable balance
between the desires of a profit-oriented health care industry (which may be ever
more prevalent in the future) and the invasion-of-privacy consequences for

patients. In short, the privacy dimension of health care information is dynamic,

and it must be treated accordingly.
SUMMARYThe committee has examined sources of concerns about informational
privacy and the confidentiality of health-related information and security, and it

defines each in the context of health information. After a review of privacy

rights, confidentiality obligations and disclosure policies, and disclosure as it is

treated by law and in practice, the committee concluded that there was much
basis for concern about confidentiality, but little applicable legal guidance for
HDOs. It reviewed options related to uniform legislation, consent and

participation rights, disclosure policies, and governance, and advanced a set of

recommendations favoring strong federal preemptive legislation and

responsible organizational policies to protect privacy and confidentiality of

person-specific information.
In the context in which "confidential" is a designation given data to be
protected in terms of security and access, the committee has made a number of

recommendations that would help HDOs achieve these ends. First,

confidentiality is addressed by a recommendation for preemptive federal

legislation that all health care data be confidential, protected as such, and access

to it controlled.Second, the committee recommends the establishment of data protection
and data integrity boards to provide oversight of security and access in HDOs.

To implement protection of health care data, the committee has addressed

security and recommended that automated systems and networks supporting

HDOs have comprehensive system and network security that reflect the state of

the art.CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA212
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Third, to address patient privacy rights, the report has recommended that
patients can have access and other rights regarding their records, and be dealt

with through a code of fair health information practices. To accommodate

patient expectations of privacy, the committee recommended that patients have

certain legally assured rights to recover damages and force compliance if health

care information is misused, abused, or improperly released to unauthorized
parties.Fourth, to address privacy
Šthe issue of access to personal information
Šthe committee has made recommendations concerning who should and should

not have access to person-identified information and under what circumstances.
CONFIDENTIALITY AND PRIVACY OF PERSONAL DATA213
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ReferencesACS (American College of Surgeons) Fact Sheet. The National Trauma Registry of the American
College of Surgeons (Draft). Chicago: American College of Surgeons, 1992.
Adler, N.E., Boyce, T., Chesney, M.A., et al. Socioeconomic Inequalities in Health. No Easy
Solution. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
 269:3140-3145, 1993.
AHCPR (Agency for Health Care Policy and Research). 
AHCPR Purpose and Programs. 
Rockville,Md.: Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, AHCPR, 1990a.
AHCPR. Program Note. Medical Treatment Effectiveness Research. 
Rockville, Md.: Department of
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, AHCPR, 1990b.
Allen, A. 
Uneasy Access: Privacy for Women in a Free Society. 
Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and
Allanheld, 1987.
AMA (American Medical Association). Principles of Medical Ethics, 
Current Opinions of the
Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs of the AMA Including the Principles of Medical
Ethics and Rules of the Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs. 
1992.AMPRA (American Medical Peer Review Association). 
Managed Competition and the Role of
Quality Oversight. 
Washington, D.C.: AMPRA, 1993.
Anderson, H.J. Managing Data in a New Era. 
Medical Claims Management
 1(4):29-36, 1993.
Andrussier S.E., The Freedom of Information Act in 1990: More Freedom for the Government; Less
Information for the Public. 
Duke Law Journal
 729:753-801, 1991.
Aronow, D.B., and Coltin, K.L. Information Technology Applications in Quality Assurance and
Quality Improvement, Part II. 
Journal on Quality Improvement
 19:465-477, 1993.
Ayanian, J.Z. Heart Disease in Black and White [editorial]. 
New England Journal of Medicine
329:656-658, 1993.
Ayanian, J.Z., and Epstein, A.M. Differences in the Use of Procedures between Women and Men
Hospitalized for Coronary Heart Disease. 
New England Journal of Medicine
 325:221-225,
1991.REFERENCES214Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Baker, N.A. Medicare PROs and Assessment of Quality: Should Physician-Specific Data be
Released? Utilization Review 21(16):4-6, 1992.
Ball, M.J., and Collen, M.F. 
Aspects of the Computer-Based Patient Record. 
Computers in Health
Care Series. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992.
Barnes, B.A., O'Brien, E., Comstock, et al. Report on Variation in Rates of Utilization of Surgical
Services in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
Journal of the American Medical
Association 254:371-375, 1985.
Batalden, P.B., and Buchanan, E.D. Industrial Models of Quality Improvement. Pp. 113-155 in:
Providing Quality Care: The Challenge to Clinicians. 
N. Goldfield and D. Nash, eds.
Philadelphia: American College of Physicians, 1989.
Beauchamp, T., and Childress, J. 
Principles of Biomedical Ethics. 
New York: Oxford University
Press, 1989.
Becker, L.B., Han, B.H., Meyer, P.M., et al. Racial Differences in the Incidence of Cardiac Arrest
and Subsequent Survival. 
New England Journal of Medicine
 329:600-606, 1993.
Belair, R.R. 
Regional Health Data Networks: Privacy Law and Policy.
 Paper prepared for the
Institute of Medicine Committee on Regional Health Data Networks. Washington, D.C.:

Kirkpatrick & Lockhart, 1993.
Benn, S. Privacy, Freedom, and Respect for Persons. In 
NOMOS XIII: Privacy
. J. Pennock and J.
Chapman, eds. New York: Atherton, 1971.
Bennett, C.J. 
Regulating Privacy: Data Protection and Public Policy in Europe and the United
States. 
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1992.
Berwick, D.M. Sounding Board. Continuous Improvement as an Ideal in Health Care. 
New England
Journal of Medicine
 320:53-56, 1989.
Berwick, D.M., Godfrey, A.B., and Roessner, J. 
Curing Health Care. New Strategies for Quality
Improvement. 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1990.
BI (Benton International). 
CHMIS. Community Health Management Information System. General
Overview. 
New York: BI, 1991a.
BI. CHMIS. Community Health Management Information System. CHMIS Overview. 
New York: BI,
1991b.BI. CHMIS. Community Health Management Information System. Generic Specification. 
NewYork: BI, 1992.
Bloustein, E.J. Privacy as an Aspect of Human Dignity: A Reply to Dean Prosser. In 
PhilosophicalDimensions of Privacy: An Anthology.
 New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Blum, J.D., Gertman, P.M., and Rabinow, J. 
PSROs and the Law. 
Germantown, Md.: Aspen, 1977.
Blumenthal, D. Total Quality Management and Physicians Clinical Decisions. 
Journal of the
American Medical Association 269:2775-2778, 1993.
Borbas, C., Stump, M.A., Dedeker, K., et al. The Minnesota Clinical Comparison and Assessment
Project. 
Quality Review Bulletin
 16:87-92, 1990.
Braveman, P., Oliva, G., Miller, M.G., et al. Adverse Outcomes and Lack of Health Insurance
Among Newborns in an Eight-County Area of California, 1982-1986. 
New England
Journal of Medicine
 321:508-513, 1989.
Brook, R.H. 
Quality of Care Assessment: A Comparison of Five Methods of Peer Review. 
DHEWPub. No. HRA 74-2100. Rockville, Md.: Department of Health, Education, and Welfare,

National Center for Health Services Research and Development, 1973.
Brook, R.H., and Appel, F.A. Quality-of-Care Assessment: Choosing a Method for Peer Review.
New England Journal of Medicine
 288:1323-1329, 1973.
Brook, R.H., and Lohr, K.N. Efficacy, Effectiveness, Variations and Quality: Boundary-Crossing
Research. Medical Care 23:710-722, 1985.
REFERENCES215Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bulger, R.J. The Search for a New Ideal. Pp. 9-21 in 
In Search of the Modern Hippocrates. 
R.J.Bulger, ed. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 1987.
Burnham, D. 
The Rise of the Computer State. 
New York: Random House, 1983.
Burnum, J.F. The Misinformation Era: The Fall of the Medical Record. 
Annals of Internal Medicine
110:482-484, 1989.
Burstin, H.R., Lipsitz, S.R., and Brennan, T.A. Socioeconomic Status and Risk for Substandard
Medical Care. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
 268:2383-2387, 1992.
California Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development. 
Health Data Catalog. 
Sacramento: State of California, January 1991.
Chassin, M.R. Quality of Care. Time to Act. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
266:3472-3473, 1991.
Chassin, M.R. Explaining Geographic Variations. The Enthusiasm Hypothesis. 
Medical Care
31:YS37-YS44, 1993a.
Chassin, M.R. The Missing Ingredient in Health Reform. Quality of Care [editorial]. 
Journal of the
American Medical Association 270:377-378, 1993b.
Chassin, M.R., Brook, R.H., Park, R.E., et al. Variations in the Use of Medical and Surgical
Services by the Medicare Population. 
News England Journal of Medicine
 314:285-290,
1986a.Chassin, M.R., Kosecoff, J., Park, R.E., et al. Does Inappropriate Use Explain Geographic
Variations in the Use of Health Care Services? A Study of Three Procedures. 
Journal of
the American Medical Association
 258:2533-2537, 1987.
Chassin, M.R., Park, R.E., Fink, A., et al. 
Indications for Selected Medical and Surgical Procedures-
A Literature Review and Ratings of Appropriateness. 
R-3204/2-CWF/HF/HCFA/PMT/RWJ. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corporation, 1986b.
Chassin, M.R., Park, R.E., Lohr, K.N., et al. Differences among Hospitals in Medicare Patient
Mortality. 
Health Services Research
 24:1-31, 1989.
Chlapowski, F. Note: The Constitutional Protection of Informational Privacy. 
Boston UniversityLaw Review
 71:133-145, 1991.
CHQC (Cleveland Health Quality Choice). 
Cleveland-Area Hospital Quality Outcome
Measurements and Patient Satisfaction Report. 
Volumes I and II . Cleveland, Ohio:
CHQC, 1993.
Chueh, H.C., and Barnett, G.O. Client-Server, Distributed Database Strategies in a Healthcare
Record System for a Homeless Population. 
Proceedings. Seventeenth Annual Symposium
on Computer Applications in Medical Care, 
October 30-November 3, 1993. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1994.
Cleaver, C.M. Privacy Rights and Medical Records. 
Fordham Urban Law Journal
 13:165, 184,
n.133, 1985.
Cooley, T.M. A Treatise on the Law of Torts, or, the Wrongs Which Arise Independent of Contract. 
Chicago: Callaghan & Co., 1880.
Couch, J.B., ed. 
Health Care Quality Management for the 21st Century.
 Tampa, Fl.: Hillsboro, 1991.
Darby, M. Minnesota Guideline Project Hinges on Local Networks. 
Report on Medical Guidelines
and Outcomes Research
 3(4):8-9, 1992.
Darby, M. New HCFA Chief Reconsiders Hospital Mortality Reports. 
Report on Medical
Guidelines and Outcomes Research, 
4(13):1-2, 5, 1993.
Densen, P.M., Fielding, J.E., Getson, J., et al. The Collection of Data on Hospital Patients
ŠTheMassachusetts Health Data Consortium Approach. 
New England Journal of Medicine
302:171-173, 1980.
Department of Justice. 
Report of the Federal Advisory Committee on False Identification: Criminal
Use of False Identification. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, 1976.
REFERENCES216Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Des Harnais, S. Current Uses of Large Data Sets to Assess the Quality of Providers. Construction of
Risk-Adjusted Indexes of Hospital Performance. 
International Journal of Technology
Assessment in Health Care
 6:229-238, 1990.
Donabedian, A. Evaluating the Quality of Medical Care. 
Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly
44:166-203, 1966.
Donabedian, A. 
Explorations in Quality Assessment and Monitoring. 
 Volumes 1-3. Ann Arbor,
Mich.: Health Administration, 1980, 1982, 1985.
Doyle, E. Physicians Worried by Requests to Turn Over Data Bank Reports. 
ACP Observer
 12(9):6,
1992.Dubois, R.W. Inherent Limitations of Hospital Death Rates to Assess Quality. 
International Journal
of Technology Assessment in Health Care
 6:220-228, 1990.
Dubois, R.W., Brook, R.H., and Rogers, W.H. Adjusted Hospital Death Rates: A Potential Screen
for Quality of Medical Care. 
American Journal of Public Health
 77:1162-1166, 1987a.
Dubois, R.W., Moxley, J.H., Draper, D., et al. Interpreting Hospital Mortality: Is it a Predictor of
Quality? 
New England Journal of Medicine
 317:1674-1680, 1987b.
DVA (Department of Veterans Affairs). 
VA Databases Resource Guide.
 M.C. Beattie, R.M.
Swindle, and L.A. Tomko, eds. Palo Alto, Calif.: HSR&D Center for Healthcare

Evaluation, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1992.
DVA. Decentralized Hospital Computer Program. 
Veterans Health Administration, Medical
Information Resources Management Office, August 1993.
Dworkin, R. 
Taking Rights Seriously. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977.
Eaton, J.W. 
Card-Carrying Americans: Privacy, Security and the National I.D. Card Debate.
Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1986.
Eddy, D.M. Variations in Physician Practice: The Role of Uncertainty. 
Health Affairs
 3(Summer):74-89, 1984.
Elison, L.M., and Nettiksimmons, D. The Right of Privacy. 
Montana Law Review
 48:1-52, 1987.
Equifax. 
Harris-Equifax Consumer Privacy Survey, 1992.
 Atlanta: Equifax, 1992.
Faden, R. Maintaining the Balance Between the Privacy of Private Sector Health Records and the
Need for Information: An Overview. Address given at a conference, ''Health Records:

Social Needs and Personal Privacy," sponsored by the Task Force on Privacy, the

Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, D.C., February 11-12, 1993.
Federal Register. 
Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects: Notices and Rules.
56:28002-28032, June 18, 1991. (For FDA policy, see 
Federal Register 56:28025-28029,
June 18, 1991a.)
Federal Register. 
Health Care Financing Administration. Privacy Act of 1974; System of Records
(proposing the Uniform Clinical Data Set). 56:67078-67080, December 27, 1991b.
Fleming, C., Wasson, J.H., Albertsen, P.C., et al. A Decision Analysis of Alternative Treatment
Strategies for Clinically Localized Prostate Cancer. 
Journal of the American Medical
Association 269:2650-2658, 1993.
Fried, C. Privacy. 
Yale Law Journal
 77:475-493, 1968.
Gable, C.B. A Compendium of Public Health Data Sources. 
American Journal of Epidemiology
131:381-394, 1990.
Gallagher, S.S., Finison, K., Guyer, B., and Goodenough, S. The Incidence of Injuries Among
87,000 Massachusetts Children and Adolescents: Results of the 1980-81 Statewide

Childhood Injury Prevention Program Surveillance System. 
American Journal of Public
Health 74:1340-1346, 1984.
GAO (General Accounting Office), Information Management and Technology Divison (IMTEC).
REFERENCES217Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Medical ADP Systems: Automated Medical Records Hold Promise to Improve Patient
Care. 
GAO/IMTEC-91-5. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1991.
GAO, IMTEC. 
Automated Medical Records. Leadership Needed to Expedite Standards
Development. 
GAO/IMTEC-93-17. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1993a.GAO, IMTEC. 
Health Care Information Systems. National Practitioner Data Bank Continues to
Experience Problems. 
GAO/IMTEC-93-1. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1993b.
Gardner, E. UB-82 Forms Offer Wealth of Information, Misinformation. 
Modern Healthcare
 20
(38):18-29, 1990.
Gates, M. Rochester Pioneers New Frontier with Cost and Quality Reform Model. 
Report on
Medical Guidelines and Outcomes Research
 4(18):11-12, 1993a.
Gates, M. Patient Outcomes Take on Long-Term Implications at Henry Ford. 
Report on Medical
Guidelines and Outcomes Research
 4(20):6-7, 1993b.
Gavison, R. Privacy and the Limits of Law. 
Yale Law Journal
 89:421-471, 1980.
Gellman, R.M. Prescribing Privacy: The Uncertain Role of the Physician in the Protection of Patient
Privacy. North Carolina Law Review
 62:255-294, 1984.
Gerety, T. Redefining Privacy. 
Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review
 12:233-296, 1977.
Goldfield, N., and Nash, D.B., eds. 
Providing Quality Care: The Challenge to Clinicians.
Philadelphia: American College of Physicians, 1989.
Gosfield, A.G. 
PSROs: The Law and the Health Consumer. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1975.
Gostin, L. Consequences to the Individual of Data Collection and Information Use and Individual
Rights and Expectations and Societal Needs. Panel presentation at a conference, "Health
Records: Social Needs and Personal Privacy," sponsored by the Task Force on Privacy, the
Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, D.C., February 11, 12, 1993.
Gostin, L.O., Brezina, J.T., Powers, M., et al. Privacy and Security of Personal Information in a
New Health Care System. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
 270:2482-2493,
1993.Greenfield, S. Adjusting for Severity: Variations in Outcomes. Paper presented at a conference,
"Measuring, Managing, and Improving Quality in the ESRD Treatment Setting,"
sponsored by the Institute of Medicine, Washington, D.C., September 21-22, 1993.
Greenfield, S., Aronow, H.U., Elashoff, R.M., and Watanabe, D. Flaws in Mortality Data. The
Hazards of Ignoring Comorbid Disease. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
260:2253-2255, 1988.
Hand, R., Sener, S., Imperato, J., et al. Hospital Variables Associated with Quality of Care for
Breast Cancer Patients. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
 266:3429-3432, 1991.
Hannan, E.L., Bernard, H.R., O'Donnell, J.F., et al. A Methodology for Targeting Hospital Cases for
Quality of Care Record Reviews. 
American Journal of Public Health
 79:430 436, 1989a.
Hannan, E.L., Kilburn, H., Bernard, H., et al. Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery: The Relationship
Between In-Hospital Mortality Rate and Surgical Volume After Controlling for Clinical

Risk Factors. 
Medical Care 29:1094-1107, 1991a.
Hannan, E.L., Kilburn, H., Lindsey, M.L., et al. Clinical Versus Administrative Data Bases for
CABG Surgery. Does It Matter? 
Medical Care 30:892-907, 1992.
Hannan, E.L., Kilburn, H., O'Donnell, J.F., et al. Adult Open Heart Surgery in New York State: An
Analysis of Risk Factors and Hospital Mortality Rates . 
Journal of the American Medical
Association 264:2768-2774, 1990.
REFERENCES218Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Hannan, E.L., Kilburn, H., O'Donnell, J.F., et al. Interracial Access to Selected Cardiac Procedures
for Patients Hospitalized with Coronary Artery Disease in New York State. 
Medical Care
29:430-441, 1991b.
Hannan, E.L., O'Donnell, J.F., Kilburn, H., et al. Investigation of the Relationship Between Volume
and Mortality for Surgical Procedures Performed in New York State Hospitals. 
Journal ofthe American Medical Association
 262:503-510, 1989b.
Harris/Equifax. 
Health Care Information Privacy. A Survey of the Public and Leaders. 
Conductedfor Equifax. New York: Louis Harris and Associates, 1993.
HCFA (Health Care Financing Administration), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Medicare Hospital Mortality Information, 1986.
 Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1987.
HCFA. Medicare Hospital Mortality Information, 1990. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1991.
Health Affairs. 
Special Issue: Variations in Medical Practice. 3(2):6-148, 1984.
Health Pages. 
Green Bay/Madison/Milwaukee Edition. l(1):1-68, 1993.
Health Pages. 
St. Louis Edition. 1(1):1-64, 1994.
Hendricks, E. Hacker "Manual" Tells Wannabes How to Penetrate TRW Database. 
Privacy Times
 12
(15):1-2, 1992.Herdrich, M.A. 
California v. Greenwood:
 The Trashing of Privacy. 
The American University Law
Review 38:993, 999-1002, 1989.
Hibbert, C. 
What To Do When They Ask for Your Social Security Number
. Available at:
hibbert@xanadu.com, 1992.
Hospital Inpatient Care. 
Washington Consumers' Checkbook
 8(3):22-36, 1992.
HSA (Health Security Act). 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1993.
Iezzoni, L.I. Measuring the Severity of Illness and Case-mix. Pp. 70-105 in 
Providing Quality Care:
The Challenge to Clinicians
. N. Goldfield and D.B. Nash, eds. Philadelphia: American
College of Physicians, 1989.
Iezzoni, L.I., Foley, S.M., Saley, J., et al. Comorbidities, Complications, and Coding Bias. Does the
Number of Diagnosis Codes Matter in Predicting In-Hospital Mortality? 
Journal of the
American Medical Association 267:2197-2203, 1992.
Inquiry. Special Issue on Quality of Care. 25:423-468, 1988.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 
Access to Medical Review Data. 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press, 1981.
IOM. Medicare: A Strategy for Quality Assurance. 
Volumes I and II K.N. Lohr, ed. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press, 1990.
IOM. The Computer-Based Patient Record: An Essential Technology for Health Care. 
R.S. Dick
and E.B. Steen, eds. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1991a.
IOM. Kidney Failure and the Federal Government. 
R.A. Rettig and N.G. Levinsky, eds.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1991b.
IOM. Guidelines for Clinical Practice: From Development to Use.
 M.J. Field and K.N. Lohr, eds.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1992a.
IOM. Setting Priorities for Health Technology Assessment. A Model Process. 
M.S. Donaldson and
H.C. Sox, Jr., eds. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1992b.
IOM. Access to Health Care in America. 
M.A. Millman, ed. Washington, D.C.: National Academy
Press, 1993a.
IOM. Assessing Genetic Risks: Implications for Health and Social Policy. 
L.B. Andrews, J.E.
Fullarton, K.E. Hanna, N.A. Holtzman, and A.G. Motulsky, eds. Washington, D.C.:

National Academy Press, 1993b. Prepublication copy.
IOM. Assessing Health Care Reform. 
M.J. Field, K.N. Lohr, and K.D. Yordy, eds. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press, 1993c.
REFERENCES219Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IOM. Emergency Medical Services for Children. 
J.S. Durch and K.N. Lohr, eds. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press, 1993d.
IOM. Employment and Health Benefits: A Connection at Risk. 
M.J. Field and H.T. Shapiro, eds.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1993e.
IOM/CBASSE (Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education). 
Toward A National
Health Care Survey. A Data System for the 21st Century. 
G.S. Wunderlich, ed.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1992.
Isikoff, M. Theft of U.S. Data Seen as Growing Threat to Privacy. 
Washington Post, 
December 28,
1991, p. Al.
Kahn, K.L., Draper, D., Keeler, E.B., et al. 
The Effects of the DRG-Based Prospective Payment
System on Quality of Care for Hospitalized Medicare Patients
ŠFinal Report. R
3931-HCFA. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corporation, 1992.
Kaiser Permanente. 
1993 Quality Report Card. 
Oakland, Calif.: Kaiser Permanente, 1993a.
Kaiser Permanente. 
1993 Quality Report Card Supplement. Performance Measure Methodologies. 
Oakland, Calif.: Kaiser Permanente, 1993b.
Kane, R.L., and Lurie, N. Appropriate Effectiveness: A Tale of Carts and Horses. 
Quality Review
Bulletin 18:322-326, 1992.
Keeler, E.B., Kahn, K.L., Draper, D., et al. Changes in Sickness at Admission Following the
Introduction of PPS. Pp. 24-43 in 
The Effects of the DRG-Based Prospective Payment
System on Quality of Care for Hospitalized Medicare Patients. Final Report.
 K.L. Kahn, et
al., eds. R-3931-HCFA. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corporation, 1992a.
Keeler, E.B., Rubenstein, L.V., Kahn, K.L., et al. Hospital Characteristics and Quality of Care.
Journal of the American Medical Association
 268:1709-1714, 1992b.
Keller, J. The Vermont Program for Quality Health Care (mimeo handout). Burlington, Vt.,
National Health Policy Forum, June 7, 1993.
Krakauer, H., and Jacoby, I. Predicting the Course of Disease. 
Inquiry 30:115-127, 1993.
Kratka, J. 
For Their Eyes Only. The Insurance Industry and Consumer Privacy. 
Boston:Massachusetts Public Interest Research Group, 1990.
Lasovich, D., White, E., Thomas, D.B., et al. Underutilization of Breast-Conserving Surgery and
Radiation Therapy among Women with Stage I or II Breast Cancer
. Journal of the
American Medical Association 266:3433-3438, 1991.
Leape, L.L., Hilborne, L.H., Kahan, J.P., et al. 
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft. A Literature Review
and Ratings of Appropriateness and Necessity. 
RAND/JRA-02. Santa Monica, Calif.: The
RAND Corporation, 1991.
Lohr, K.N. Commentary: Professional Peer Review in a "Competitive" Medical Market. 
CaseWestern Reserve Law Review. The Legal Implications of Health Care Cost Containment: A

Symposium 36(4):1175-1189, 1985-86.
Lohr, K.N., Grossman, J.H., and Cassel, C.K. From the IOM. Issues in Measuring and Assuring
Quality of Care for Health Care Reform. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
270:1911, 1993.
Longo, D.R., Bohr, D.A., Miller, L., and Miller, J. 
Inventory of External Data Demands Placed on
Hospitals. 
A Report of the Quality Measurement and Management Project. Chicago: The
Hospital Research and Educational Trust, 1990.
Luft, H.S., and Romano, P.S. Chance, Continuity, and Change in Hospital Mortality Rates:
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Patients in California Hospitals, 1983 to 1989. 
Journal of
the American Medical Association
 270:331-337, 1993.
Lu-Yao, G.L., McLerran, D., Wasson, J., et al. An Assessment of Radical Prostatectomy. Time
Trends, Geographic Variation, and Outcomes. 
Journal of the American Medical
Association 269:2633-2636, 1993.
McCloskey, H.J. Privacy and the Right to Privacy. 
Philosophy 55:17-38, 1980.
McNeil, B.J., Pederson, S.H., and Gatsonis, C. Current Issues in Profiling Quality of Care. 
Inquiry29:298-307, 1992.
REFERENCES220Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.McPherson, K., Strong, P.M., Epstein, A., et al. Regional Variations in the Use of Common Surgical
Procedures: Within and Between England and Wales, Canada and the United States of

America. Social Science and Medicine
 15A:273-288, 1981.
Marquis, M.S. 
Consumers' Knowledge About Their Health Insurance Coverage.
 R-2753HHS. Santa
Monica, Calif.: The RAND Corporation, 1981.
Marquis, M.S., Kanouse, D.E., and Brodsley, L. 
Informing Consumers about Health Care Costs. A
Review and Research Agenda. 
R-3262-HCFA. Santa Monica, Calif.: The RAND
Corporation, 1985.
Martin, J. 
Managing the Database Environment. 
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1983.
Mayo Foundation. Index to Medical Records Access Policy. Internal Document, May 1991.

Merrick, N.L., Brook, R.H., Fink, A., et al. Use of Carotid Endarterectomy in Five California
Veterans Administration Medical Centers. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
258:2531-2535, 1986.
MIB (Medical Information Bureau). MIB Fact Sheet. Boston: MIB, 1989.

Miller, M. Patients' Records Are Treasure Trove for Budding Industry. 
Wall Street Journal, 
February 27, 1992.
Moses, L.E. Framework for Considering the Role of Data Bases in Technology Assessment.
International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care
 6:183-193, 1990.
NAHDO (National Association of Health Data Organizations). 
NAHDO Resource Manual. 
FallsChurch, Va.: NAHDO, 1988.
NAHDO. 
The State Health Data Resource Manual: Hospital Discharge Data Systems. 
FallsChurch, Va.: NAHDO, 1993.
Nash, D.B. Is the Quality Cart Before the Horse? [editorial]. 
Journal of the American Medical
Association 268:917-918, 1992.
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws. 
Uniform Laws Annual
 9(1):475. St.
Paul, Minn.: West Publishing Co., 1988.
NCHS (National Center for Health Statistics)
. National Health Interview Survey, 1991. Public Use
Data Tape. 
NTIS Order No. PB93-500700. Springfield, Va.: National Technical
Information Service, 1993.
Newhouse, J.P., and Insurance Experiment Group. 
Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health
Insurance Experiment. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993.
NRC (National Research Council). 
Private Lives and Public Policies: Confidentiality and
Accessibility of Government Statistics. 
G.T. Duncan , T.B. Jabine, and V.A. de Wolf, eds.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1993.
OTA (Office of Technology Assessment). 
Federal Government Information Technology: Electronic
Record Systems and Individual Privacy. 
OTA-CIT-296. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1986, p. 15.
OTA. 
The Quality of Medical Care: Information for Consumers. 
OTA-H-386. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1988.
OTA. 
Protecting Privacy in Computerized Medical Information. 
OTA-TCT-576. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1993.
Palmer, R.H. 
Ambulatory Health Care Evaluation: Principles and Practice.
 Chicago: American
Hospital Association, 1983.
Palmer, R.H., and Adams, M.M.E. (Commissioned Paper). 
Quality Improvement/Quality Assurance
Taxonomy: A Framework. 
Rockville, Md.: Agency for Health Care Policy and Research,
1993.Parent, W.A. Privacy, Morality, and the Law. 
Philosophy and Public Affairs
 12:269-288, 1983.
Patrick, D.C., Madden, C.W., Diehr, P., et al. Health Status and Use of Services Among Families
With and Without Health Insurance. 
Medical Care 30:941-949, 1992.
Paul, J.E., Weis, K.A., and Epstein, R.A. Data Bases for Variations Research. 
Medical Care 31:S96-
S102, 1993.
REFERENCES221Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PHCCCC (Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council). 
Hospital Effectiveness Report: A
Model Report. 
HE 5-Volume I. Harrisburg: PHCCCC, 1989.
PHCCCC. 
A Consumer's Guide to Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery,
 Harrisburg: PHCCCC,
1992.Piller, C. Privacy in Peril. How Computers are Making Private Life a Thing of the Past. 
Macworld10(7):124-130, 1993.
Pipko, S., and Pucciarelli, A.J. The Soviet Internal Passport System. 
International Lawyer
19:915-919, 1985.
Powers, M. Legal Protections of Confidential Medical Information and the Need for
AntiDiscrimination Laws. Pp. 221-255 in 
AIDS, Women and the Next Generation
. R.
Faden, G. Geller, and M. Powers, eds. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Powers, M. Privacy and the Control of Genetic Information. In 
The Genetic Frontier: Ethics, Law,
and Policy
 . M.S. Frankel and A.H. Teich, eds. Washington, D.C.: American Association
for the Advancement of Science Press, 1993.
PPRC (Physician Payment Review Commission). 
Annual Report to Congress
. Washington, D.C.:
PPRC, 1992.
PPRC. 
Annual Report to Congress. 
Washington, D.C.: PPRC, 1993.
PPSC (Privacy Protection Study Commission). 
Personal Privacy in an Information Society. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1977a.
PPSC. Appendix 4. The Privacy Act of 1974: An Assessment
. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1977b.
Rachels, J. Why Privacy Is Important. 
Philosophy and Public Affairs
 4:323-333, 1975.
Raskin, I.E., and Maklan, C.W. Medical Treatment Effectiveness Research. A View from Inside the
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. 
Evaluation & the Health Professions
 June:
161-186, 1991.
Raz, J. 
The Morality of Freedom. 
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Reiman, J.H. Privacy, Intimacy, and Personhood. 
Philosophy and Public Affairs
 6:26-44, 1976.
Roos, L.L., Cageorge, S.M., Austen, E., et al. Using Computers to Identify Complications After
Surgery. 
American Journal of Public Health
 75:1289-1295, 1985.
Roos, L.L., Roos, N.P., Cageorge, S.M., et al. How Good Are the Data? Reliability of One Health
Care Data Bank. 
Medical Care
 20:266-276, 1982.
Roos, L.L., Sharp, S.M., Cohen, M.M., and Wajda, A. Risk Adjustment in Claims-Based Research:
The Search for Efficient Approaches. 
Journal of Clinical Epidemiology
 42:1193-1206,
1989.Roos, N.P. Hysterectomy: Variations in Rates Across Small Areas and Across Physicians' Practices.
American Journal of Public Health
 74:327-335, 1984.
Roos, N.P., Black, C., Frolich, N., et al. Assessing the Relationship Between Health Care Use and
the Health of a Population: Seeking Levers for Policy Makers. 
Daedalus 1993, in press.
Roos, N.P., and Roos, L.L. High and Low Surgical Rates: Risk Factors for Area Residents.
American Journal of Public Health
 71:591-600, 1981.
Roper, W.L., Winkenwerder, W., Hackbarth, G.M., et al. Effectiveness in Health Care: An Initiative
to Evaluate and Improve Medical Practice. 
New England Journal of Medicine
319:1197-1202, 1988.
Rothfeder, J. 
Privacy for Sale. 
New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992.
Schoeman, F.D. Privacy: Philosophical Dimensions of the Literature. In 
Philosophical Dimensionsof Privacy: An Anthology. 
F.D. Schoeman, ed. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1984.Shattuck, J. In the Shadow of 1984: National Identification Systems, Computer-Matching and
Privacy in the United States. 
Hastings Law Journal
 35:991-1005, 1984.
REFERENCES222Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Shils, E. Privacy: Its Constitution and Vicissitudes. 
Law and Contemporary Problems
 31:281, 282,
1966.Smith, S. NHIS Electronic Data Products. 
Public Health Reports
 108:409, 1993.
Stern, R.S. Record Linkage. A Powerful Tool for Epidemiological Analysis [editorial]. 
Archives of
Dermatology 122:1383-1384, 1986.
Steven, C. Good Medicine. 
Washingtonian 29:90-114, 1993.
Tanouye, E. Merck Will Exploit Medco's Database. 
Wall Street Journal, 
August 4, 1993, p. B1.
Thomson, J.J. The Right to Privacy. 
Philosophy and Public Affairs
 4:295-314, 1975.
Tillmann, I.A., and Sullivan, S. Quality and the Future of American Health Care. In 
Building Blocks
for Change: How Health Care Reform Affects Our Future. 
J.A. Meyer and S. Silow-
Carroll, eds. Washington, D.C.: The Economic and Social Research Institute, 1993.
Tribe, L. 
American Constitutional Law. 
Mineola, Minn.: Foundation, 1978.
Trubow, G.B. (ed.) 
Privacy Law and Practice. 
New York: Bender, 1991.
Turkington, R.C. Legal Protection for the Confidentiality of Health Care Information in
Pennsylvania: Patient and Client Access; Testimonial Privileges; Damage Recovery for

Unauthorized Extra-Legal Disclosure. 
Villanova Law Review
 32:259, 269, 1987.
USDHEW (U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare). Secretary's Advisory Committee
Report on Automated Personal Data Systems. 
Records, Computers and the Rights of
Citizens. 
DHEW Pub. No. (OS)73-97. 1973.
USDHHS. Report to Congress: The Feasibility of Linking Research-Related Data Bases to Federal
and Non-Federal Medical Administrative Data Bases. 
AHCPR Pub. No. 910003.
Rockville, Md.: Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, 1991.
USDHHS. Literature Review. Automated Data Sources for Ambulatory Care Effectiveness
Research. 
M.L. Grady and H.A. Schwartz, eds. AHCPR Pub. No. 93-0042. Rockville,
Md.: Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, 1993a.
USDHHS. Protecting Human Research Subjects. Institutional Review Board Guidebook. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1993b.
U.S. News & World Report.
 1991 Survey on America's Best Hospitals. August 5, 1991.
U.S. News & World Report
 1992 Annual Guide on America's Best Hospitals. June 15, 1992.
U.S. News & World Report
 1993 Annual Guide on America's Best Hospitals. 115(2):68-94, 1993.
U.S. Senate, Subcommittee on Courts, Senate Committee on the Judiciary. Federal Identification
Systems: Hearings on S. 1706 before the Subcommittee on Courts, Senate Committee on

the Judiciary. 98th Congress, 1st Session 5, July 19, October 5, 21, 1983, p. 169.
VanAmringe, M., and Shannon, T.E. Commentary: Awareness, Assimilation, and Adoption: The
Challenge of Effective Dissemination and the First AHCPR-Sponsored Guidelines.

Quality Review Bulletin
 18:397-404, 1992.
Waller, A.A. Appendix B. Legal Aspects of Computer-Based Patient Records and Record Systems.
In 
The Computer-Based Patient Record: An Essential Technology for Health Care. 
R.S.Dick and E.B. Steen, eds. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1991.
Waller, A.A. Confidentiality Issues in Electronic Data Interchange. Conference on Electronic Data
Interchange: If You Are a Health Care Provider, It Applies to You! Bloomington, Minn.,
November 20, 1992.
Ware, W. The New Faces of Privacy. 
The Information Society
 9:195-211, 1993.
Warren, S.D., and Brandeis, L.D. The Right to Privacy. 
Harvard Law Review
 4:193-220, 1890. 
(Seefurther, Katz v. United States
 389 U.S. 347; 1967.)
Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language. 
2nd ed. D.B. Guralnik, ed. New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1980.
WEDI (Workgroup for Electronic Data Interchange). 
Report to Secretary of U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, 
1992.REFERENCES223Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Weissman, J.S., Gatsonis, C., and Epstein, A.M. Rates of Avoidable Hospitalization by Insurance
States in Massachusetts and Maryland. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
268:2426-2427, 1992.
Welch, W.P., Miller, M.E., Welch, H.G., et al. Geographic Variation in Expenditures for Physicians'
Services in the United States
. New England Journal of Medicine
 328:621-627, 1993.
Wennberg, J.E. Dealing with Medical Practice Variations: A Proposal for Action. 
Health Affairs
3:6-32, 1984.
Wennberg, J.E. Small Area Analysis and the Medical Care Outcome Problem. Pp. 17-206 in
AHCPR Conference Proceedings: Research Methodology: Strengthening Causal

Interpretations of Nonexperimental Data. 
L. Sechrest, E. Perrin, and J. Bunker, eds.
DHHS Pub. No. (PHS) 90-3454, Rockville, Md.: Department of Health and Human

Services, 1990.
Wennberg, J.E., and Gittelsohn, A. Variations in Medical Care Among Small Areas. 
ScientificAmerican 246:120-134, 1982.
Wennberg, J.E., Barnes, B.A., and Zubkoff, M. Professional Uncertainty and the Problem of
Supplier-Induced Demand. 
Social Science and Medicine
 16:811-824, 1982.
Wennberg, J.E., McPherson, K., and Caper, P. Will Payment Based on Diagnosis-Related Groups
Control Hospital Costs? 
New England Journal of Medicine
 311:295-300, 1984.
Wenneker, M.B., and Epstein, A.M. Racial Inequalities in the Use of Procedures for Patients with
Ischemic Heart Disease in Massachusetts. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
261:253-257, 1989.
Wenneker, M.B., Weissman, J.S., and Epstein, A.M. The Association of Payer with Utilization of
Cardiac Procedures in Massachusetts. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
264:1255-1260, 1990.
Westin, A.F. 
Privacy and Freedom. 
New York: Atheneum, 1967, p. 39.
Westin, A.F. 
Databanks in a Free Society. Computers, Recordkeeping and Privacy. 
(Report of the
Project on Computer Databanks of the Computer Science and Engineering Board, National

Academy of Sciences.) New York: Quadrangle, 1972.
Westin, A.F. 
Computers, Health Records, and Citizen Rights. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. National
Bureau of Standards, 1976.
Whittle, J., Conigliaro, J., Good, C.B., and Lofgren, R.P. Racial Differences in the Use of Invasive
Cardiovascular Procedures in the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical System. 
NewEngland Journal of Medicine
 329:621-627, 1993.
Wilensky, G., and Jencks, S. The Health Care Quality Improvement Initiative: A New Approach to
Quality Assurance in Medicare. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
268:900-903, 1992.
William M. Mercer, Inc. 
CHMIS Information Repository. Hartford Foundation Grant. Initial
Analytic Framework Deliverable for Task 7.
 Seattle: William M. Mercer, Inc., 1993.
Williamson, J.W. 
Assessing and Improving Outcomes in Health Care: The Theory and Practice of
Health Accounting. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1978.
Winslow, C.M., Kosecoff, J.B., Chassin, M., et al. The Appropriateness of Performing Coronary
Artery Bypass Surgery. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
 260:505-509, 1988a.
Winslow, C.M., Solomon, D.H., Chassin, M.R., et al. The Appropriateness of Carotid
Endarterectomy. New England Journal of Medicine
 318:721-727, 1988b.
Work Group on Computerization of Patient Records. 
Toward a National Health Information
Infrastructure. 
Report of the Workgroup to the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, April 1993.
Zinman, D. Heart Surgeons Rated. State Reveals Patient-Mortality Records. 
Newsday, 
December18, 1991, p. 3.
REFERENCES224Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesAPPENDIXES225Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXES226Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AFact-Finding for the Committee on
Regional Health Data Networks
This appendix briefly documents the organizations and individuals who
contributed to the committee's efforts at data collection and fact-finding during
the first parts of the project.Listed below are participants and guests at
committee meetings, including experts who gave special briefings to the

committee. Following that is material on the committee's site visits.
PARTICIPANTS AND GUESTS AT COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Expert Presentations and Briefings
John A. Baker, Senior Vice President, Equifax, Inc.
Robert Belair, J.D., formerly Kirkpatrick and Lockhart; currently
Mullenholz and Brimsek
John P. Fanning, LL.B., OHPE/OASH/Department of Health and Human
ServicesMarilyn J. Field, Ph.D., Senior Program Officer, Institute of Medicine

Jane Fullarton, Senior Program Officer, Institute of Medicine

William Goss, Health Care Management Program, General Electric
Edward J. Hinman, M.D., Lincoln National
H. Jefferson Smith, Ph.D., Georgetown University School of Business
AdministrationRobin Stults, R.R.A., University of Maryland Medical System

Bert Tobin, Benton International
FACT-FINDING FOR THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATA NETWORKS227
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Invited Guests and Observers
Lois Alexander, Special Assistant to the Commissioner, Social Security
AdministrationLeslie Alexandre, Government Affairs Representative for Health Policy,
Office of Government Affairs, Electronic Data Systems
Marjory Blumenthal, Ph.D., Staff Director, Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board, Committee on Physical Sciences, Mathematics,
and Applications, National Research Council
Moses Boyd, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, U.S.
SenatePaula Bruening, J.D., Office of Technology Assessment

Mark Epstein, Executive Director, National Association of Health Data
OrganizationsJ. Michael Fitzmaurice, Ph.D., Director, Office of Science and Data
Development, Agency for Health Care Policy and Research
Kathleen Frawley, R.R.A., J.D., Director, Washington, D.C., Office, American
Health Information Management Association
Robert Gellman, J.D., Chief Counsel, Subcommittee on Government
Information, Justice, and Agriculture, Committee on Government Operations,
U.S. House of Representatives
Michael Hash, Subcommittee on Health and the Environment, Committee on
Energy and Commerce, U.S. House of Representatives
Stephen Jencks, M.D., Health Standards and Quality Bureau, Health Care
Financing Administration
Judith Miller Jones, Director, National Health Policy Forum, George
Washington UniversityCharles N. Kahn III, J.D., Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of
RepresentativesRene C. Kosloff, Ph.D., Vice President, Kunitz and Associates, Inc.
Selma Kunitz, Ph.D., President, Kunitz and Associates, Inc.

Donald A. B. Lindberg, M.D., Director, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health
Richard S. Sharpe, Program Officer, The John A. Hartford Foundation

Nicole Simmons, Office of Legislation and Policy, Health Care Financing
AdministrationJoan Turek-Brezina, Ph.D., Director of Technical and Computer Support,
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Department of
Health and Human Services
Institute of Medicine Staff
Enriqueta Bond, Ph.D., Executive Officer
Jane Durch, Staff Officer
FACT-FINDING FOR THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATA NETWORKS228
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Kenneth I. Shine, M.D., President
Karl D. Yordy, M.P.A., Director, Division of Health Care Services
SITE VISITS
This section gives the location and dates of the committee's site visits and
lists the organizations or groups of individuals with whom the committee met.
Memphis, Tennessee: July 26-28, 1992
Baptist Memorial Hospital
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Memphis

International Paper Company

Memphis and Shelby County Medical Society

Memphis Business Group on Health, Confidentiality Task Force
Memphis Business Group on Health, Inc.
Methodist Health Systems

Regional Medical Center (County Medical Center)

Sharpe Manufacturing Company, Personnel Department
Cleveland, Ohio: August 2-4, 1992
Academy of Medicine
Blue Cross/Blue Shield of Cleveland

Board of County Commissioners

Centerior Energy

The Cleveland Clinic Foundation

Cleveland Health Quality Choice

Council on Small Enterprises

Greater Cleveland Hospital Association
Health Action Council
Lubrizol Corporation
University Hospitals of Cleveland
Des Moines, Iowa: August 26-28, 1992
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Iowa
Health Policy Corporation of Iowa

Iowa Bankers Insurance Service

Iowa Hospital Association

Iowa Medical Society

Iowa Methodist Medical Center

Iowa State Education Association
FACT-FINDING FOR THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATA NETWORKS229
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Pioneer Hi-Bred, Human Resources Department
Principal Financial Group

Practicing Physicians
Seattle, Washington: September 9-11, 1992
The Exchange System
Foundation for Health Care Quality (FHCQ)

Health Care Purchasers Association
Group Health of Puget Sound
Overlake Hospital Medical Center, Employees

State of Washington, Department of Health

State of Washington, Office of the Governor

University of Washington, Faculty

Washington State Health Care Authority

Washington State Hospital Association and Task Force on Administrative
ReformWashington State Medical Association

Weyerhaeuser Company, Health Management Services
Rochester and Albany, New York: September 21-23, 1992
AlbanyAlbany Medical Society
Hospital Association of New York State

New York State Department of Health (NYDOH)
RochesterConsumer Representatives
Integrated Mental Health Services
Physicians Network

Rochester Health Information Group
Basic Findings of Site Visits
During the site visits, IOM committee members and staff were able to
learn in some detail about current and planned initiatives under the auspices of

numerous groups as well as about a great variety of issues, concerns, and

suggestions from these groups and a broad cross-section of people in urban and

rural areas.
The site visits included three sites where CHMISs were being devel
FACT-FINDING FOR THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATA NETWORKS230
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.oped (both state-mandate and business coalition models in Washington State,
Des Moines, and Memphis) and three where they are not (Rochester, Albany,

and Cleveland). Questions raised frequently by hosts were as follows:
1. Who would run and administer such a database, and who would
own the data?
2. What would this effort cost and who would finance it, in terms of
both fixed costs (for example, for computer equipment) and

variable costs (over the short and long run, such as staff/personnel

costs for data entry)?
3. What is in it for me or what will this do to me (particularly from
physicians in private practice and from employers with national

interests whose health policies were set at a corporate level

somewhere else)?
4. Who would have access to patient-identified and provider-specific
data? Interestingly, not everyone was worried about privacy of

patient data, believing either that such information could be

protected (so the question was moot) or that not much harm would
come from judicious release to, for example, employers).
Consumers understood the potential value of such databases, but

they were also worried about access to patient-level data, especially

concerning insurability.
5. Could analyses about quality of care realistically be done (in
contrast to analyses of cost or charges data or analyses of

utilization patterns)?
The visiting committee members, in turn, tried to learn as much as possible
about ways
Šin practice or in theory
Šgroups in these various areas meant to
realize the benefits of such databases, to minimize or prevent the exacerbation

of current risks to the confidentiality of patient-level data, to improve database
security, and to promote appropriate data collection, valid analyses, and useful
dissemination of data.
FACT-FINDING FOR THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATA NETWORKS231
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BCommittee on Regional Health
DataNetworks Biographical Sketches
ROBERT H. BROOK,
 M.D., Sc.D., F.A.C.P., is a Corporate Fellow at
RAND and the Director of RAND's Health Sciences Program. He led the
Health and Quality Group on the $80 million. RAND Health Insurance
Experiment, and he was co-principal investigator on the Health Services

Utilization Study, which developed a method to assess appropriateness of care

and applied it to carotid endarterectomy, coronary angiography, and endoscopy.

He was the co-principal investigator on a joint activity of 12 academic medical

centers, the AMA, and RAND, the purpose of which was to develop

appropriateness criteria and parameters for the use of procedures. At UCLA, Dr.

Brook is the Director of the Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program.

He is also professor of Medicine and Health Services, UCLA Center for Health

Sciences. His special research interests include quality assessment and

assurance, the development and use of health status measurements in health

policy, the efficiency and effectiveness of medical care, and the variation in use

of selected services by geographic area. He is a member of the Institute of
Medicine, the American Society for Clinical Investigation, and the American
Association of Physicians. He was awarded the Baxter Foundation Prize for

excellence in health services research, the Rosenthal Foundation Award of the

American College of Physicians for contributions to improving the health of the

nation, and the Distinguished Health Services Research Award of the

Association of Health Services Research. Dr. Brook is the author of over 250

articles on quality of care.
COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATANETWORKS BIOGRAPHICAL
SKETCHES232Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROGER J. BULGER,
 M.D., is currently President and Chief Executive
Officer of the Association of Academic Health Centers. Before his appointment

in 1988, Dr. Bulger served for 10 years as President of the University of Texas

Health Science Center at Houston, professor of medicine at the University of

Texas Health Medical School at Houston, and professor of public health at the

University of Texas School of Public Health at Houston. Earlier he served as
the second dean of the University of Massachusetts School of Medicine and
chancellor of the University of Massachusetts Medical Center campus at

Worcester. He was the first executive officer of the Institute of Medicine,

serving that organization during its first formative years. Dr. Bulger has served

on numerous government and private advisory committees on issues related to

health policy and higher education, including the Board of Directors of

Georgetown University, the Board of the Association for Health Services

Research (of which association he was president in 1992-1993), the Advisory

Committee on Scientific Integrity of the Assistant Secretary of Health, and the

Special Medical Advisory Group of the Department of Veterans Affairs. Dr.

Bulger also chaired the Institute of Medicine's Committee to Study Medical

Professional Liability and the Delivery of Obstetrical Care. He has written
numerous articles in the fields of infectious diseases, internal medicine, and
human values and public policy related to health and medicine. The two most

recent of his books on health policy are 
In Search of the Modern Hippocrates
and Technology, Bureaucracy and Healing in America: A Post Modern
Paradigm. Dr. Bulger is a member of the Institute of Medicine, a fellow in the
American College of Physicians, a fellow of the Infectious Diseases Society of

America, a member of the Society of Medical Administrators, and a fellow in

the Royal Society of Medicine, London.
ELLIOTT S. FISHER,
 M.D., M.P.H., is Associate Professor of Medicine
and Community and Family Medicine in the Center for the Evaluative Clinical

Sciences (CECS) at Dartmouth Medical School and the Department of Veterans

Affairs Medical Center in White River Junction, Vermont. He directs the VA

Outcomes Group, which conducts policy-related research for the Department of

Veterans Affairs and is co-director of the VA General Medicine Faculty

Development Fellowship. He is also co-director of the Health Policy curriculum
in Dartmouth's newly established postgraduate program in the Evaluative
Clinical Sciences. He received his undergraduate and MD degrees from

Harvard and his Masters of Public Health from the University of Washington,

where he was a Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholar. His primary research

interests are in the measurement of health system performance, the development

of methods for resource allocation, and the use of administrative databases for

health care research.
SPENCER FOREMAN, M.D., is president of Montefiore Medical Center
in the Bronx, New York. As chairman of the Association of American
COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATANETWORKS BIOGRAPHICAL
SKETCHES233Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Medical Colleges (AAMC), Dr. Foreman is committed to broadening the social
commitment of academic medical centers, enabling them to use their

considerable resources to help alleviate problems of poverty, isolation, and

community disintegration. Dr. Foreman was chairman of the Administrative

Board of the AAMC Council of Teaching Hospitals and served on its Task

Force on Graduate Medical Education. He served on the Task Force on
Graduate Medical Education of the Hospital Association of New York State; on
the Accreditation Council on Graduate Medical Education, the accrediting body

for residency training in the United States; and on the Liaison Committee on

Medical Education, which accredits United States and Canadian medical

schools. He is board chairman of the League of Voluntary Hospitals, chairman

of the Board of Governors of the Greater New York Hospital Association, and

is a member of the Board of Directors of the Hospital Association of New York

State. Before assuming leadership of Montefiore in 1986, Dr. Foreman was

president of Sinai Hospital in Baltimore. He received his doctor of medicine

degree in 1961 from the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Foreman's medical

training included internship at the Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit, residency in

internal medicine at the U.S. Public Health Service Hospital in New Orleans,
and a fellowship in pulmonary disease at Tulane University. He is certified by
the American Board of Internal Medicine and Subspecialty Board of Pulmonary

Diseases, and is a fellow of the American College of Physicians and the New

York Academy of Medicine. He is professor of Medicine and professor of

Epidemiology and Social Medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.

For 11 years Dr. Foreman served as a commissioned officer in the United States

Public Health Service, achieving a rank equivalent to the United States Navy

rank of captain.
JANLORI GOLDMAN
 is director of the Project on Privacy and
Technology of the American Civil Liberties Union. Her work on the Project

involves researching the ways technology impacts on access to information and

individual privacy. She has testified before Congress and appeared on panels on

numerous privacy issues, including the federal Privacy Act,

telecommunications, video and library lists, credit records, criminal justice

systems, and drug testing. Prior to her work with the Project on Privacy and
Technology, Ms. Goldman was legal counsel to the Minnesota affiliate of the
ACLU. The priority for the Project on Privacy and Technology for the 103rd

Congress has been passage of legislation to create a privacy right in personal

health care records.
CLARK E. KERR
 is Vice President, Government Relations, at the Bank
of America, where he manages corporate policy development and advocacy for

state and federal health care reform legislation. He is president of the California

Business Group on Health, and chairs the California Health Policy and Data

Advisory Commission. Mr. Kerr is a commissioner
COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATANETWORKS BIOGRAPHICAL
SKETCHES234Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.on the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission, and a member of the
board of directors of the Washington Business Group on Health, the National

Committee for Quality Assurance, and the Bay Area Business Group on Health.
JOHN W. KIRKLIN,
 M.D., has been professor of Surgery at the
University of Alabama at Birmingham since 1966. Earlier he occupied that

same position at the Mayo Clinic. He is a member of the Institute of Medicine

and has previously served on Institute committees. Dr. Kirklin had a 38-year

career in academic cardiac surgery, to which he made many contributions.

Since his retirement from active cardiac surgery in 1989, he continues to work
in a number of areas, including outcomes research, multi-institutional studies,
the chairmanship of the Cardiac Advisory Committee of the State of New York,

and most recently the development and installation of a paperless computer-

based medical record concomitantly with the application of a unique computer

architecture at the University of Alabama at Birmingham Medical Center.
ANTHONY M. KOTIN,
 M.D., is currently the National Medical Director
for Marketing and Specialty Products at the Travelers companies. He also

serves as the Travelers' National Medical Quality Officer. Dr. Kotin received

his bachelor of science, magna cum laude, from the University of Illinois in

1975. He attended Rush Medical College and graduated, Alpha Omega Alpha,

in 1977. After completing an internal medicine internship and residency at

Rush-Presbyterian St. Luke's Medical Center he entered private practice. In
1983, he cofounded the Highland Health Care IPA and served as its Medical
Director until 1988, at which time he left to become the medical director for

Metlife HMO of Illinois and Wisconsin. In 1990, he joined the Travelers as

Midwest Regional Medical Director.
ROBERT M. KRUGHOFF,
 J.D., is Founder and President of the Center
for the Study of Services in Washington, D.C. The center is a nonprofit

organization studying local services and publishing two local 
ConsumerReports-like magazines entitled 
Washington Consumers' Checkbook
 and 
BayArea Consumers' Checkbook,
 which rate Washington and San Francisco area
services firms. Prior to that position, he was the Director of the Office of

Research and Evaluation Planning in the Office of the Secretary of the

Department of Health and Human Services. Mr. Krughoff received his B.A.
from Amherst College and his J.D. from the University of Chicago Law School.
He has published numerous articles and reports. Mr. Krughoff served as a

member of the earlier Institute of Medicine Committee on Professional

Standards Review Organization Disclosure Policy from 1980 to 1981, and as a

member of the Advisory Panel for the Study of Medical Technology Under

Competitive Proposals for the Office of Technology Assessment.
COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATANETWORKS BIOGRAPHICAL
SKETCHES235Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RENE LERER,
 M.D., is Senior Vice President for Corporate
Development at Value Health Sciences. Dr. Lerer received his undergraduate

degree from Oberlin College and his medical degree from the State University

of New York at Buffalo. Dr. Lerer is board-certified in internal medicine and

practiced in the Hartford area for approximately five years. Prior to joining

Value Health Sciences, Dr. Lerer was chief medical officer for the Travelers
Managed Care and Employee Benefits operations. He had responsibility for the
development and implementation of the Travelers managed care strategy as

well as its medical management strategy in the indemnity environment. At

VHS, Dr. Lerer is responsible for the introduction of all new products, for

support of large accounts, and for all marketing and sales operations.
ELENA O. NIGHTINGALE,
 M.D., Ph.D., is Special Advisor to the
President and Senior Program Officer of the Carnegie Corporation of New

York, Adjunct Professor of Pediatrics at Georgetown University, and a lecturer

in Social Medicine at Harvard University. She received an A.B. degree in

zoology, summa cum laude, from Barnard College of Columbia University

(1954), a Ph.D. in microbial genetics from The Rockefeller University (1961),

and an M.D. from New York University School of Medicine (1964). Dr.
Nightingale is a member of the Institute of Medicine and is a fellow of both the
American Association for the Advancement of Science and the New York

Academy of Sciences. She is the coauthor of 
Before Birth: Prenatal Testing for
Genetic Disease,
 coeditor of 
Prenatal Screening, Policies and Values: The
Example of Neural Tube Defects, The Breaking of Bodies and Minds: Torture,

Psychiatric Abuse and the Health Professions,
 and 
Promoting the Health of
Adolescents: New Directions for the Twenty-first Century,
 and author of
numerous articles on health, health policy, and human rights.
MADISON POWERS, J.D., D.Phil., has written on legal, ethical, and
public policy aspects of informational privacy, and has made numerous

presentations and participated in panel discussions of privacy and health care.

He is coeditor of 
AIDS, Women and the Next Generation,
 and has written on
privacy, discrimination, and reproductive decision making in legal, medical,

and philosophical journals. He is the author of several forthcoming papers on

genetic privacy, and has completed commissioned papers for the Department of
Health and Human Services and the Department of Energy on both conceptual
and policy aspects of genetic privacy. In addition, Dr. Powers has served as a

consultant to the president's Health Care Reform Task Force, and is coauthor of

the task force policy position paper on privacy.
EDWARD H. SHORTLIFFE,
 M.D., Ph.D., is professor of Medicine and
of Computer Science at Stanford University. After attending Harvard College

(1970), he earned a Ph.D. in Medical Information Sciences (1975)
COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATANETWORKS BIOGRAPHICAL
SKETCHES236Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and an M.D. at Stanford (1976). During the early 1970s, he was principal
developer of the medical expert system known as MYCIN. He then served

medical residencies at Harvard and Stanford. As a member of Stanford's

internal-medicine faculty since 1979, he has directed an active research

program in medical expert systems and has spearheaded the formation of a

degree program in medical informatics. He is currently Chief of the Division of
General Internal Medicine and Associate Chair of Medicine for Primary Care.
Dr. Shortliffe is a member of the Institute of Medicine, the American Society

for Clinical Investigation, the American Association of Physicians, the

American Clinical and Climatological Association, the American College of

Medical Informatics, and is a fellow of the American Association for Artificial

Intelligence. He has served on the Computer Science and Telecommunications

Board (National Research Council), the Federal Networking Advisory

Committee (National Science Foundation), the Biomedical Library Review

Committee (National Library of Medicine), and was recipient of a research

career development award from the last named agency. In addition, he received

the Grace Murray Hopper Award of the Association for Computing Machinery

in 1976 and has been a Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation Faculty Scholar in
General Internal Medicine.
ELLIOT M. STONE
 has been Executive Director of the Massachusetts
Health Data Consortium since it was established in 1978 as a private, nonprofit

corporation and a politically neutral setting for the collection and analysis of the

state's large health care databases. The consortium publishes annual reports to a

broad constituency of health care organizations and business coalitions.
Previously, Mr. Stone served as director of the state's Center for Health
Statistics in the Massachusetts Department of Public Health. Massachusetts

provided data to the federal government through the Cooperative Health

Statistics System (CHSS) of the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS).

Mr. Stone has been an advisor to the AHCPR, NCHS, HCFA, and the Robert

Wood Johnson Foundation on state health statistics issues. Mr. Stone is a board

member of the Massachusetts Peer Review Organization and chairman of its

Data Committee. He is an active member of the National Association of Health

Data Organizations (NAHDO) and the Association for Health Services

Research (AHSR). Mr. Stone received his bachelors and masters degrees at

Boston University. He attended an executive program in health care

management at Yale University.
ADELE A. WALLER,
 J.D., is a partner who practices health law with the
Chicago law firm of Gardner, Carton & Douglas. A substantial portion of her

law practice involves advising clients on issues related to health information

and the use of information technology in health care. Ms. Waller has spoken

extensively on health information issues for organizations such as the American

Medical Association, the National Health Lawyers Association, the American
Academy of Hospital Attorneys, the Ameri
COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATANETWORKS BIOGRAPHICAL
SKETCHES237Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.can Health Information Management Association, and the National Managed
Health Care Congress. She has published numerous articles and book chapters

on health information topics. She cochairs the Workgroup on Confidentiality,

Privacy, and Legislation of the Computer-Based Patient Record Institute and is

a member of the Advisory Board of 
Computers in Healthcare.
 Ms. Waller has
been an adjunct faculty member for the Health Law Institute at Chicago's
School of Law, Loyola University, and is a frequent guest lecturer in the
graduate health information management program of the University of Illinois

at Chicago.WILLIS H. WARE
 is a senior computer scientist with RAND in Santa
Monica, California. His academic degrees include Ph.D. (Princeton University),

S.M. (MIT), and B.S. (University of Pennsylvania)
Šall in electrical
engineering. He joined RAND in 1952 and has held several staff and

managerial positions. His career has been devoted to all aspects of computer

scienceŠhardware, software, architectures, software development, federal
agency and military applications, management of computer-intensive projects,
public policy, and legislation. In the late 1960s he developed a research interest

in the security of computer systems, and shortly thereafter, a corresponding

interest in the personal privacy consequences of recordkeeping systems. He has

written extensively on both topics, testified to Congress, and been active

professionally as speaker and conferee. In the early 1970s, he chaired the ''HEW

Committee" whose report was the foundation for the Federal Privacy Act of

1974. President Ford appointed him to the subsequent Privacy Protection Study

Commission, whose report remains the most extensive examination of private-

sector recordkeeping practices. Dr. Ware is a member of the National Academy

of Engineering, a Fellow of the Institute of Electronic and Electrical Engineers,

and a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL HEALTH DATANETWORKS BIOGRAPHICAL
SKETCHES238Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GlossaryAccess con-trolInformation use policy to determine who can have access to what data (both
organization personnel and persons external to the organization) and
policies and procedures preventing access by those who are not authorized
to have it.AccuracyMagnitude of errors in data resulting from miscoding or misrepresenting
facts, maintaining out-of-date findings, or commingling of data from more
than one person.Compre-hensivenessCompleteness of records in patient care events. Amount of information one
has on an individual in the population both for each patient encounter with
the health care system and for all of a patient's encounters over time.

Computer-based patient record See Patient record, computer-based.
Connectivi-tyThe potential of the (computer-based) record or record system to establish
links to or interact effectively with any sort of provider or database (IOM,
1991a).DatabaseA collection of data in a computer, organized so that it can be expanded,
updated, and retrieved rapidly for various uses.
Data confi-dentialityStatus accorded to data or information indicating that it must be protected.
Protection includes maintaining the integrity of the data and access control.
Data-ex-changestandardsStandards that govern the collection, aggregation,
GLOSSARY239Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. transmission, dissemination, and exchange of health data (across disparate
systems) and that foster the use of more consistent medical vocabulary

(IOM, 1991a).Data in-
tegrityQuality or state of being unimpaired such that data are not altered or

destroyed accidentally or intentionally.Data linkageBringing together two separately recorded pieces of information concerninga particular individual, family, provider, facility, or other record subject.

Data network See Network, data.
Data relia-
bilityA measure of the consistency of data items based on their reproducibility

and an estimation of their error of measurement.
Data reuseUse of data that have been gathered for another purpose (such as patient

care, billing, or research) and that are employed for purposes for which they

were not necessarily intended but which may generate new knowledge.
Data securi-
tyProtection of data, especially sensitive data, from accidental or intentional

disclosure to unauthorized persons and from unauthorized alteration by

techniques such as software and hardware protections, physical measures,

and informed, alert staff. (See also 
Data confidentiality.)Disclosure,
publicCommunication, or publication and dissemination, of certain kinds of

information to the public at large.
FeedbackMaking available to providers and practitioners the data for or results of

evaluative studies about themselves and their peers.Generaliz-
abilityThe proposition that information on one dimension of health care delivery

and performance will in some fashion predict or otherwise relate to other

dimensions of performance.
Global in-

dexA composite score intended to represent the performance of an entire

hospital, plan, or individual provider.
Health
database
organiza-
tionThe administrative and operational structure for regional health databases.

A data organization that has as its mission the public release of data and

results of analyses done on the databases under its control. It (1) operates

under a common authority; (2) obtains health-related information from a

wide variety of sources and puts databases to multiple uses; (3) contains

person-identifiable data; (4) serves a specific, defined geographic area; (5)

has inclusive population files; (6) has comprehensive data; (7) manipulates

data electronically; and (8) supports electronic access.
Health sta-

tusInformation typically from individuals themselves, on domains of health

such as physical functioning, mental and emotional
GLOSSARY
240
Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. well-being, cognitive functioning, social and role functioning, and
perceptions of one's health in the past, now, and for the future and/or
compared with that of one's peers (also called health-related quality of life).
Inclusive-nessThe extent to which entire populations or defined groups are intentionally
included in a database.Longitudi-nal recordof careAll the care provided for a discrete course of illness or injury, regardless of
site or setting.Network,dataA set of databases that are hosted on several computer systems
interconnected with one another and to terminals and that serve some
community of users. Such a network will typically have the following
attributes: (1) The databases are dispersed over several machines; each one
or group resides on one or more computer systems. (2) The computer
systems are often, but not necessarily, physically distant from one another.

(3) All the machines in the network are linked by some means so that
information can be transmitted from one machine to another. (4) Each
machine has software to permit exchange of information among individual
systems in the network, and in turn to allow individual users of the network
to query the many databases and to receive, analyze, and aggregate data

from them.
OutcomesWhat happens to a person as a result of health care. Outcomes include
measures of the individual's health status and quality of life (or health-
related quality of life), as well as numerous other measures such as
presence or absence of disease, readmission to hospital, repeat surgery, anddeath (USDHHS, 1991).
Patientrecord,computer-basedAn electronic patient record that resides in a system specifically designed to
support users by providing accessibility to complete and accurate data,
alerts, reminders, clinical decision support systems, links to medical
knowledge, and other aids (IOM, 1991a).
Patientrecord,primaryThat health care/medical record used by health care professionals while
providing patient care services to review patient data or document their
own observations, actions, or instructions (Ball and Collen, 1992).
Patientrecord, sec-
ondaryPatient-identifiable data taken from the primary patient record to satisfy the
needs of specific users (Ball and Collen, 1992).
Person-identifiableAny information that could be uniquely associated
GLOSSARY241Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. with the individual to whom it pertains; such inferential identification is
greatly enhanced by computer cross-matching. 
Person is not intended to
include physicians or other individual caregivers in their caregiver roles.
(See also Person-identified.)Person-identifiedInformation that definitely or probably refers to specific persons. Person-
identified information is associated with names, Social Security numbers,
alphanumeric codes, or other unique (or nearly unique) information
assigned to an individual. 
Person is not intended to include physicians or
other individual caregivers in their caregiver roles. (See also 
Person-identifiable.)Personalidentifica-tion codeA short code entered by a patient, probably on a keypad, at the time of
health care services that permits access to his or her database.
PrimarydataSee under 
Data, primary.
PrimarypatientrecordSee under 
Patient record, primary.PrivacyThe right of the individual to be left alone, to withdraw from the influence
of his environment, to be secluded, not annoyed, and not intruded upon by
extension of the right to be protected against physical or psychological
invasion or against the misuse or abuse of something legally owned by an
individual or normally considered by society to be his or her property
(Westin, 1976). (See also 
Privacy, information.)
Privacy,informationThe interest of an individual to control the dissemination and use of
information that relates to himself or herself or to have information about

oneself be inaccessible to others.
QualityassessmentMeasurement of technical and interpersonal aspects of health care,
including access to and outcomes of that care.
QualityassuranceA cycle of activities and systems for maintaining the quality of patient care.
Programs of quality assurance can be internal or external to an organization.
Qualityimprove-
mentEfforts to improve the level of performance of a key process, which
involves measuring the level of current performance, finding ways to

improve that performance, and implementing new and better methods.
ReliabilitySee Data reliability.SecondarydataSee Data, secondary.
SecondarypatientrecordSee Patient record, secondary.
SecuritySee Data security, System security.
System se-curityProtection from unauthorized access, including provisions for hardware,
software, communications, and system users, and use determinations based
on organizational computer security programs
GLOSSARY242Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. (Martin, 1983). Also, the measures taken to keep computer-based
information systems safe from unauthorized access and other harm (IOM,
1991a).Third-party payers
Companies that administer health benefit plans, maintain records of
eligibility and payment, adjudicate, and pay claims. The first and second
parties are the patient and the provider (clinician or institution). (When the
health plan is administered by the company, they are called 
third-partyadministrators.)UniqueidentifierA code (usually numeric or alphanumeric) that refers to one, and only one,
person at any one time, does not change for that person over time, and
permits positive (or probable) identification of that individual. The term
may apply to codes assigned to data subjects and to practitioners. (See also
Universal identifier.)UniversalidentifierA single code used in all health databases to refer to an individual. Such a
code would allow linkage among health databases. (See 
Data linkage.)
ValidityThe extent to which data correspond to the actual state of affairs or an
instrument that measures what it purports to measure.
InternalvalidityThe degree to which one can support a causal relationship between
treatment and outcome, given the way they are measured by the data.
ConstructvalidityThe degree to which one can generalize from one analysis to broader
theories or models.ExternalvalidityThe degree to which one can generalize from a finding (of causal
relationship) to alternative measures of the treatment and outcome and
across different types of individuals, sites of care, and times. (See also
Generalizability.)GLOSSARY243Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AcronymsADAAmericans with Disabilities Act
AHCPRAgency for Health Care Policy and Research
AHIMAAmerican Health Information Management Association
AIDSAcquired immunodeficiency syndromeAMAAmerican Medical Association
ANSIAmerican National Standards Institute
ASTMAmerican Society for Testing and Materials
ATMAutomated teller machine
BCBSABlue Cross and Blue Shield Association
CABGCoronary artery bypass graft
CHMISCommunity Health Management Information System
CPRComputer-based patient record
DRGDiagnosis-related groupDVADepartment of Veterans Affairs
EDSElectronic Data Systems
EFTElectronic funds transfer
ERISAEmployment Retirement Insurance Security Act
ESRDEnd-stage renal disease
ACRONYMS244Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FCRAFair Credit Reporting Act
FOIAFreedom of Information Act
FOILFreedom of Information Law
HCFAHealth Care Financing Administration
HDOHealth database organization
HICHealth Insurance Claim (number, for Medicare beneficiaries)
HIVHuman immunodeficiency virus
HMOHealth maintenance organization
HSAHealth Security Act
ICD-9-CMInternational Classification of Diseases, ninth revision,
clinical modifications (for use in the United States)
IDPersonal identifierIOMInstitute of Medicine
IPAIndependent practice association
IRBInstitutional review board
IRSInternal Revenue Service
MEDTEPMedical Treatment Effectiveness Program (of AHCPR)
NAHDONational Association of Health Data Organizations
NAICNational Association of Insurance Commissioners
NCHSNational Center for Health Statistics
NRCNational Research Council
OTAOffice of Technology Assessment
PHCCCCPennsylvania Health Care Cost Containment Council
PICPersonal identification code
PINPersonal identification number
PORTPatient Outcomes Research Team (in MEDTEP program)
PPOPreferred provider organization
PPRCPhysician Payment Review Commission
PPSCPrivacy Protection Study Commission
PRO(Medicare) Peer Review Organization
QA/QIQuality assurance/quality improvement
RHIGRochester Health Information Group
SPARCSStatewide Planning and Research Cooperative System
SSASocial Security Administration
SSNSocial Security number
ACRONYMS245Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TPAThird-party administrator
TPPThird-party payer
UB-82Uniform Bill (1982) (a HCFA-mandated claim form for
inpatient care)
UB-92Uniform Bill (1992)UCDSUniform Clinical Data Set
UHDDSUniform Hospital Discharge Data Set
UPINUniversal physician identification number
USDHEWU.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
USDHHSU.S. Department of Health and Human Services
VHCAVermont Health Care Authority
WEDIWorkgroup for Electronic Data Interchange
ACRONYMS246Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IndexAAcademic organizations, 
64, 81, 98Access control (to data), 
3, 36, 37, 152,153, 154-155, 162, 239Access to health care, 61, 65, 70, 80Account numbers, 52Accuracy of data, 5-6
, 7, 8, 11, 12-13, 31,36, 50, 85-90 passim, 95, 107-108
,161, 239Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
AIDS), 
149Administration on Aging, 
64Administration on Children and Families,
64Administrative information, 
3, 33, 44, 45,54, 75-76, 88data sets, 
29, 54, 70, 87nAdopted children, 
75Age and date of birth, 
44, 51Agency for Health Care Policy and
Research (AHCPR), 
43, 87n.See also National Center for Health Ser-
vices ResearchAllergies, 
46, 74Alliances, 
see Networks and alliances(provider)Ambulatory care, 30, 63, 73, 86, 99American College of Surgeons National
Trauma Registry, 68, 80American Health Information Manage-
ment Association, 
34nAmerican National Standards Institute, 
89Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA),
79, 159Analysis consultants, 
115nAnalytic methods, 7, 8, 12-13, 36, 113Ancillary facilities, 78Antitrust issues, 
31, 78, 111-112Appropriate health services, 
1, 62, 72, 88,114Artificial intelligence, 
77Assessment, 
see Comparative data;Needs
assessment; Quality assessment;
Technology assessmentsAssociations, 
see Business coalitions;
Consumer interest groups; Profes-

sional associationsAttorneys, 
37, 65, 82, 141, 207BBehavioral risks, 
44, 80Benefits, 
76n.See also
 Insurance coverage and terms
Benton International (BI), 
59Bill collectors, 
65, 82Billing, 59, 70, 76INDEX247Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Biometric identifiers, 
6, 51, 52, 165, 206Blood banking, 
80Breast cancer, 
79-80Business coalitions, 
6, 32, 35, 50, 60, 64CCalifornia, 
73-74, 96-97, 147, 149Canadian provincial databases, 
30, 62, 70Cancer registries, 
42, 79-80
Capitation payments and systems, 
12, 30,60, 106Cardiac surgery, 
71-72, 74, 79, 96, 123-135
Case management, 
74-75, 76-77, 141employer-based plans, 
79, 159-160,207, 208-209Case-mix analyses, 
46, 113, 127CD-ROM releases, 
104Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion, 
64Certainty, 127-129
Charges for services, 
44, 70, 78, 91, 98Charitable groups, 65, 81Check digits, 
166nChild abuse, 
82, 141Chronic illness, 
74-75, 79Claims, see Insurance claims
Clearinghouses, 
59, 62nCleveland Health Quality Choice
(CHQC), 67, 97, 103n, 109Clinical evaluative sciences, 
72-73Clinical information, 
3, 33, 50, 54, 62limitations of, 
31, 88Clinical practice norms and guidelines,
62, 71, 78, 100Clinton administration health plan, seeHealth Security Act
Code of Fair Health Information Prac-
tices, 
9, 20, 21, 190, 192, 196 ,197-198
, 211Code of Fair Information Practices,
176-178
, 192Cognitive functioning, 
46Commercial applications, 
65, 82,137-138
, 141-142
, 144-145, 210Community-based information systems,
40n, 81.See also Health database organizations
Community Health Management Informa-
tion Systems (CHMISs), 
34, 59-60, 64Community health needs, see Needs
assessmentCommunity interest groups, 
37, 64-65
, 81Comparative data, 
13, 30, 73, 78, 92, 97,108, 127-129Competition and competitor information,
31, 37, 70, 78, 100managed competition, 
71, 73Completeness of data, 
5-6, 7, 8, 85-89, 90,107-108
Comprehensiveness of databases, 
3, 5, 33,35, 36, 44-47, 48n, 49, 54, 61, 85,89, 239limitations to, 
30-31, 46-47, 84research projects, 
31Compulsory process, 
9, 16, 20, 21, 151,185, 186, 191, 193-194
, 207Computer-based media, 
91, 104-105
public use data tapes, 
30, 112, 114Computer-based patient records (CPRs),
7, 30, 32, 41, 43, 50, 51, 83n, 241development of, 
88-89, 90privacy issues, 
141-142Computer Matching and Privacy Protec-
tion Act, 
178-179
, 189-190
Computer systems, 
see Computer-based
media; Computer-based patient

records; Networks (data); System
securityConfidentiality, 
3, 16, 29, 33, 36, 46, 83,92, 147-155
, 156-161, 239and data release, 
7, 8, 16-18, 110, 111,112, 149-151, 157-161
, 198 -199
protection measures, 
4, 8, 114, 136,151-152
, 154-156
, 157, 171public education on, 
9, 39, 195See also
 PrivacyConnectivity, 
239Consent, 
see Informed consent
Construct validity, 
243Consultants, 98, 15nConsumer information, 
71, 75, 81, 92,93-94, 101, 115n, 129guides, 
96, 97-98See also
 Public disclosure
Consumer interest groups, 
35, 37, 64-65,81, 115, 211Consumer reporting agencies, 
172, 173-174Control of databases, 
50Copayments, 
44INDEX248Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
surgery, 
71-72, 74, 96, 123-135Costs of databases, 
31, 87and education and outreach activities,
47, 106, 107relation to expansiveness, 
36Costs of health care analyses and control
of, 1, 2, 11, 32, 41, 61-62, 65, 70, 73public disclosure, 
11, 12, 91, 93-94, 98,106Counseling, 
46Court orders, 
16, 150, 151, 193Covert data acquisition, 
160-161
, 162CPR Institute, 
88, 89Credit institutions, 
65, 82, 138, 160Current medical management, 
45, 46DDatabases, 
1-3
, 4-5, 29-32, 42-43, 239characteristics of, 
5-6, 43-53limitations of, 
2, 30-31
, 84, 85-86national identification, 
18, 163-165See also
 Administrative information,
data sets;Comprehensiveness of databases;

Health database organizations;
Inclusiveness of databases;

Insurance claims;
Medicare, administrative data files;
Networks (data);
Public use data tapes;
Registries;

Research databases;
Statewide databases;
Surveys and questionnaires;
Uses of databases
Data confidentiality, 
148, 154-155, 156,239Data-exchange standards, 
89, 239-240
for computer-based patient records, 
43nobstacles to setting of, 
31Data integrity, 
154-155, 200-201, 240Data integrity boards, 
189-190
, 195, 200Data linkage, 
4-5, 32, 42, 49, 87n,165-166
, 200, 240of computer-based patient records, 
43nand multiple providers, 53, 167and networks, 
6, 53-54
See also Universal identifiersData networks, 
see Networks (data);
Regional data centers and networks
Data protection units, 
9-10, 21-22,189-190
, 194-201
Data reliability, 
6, 36, 70, 85, 86, 240of clinical information, 
31and public disclosure, 
11, 92-93, 95, 98,99, 101, 112Data reuse, 
42, 240Data security, 
14-15, 18, 139-140n,152-153
, 154-155
, 156, 240in HDOs, 
21-22, 36, 189-190, 192n,200-201
, 210Decisional privacy, 
143Deductibles, 44Definitions of patient record data ele-
ments, 6, 31, 87, 89Demographic characteristics, 
44, 45adjustments for, 
2, 30, 113Dentists, 
12, 106Department of Defense, 
167Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices (DHHS), 43, 64, 139Department of Veterans Affairs, 
66Diagnosis-related Group Prospective Pay-
ment System (DRG-based PPS), 
72,85-86Diagnosis-specific analyses, 
71, 85-86, 98Diagnostic procedures, 
46, 119, 153Direct marketing firms, 
65, 82, 138Disadvantaged populations, 
65, 70, 71, 81Discharges, 
see Hospitals, discharge
databasesDisclosure, 
see Confidentiality; Informed
consent; Privacy; Public disclosure;
Redisclosure; Statistical disclosure

limitationDisease incidence, 62, 65, 79Disease registries, 
41, 42, 79-80DNA Identification Act, 
138DNA patterns, 
6, 51Dossiers, 
144in national identification systems, 
18,163-165
Drugs and medications, 
46, 141-142
reactions and allergies to, 
46, 74, 75tracking of, 
75, 146-147Dual coverage, 
44Duty to warn, 
151, 159EEconomics, 
see Costs of health care;
Socioeconomic statusEducation, 
see Public education and out-
reachINDEX249Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Effectiveness research, 
72-73, 85, 87, 88,114Elderly population, 
72Electronic data interchange (EDI), 
50, 76Electronic Data Systems Corporation(EDS), 
34nElectronic funds transfer (EFT), 
142Electronic transmission, 
see Electronic
data interchange; Transmission of data
Emergency information, 
44Emergency medical services, 
30, 80Emotional well-being, 
46, 99Employee agreements, 
189Employersinformation on, 
44, 54, 99self-insured health plans, 
37, 64, 75,78-79, 152, 159-160
use of person-identifiable data, 
10, 2425, 79n, 139n, 140, 159-160, 207,208-209
, 210-211
Employment Retirement Income Security
Act (ERISA), 
17-18, 78-79n. 152Employment status, 
44Encounter forms, 30, 31, 42, 46End results, 
see Outcomes of care
End-stage renal disease (ESRD) data sys-
tems, 
74Epidemiological data and applications, 
36,41, 72, 77, 79-80, 81, 99, 170Equifax, see Harris/Equifax survey
Error control, 
166ESRD Program Management and Medical
Information System, 
74Ethnic groups, 
see Race and ethnicity
Evaluative studies, 
8, 71-74public disclosure of, 
4, 11, 12-14, 91 92,95, 98, 101-103, 105, 106-107,108-110
, 114-116
, 122, 123, 127-129
retraction and correction of. 
115-116staff capabilities, 
114-115
Exclusive provider organization (EPO)
arrangements , 
79Executive Order 12356, 
191-192
Expenditures, 
see Costs of
databases;Costs of health care
FFair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), 
138,173-174
Fairness doctrine, 
13, 109-110
, 178Fairness issues, 
2, 11, 31-32, 39, 92-93,121, 123, 127-129See also
 Code of Fair Health Informa-
tion Practices;
Code of Fair Information Practices;

Potential for harm
Family medical history, 
44, 46, 74-75, 140of adopted children, 
75Family members, 
44, 74-75, 159-160Feedbackfrom providers, 
13, 110to providers, 
14, 80, 116-117, 121, 240Financial institutions, 65, 82, 138Fingerprints, 
6, 51, 52Food and Drug Administration, 
64Fraud, 82, 141Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), 
101,111n, 120-121
, 148, 175-176
Free-standing surgery centers, 
63Fund-raising campaigns, 
81GGender, 
44, 65Generalizability, 
101, 102, 240General releases, 
183-184Genetic information, 
44, 75, 82, 140privacy issues, 
138, 149, 158-159
Geographic variation, 
65, 70, 77Germany, 
164Global index, 
101, 102-103, 240Good information practices, 
192-193
Government employees, 
75Group practices, 
106HHarm, 
see Potential for harmHarris/Equifax survey, 
137, 156, 159,164, 171-172, 211Hartford, John A., Foundation, 
33-34,59-60, 62nHealth Care Financing Administration
(HCFA), 
43, 51, 53, 64, 70, 74hospital mortality studies, 
71-72, 96-98,109Health Care Policy Corporation, 
50Health care purchasing coalitions, 
60, 64Health care reform, 
2, 32, 50, 61, 62, 65,87, 88and antitrust rules, 
31INDEX250Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and insurance benefits, 
76nand quality assessment, 
71See also Health Security Act
Health database organizations (HDOs), 
1,29, 35-37, 41, 54-60, 89 -90
data protection units, 
9-10, 21-22,189-190
, 194-201
definition of, 
3, 32-33, 54-55, 240governance of, 
3, 33, 35, 50, 54, 55,95-96, 156, 186-189
, 196-197
legal status, 
172-179, 188-189
privacy and confidentiality issues, 
9-10,20-26, 36, 145-146, 151, 154-156
,161, 162-163, 170-210
quality assurance, 
6-7, 85-89, 90, 95See also Evaluative studies;
Public disclosure;
Research applications;

Uses of databases
Health Information System Standards
(proposed), 
139nHealth Information Technologies, Inc., 
142Health maintenance organizations
(HMOs), 12, 30, 47, 52, 53, 60, 63,98, 106Health Pages, 97Health promotion, 
see Public education
and outreachHealth Reform Task Force on Privacy and
Security of Health Care Information,

139Health risk factors, 
44, 45, 74, 140-141
Health Security Act (HSA), 
3, 25, 34n,40n, 92n, 139-140nHealth Services and Resources Adminis-
tration, 
64Health status, 
2, 3, 30, 33, 45, 46, 47, 54,60, 99, 140, 154, 240 -241
Heart surgery, 
see Cardiac surgeryHenry Ford Health System, 
57-58
High-technology therapies, 
79Hippocratic Oath, 
148Home health agencies, 53, 63, 78, 99Homeless population, 
81Hospital Consortium of Greater Rochester
(HCGR), 56-57Hospitals, 30, 52, 63, 78, 94admissions, 
46, 51discharge databases, 
29-30, 42, 50, 51,73-74mortality rate studies, 
71-72, 96-98quality assessments, 
12, 96-98, 105, 106Human Genome Privacy Act, 
138Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),
149IIdentification, 
see Biometric identifiers;
National identification system or

dossier; Personal identification

codes; Person-identifiable informa-
tion; Person-identified information;
Unique identifiers; Universal identi-

fiersIllegal data acquisition, 
160-161, 162Illinois, 
79Immunization records, 
74, 80Inadvertent release, 
157Inappropriate health services, 
see Appro-priate health services
Inclusiveness of databases, 
3, 5, 33, 36,47-49, 50, 52, 54, 61, 84, 89, 241Independent practice associations (IPAs),
52, 63, 98Industrial health and safety, 
99Informational privacy, 
15, 29, 143-147,155-156
, 242Information brokers, 
160-161
Information-use policy, 
155-156Informed consent, 
10, 17, 23-24,139-140
n, 148, 150, 152, 158, 173182-186
, 202-203
, 206Injuries, 
see TraumaInsider threat, 
160, 189Institute for Health Care Assessment, 
62nInstitutional Review Boards, 
10, 24, 114,115n, 202, 205Insurance claims, 
30, 32, 41, 43, 44, 51,54, 60automated processing, 
2, 59, 75-76, 139,141-142
, 202limitations as data source, 
30, 31, 47,86, 171privacy issues, 
139, 141-142
, 150, 158,161, 174Insurance coverage and terms, 
65, 70, 75,76, 77documentation in patient records, 
44, 154public knowledge, 
93nInsurance premiums, 
30, 77Insurance support organizations, 
172-173Insurers, 
31, 37, 50, 63, 64, 70, 77, 92identifiers, 
52, 89INDEX251Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and quality assessment, 
71, 73See also Insurance claims;
Insurance coverage and terms;

Insurance premiums;
Third-party payers
Integrated Medical Systems, Inc., 
69Integrity, 
see Data integrity
Intelligent adjudication, 
76-77Interactive access, 
33, 55Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 
167, 168,192, 193Internal validity, 243Interpersonal performance, 
62Invasive procedures. 
70, 119Iowa, 50KKaiser Permanente, 
98LLaboratories and laboratory testing, 
46, 63Law enforcement agencies, 
37, 65, 82,141, 185, 186, 193, 194, 207Laws, see Legislation and statutes
Lawyers, 
see AttorneysLegal guardians, 
10, 23, 202, 204Legal cases, 
141improper disclosure, 
149, 152, 157, 196,213libel lawsuits, 
109, 115-116
malpractice lawsuits, 
37, 71, 82, 141privacy rights, 
146-147
, 148, 175, 191Legislation and statutes, 19, 37, 50, 106insurance regulation, 
78-79npreemptive, 
9, 20-21, 111n, 152,180-182
, 190-194
on privacy and confidentiality, 
9, 136,138-140
, 144, 146-147
, 148, 149,151-152
, 155, 159, 168, 172-179
,180-182
, 190-194
, 212-213of states, 
6, 32, 35, 37, 50, 51, 60, 79n,107, 140, 147, 182Legislative charters, 175Level of aggregation, 
101, 106Libel and defamation lawsuits, 
109,115-116
Lifestyle, 44, 140, 153Linkage, 
see Data linkageLocal areas, 
97-98Logic programs, 76-77Longitudinal records, 
2, 30, 49, 52, 241MMalpractice suits, 
37, 71, 82, 141Managed care, 
63, 64, 75, 76-77, 100, 141See also
 Health maintenance organiza-
tions;Independent practice associations;
Preferred provider organizations
Managed competition, 
71, 73Mandatory reporting requirements, 
16,150-151
, 159, 193-194
Manitoba Provincial Health Database, 
67Manual abstraction of records, 
7, 31, 88Marital status, 
44, 154Market research, 
73, 77-78, 82, 98Massachusetts Health Data Consortium,
50, 97Maternal and Child Health block grants, 
64Medco Containment Services, 
142Medicaid, 29, 43, 52, 149Medical devices, 
82, 99Medical histories, 
2, 32, 45, 46, 74-75, 153of adopted children, 
75family, 
44, 46, 74-75, 140Medical Information Bureau, 
152, 158Medicareadministrative data files, 
29, 42, 43, 51,70, 72, 74, 96assignment of identifiers, 
52, 53, 167-168Beneficiary Health Status Registry, 
69confidentiality regulations, 
149Current Beneficiary Survey, 
51Diagnosis-related Group Prospective
Payment System, 
72, 85-86National Claims History, 
29, 69peer review organizations (PROs),
117n, 119n, 120-121Medication, see Drugs and medications
Memphis Business Group on Health, 
60Mental health status, 
46Merck & Company, 
142Metropolitan areas, 
55, 97-98Minnesota Clinical Comparison and
Assessment Project, 
67Minorities, see Race and ethnicity
Missing and miscoded data, 
46-47, 49, 50,86, 161Missouri, 
98Misuse of information, 
39, 51, 108, 112,158by employers, 
79, 159, 208-209providers' concerns, 
3, 33, 120INDEX252Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Mortality rate studies, 
71-72, 96-98Multivariate analyses, 
8, 12, 113, 127NNational Association of Health Data Orga-
nizations, 
43National Association of Insurance Com-
missioners (NAIC) Information and

Privacy Protection Model Act (NAIC

Model Act), 
172-173
National Center for Health Services
Research, 
72See also Agency for Health Care Policy
and ResearchNational Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS), 
43, 84National Committee on Quality Assur-
ance, 
98National Health and Nutrition Examina-
tion Survey, 
30National Health Board (proposed), 
40n, 139-140
nNational Health Care Survey, 
84National identification system or dossier,
18, 163-165
National information infrastructure, 
88-89National Institute of Diabetes and Diges-
tive and Kidney Diseases, 
74National Medical Expenditures Surveys,
30, 43National Quality Management Council
(proposed), 
92nNational Trauma Registry of the Ameri-
can College of Surgeons, 68, 80Needs assessment, 
1, 2, 31, 32, 41, 65, 70,80-81Networks and alliances (provider), 
6, 71,78, 79, 92n, 119Networks (data), 
32, 53-54, 153, 155-156,163, 200-201, 241See also Health database organizations;
Regional data centers and networks
Newsletters, 
91News media, 
91, 96, 101, 115New York
Cardiac Surgery Reporting System, 
68,71, 96, 123-135Single-Payer Demonstration Program, 
58Statewide Planning and Research Coop-
erative System (SPARCS), 
30, 51Notification procedures, 
183Nurses, 12, 99, 106Nursing homes, 
63, 98OObservational data, 
84Office of Technology Assessment (OTA),
94Orange County, California, 
97Organ and tissue banking, 
80, 97Outcomes of care, 
2, 45, 46, 54, 62,71-73, 79data limitations, 
31, 41, 47definition, 
241prediction of, 
92, 127-129
Out-of-area care, 
24, 46-47, 204Out-of-range values, 
86Outpatient care, 
30, 63, 73, 86, 99Outreach, 
see Public education and out-
reachPPaper-based medical records, 
31, 42, 42n,88Parents, 
10, 23, 202, 204Participation rights, 
184Patient Outcome Research Teams
(PORTs), 
43, 72Patient records, 
30, 60, 76commercial uses, 
141-142, 210data elements in, 
44-46, 85-86longitudinal, 
2, 30, 49, 52, 241primary, 
42, 42n, 55, 140-141
, 171, 241privacy and confidentiality issues,
140-142
, 145-152
, 153-154
, 156-161, 199-200redisclosure, 
17, 151-152
, 156, 158-160
,171-172
, 196, 198-199
secondary, 
5, 37, 42, 42n, 141, 241See also
 Computer-based patient records
Payers, 
see Third-party payersPeer review, 108, 119-121
, 122Peer review organizations (PROs), Medi-
care programs, 117n, 119n, 
120-121
Pennsylvania Health Care Cost Contain-
ment Council (PHCCCC), 
71-72, 96,105nPersonal identification (ID) codes (PICs),
19, 52, 59, 164, 165-170, 242Person-identifiable information, 
3, 6,14-15, 33n, 39, 51-52, 136, 241-242
INDEX253Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.employer use of, 
10, 24-25, 79n, 139n,140, 159-160, 207, 208-209, 210-211
in HDO files, 
3, 5, 20, 33, 36, 54, 65,89, 185-186
protection of, 
9-10, 20, 114, 139-140
n, 
175-179
, 190-201
Person-identified information, 
3, 6, 33n,51, 136, 242commercial uses, 
82, 137-138, 141-142,144-145
, 210in HDO files, 
5, 10, 23-25, 33, 36, 54,185, 201-208Personnel actions, 
79Pharmacies, 
52, 63, 99identifiers, 
53Physical functioning, 
46, 99Physician Payment Review Commission
(PPRC), 48Physicians, 
36, 63, 74, 98, 118-119
and confidentiality, 
148-149, 151, 159consumer information on, 
75, 94, 98-99,100, 105, 106identifiers, 
52-53quality assessment, 
12, 71, 94, 98-99,100, 105, 119-120Planning applications, 
2, 32, 37, 61, 62,65, 71, 80-81long-range strategic, 
73, 77-78patient care, 74-75Podiatry, 12, 106Point-of-service transactions, 
59Policy analysis, 
30, 70Populations, 
see Demographic characteris-
tics;Disadvantaged populations;
Inclusiveness of databases
Postmarketing surveillance, 
64Potential for harm, 
2, 31-32, 36, 39, 90,156-161
of common disclosures, 
157-160
of covert and illegal data acquisition,
160-161
, 162of data inaccuracies, 
50, 86, 95, 161of public disclosure, 
8, 11-12, 13, 100,105, 108-110, 121, 122Practitioners, 
8, 12, 30, 36, 44, 63, 78,118-119
and data release, 10, 23, 24, 202, 206duty to warn, 151, 159identifiers, 
52and public disclosure, 
37, 99, 100, 105,106Precertification, 
76-77, 141Preemptive legislation
and confidentiality, 
9, 20-21, 152,180-182
, 190-194
and FOIA, 
111nPreferred provider organizations (PPOs),
63, 98identifiers, 
52-53Pregnancy, 
46, 65Prescriptions and prescription drugs, 
46,141-142
tracking of, 
75, 146-147Preventive care, 
80Price regulation, 
73Primary care, 
30, 99Primary patient records, 
42, 42n, 
55,140-141
, 171, 241PrimeTime Live, 104Privacy, 3, 15, 18-19, 33, 39, 46, 92,136-138
, 142-143
, 154, 162-172,210-213
, 242ethical issues, 
148-149
, 210-212informational, 
15, 29, 143-147
,155-156
, 242institutional safeguards, 
36, 83,139-140
n, 162-163
, 165-167
,176-180
, 189-190
, 194-208legislation on, 
9, 136, 138-140, 144,146-147
, 148, 149, 151-152, 155,159, 168, 172-179, 180-182,190-194
, 212-213
opinion surveys, 
137, 156, 159, 164,171-172
, 211and research uses, 
10, 23, 24, 114,170-172
, 202, 205-206
right of, 
15-16, 143, 145-147See also
 ConfidentialityPrivacy Act of 1974, 
15, 136, 144, 168,176, 177-179, 197Privacy Protection Study Commission(PPSC), 136-137, 142, 178Private sectordatabases, 
6, 12, 32, 35, 50, 106-107,187-188
Social Security number use, 
168-169
See also
 Competition and competitor
informationPrivileging, 118-119Product safety litigation, 
82Professional associations, 
35, 107Professional Standards Review Organiza-
tions (PSROs), 119n, 120INDEX254Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Proprietary information, 
31, 107Prospective Payment System, 
72, 85-86Prostatectomy, 
72-73Providers, 
63competition issues, 
31, 37, 100concerns about HDOs, 
31, 33, 35, 37,92-93and confidentiality, 
148-151data on, 36, 37, 44harm from public disclosure, 
11-12, 13,100, 105, 108-110, 120, 122identifiers, 
52, 89quality assessment, 
12, 71, 73-74,103-104
, 106-107
, 116-121staff management, 
73, 74, 79strategic planning, 
78Public disclosure, 
3, 4, 8-9, 20-24, 37,38-39, 89, 90, 91-129, 240advocacy of, 
8-9, 110-113
content and format, 
91, 103-105
methodological and technical issues, 
8,12-13, 93, 101-103, 104, 105,107-108
, 113, 122, 123, 127-129and population subgroups, 
37potential for harm, 
8, 11-12, 13, 100,105, 108-110, 121, 122prerelease review, 
8, 11, 13, 109-110, 122and providers, 
8, 11, 37, 91-107 passim, 116-121
topics, 
96-98, 121Public education and outreach, 
11, 39, 74,75, 80, 81, 83-84, 95, 129, 195Public health agencies and programs, 
9,64, 80-81, 148, 191Public Health Service (PHS), 
43, 64Public use data tapes, 
30, 112, 114QQuality assessment, 
1, 2, 32, 41, 61, 62,71, 74, 88, 242comparative data, 
13, 30, 73, 78, 92, 97,108, 127-129mortality rate studies, 
71-72, 96-98public disclosure of, 
12, 91-92, 93, 94,98, 106-107
Quality assurance and quality improve-
ment (QA/QI), 71, 242and HDOs, 
12, 14, 36, 61, 73-74, 95,105, 113, 116-118, 121-122Quality of data, 6-7
, 36, 84, 85-89, 90and public disclosure, 
92-93, 95, 98,101, 107-108Quality of life, 
see Health status
Questionnaires, 
see Surveys and question-nairesRRace and ethnicity, 37, 65RAND Health Insurance Experiment, 
30,43, 93n, 
127nRandom error, 
86nRandomized trials, 
72Recordkeeping privacy, 
144-145Redisclosure, 
17, 151-152
, 156, 158-160
,171-172
, 196, 198-199
Reform, 
see Health care reform;Health
Security Act
Regional data centers and networks, 
6,34-35, 39, 138in Clinton health plan, 
40nSee also
 Health database organizations
Registries, 
41, 42, 68, 79-80, 164Regulation, 37, 97, 98, 190on confidentiality, 
149, 172of insurance, 
78-79nand quality assessment, 
71, 73See also
 Health care reform
Release of data, 
see Access control;PublicdisclosureReliability, 
see Data reliabilityReport cards, 98, 104Repositories, 
6, 29, 32, 59-60.See also Health database organizations
Research applications, 
2, 30, 36, 37, 55,60, 64, 65, 70and database comprehensiveness, 
46, 47effectiveness and outcomes, 
72-73, 85,87, 88, 114mortality rate studies, 
71-72privacy issues, 
10, 23, 24, 114, 170-172
,202, 205-206quality of care, 
73-74Research databases, 
30, 31, 42, 43See also
 RAND Health Insurance Exper-
iment;
Surveys and questionnaires
Residential facilities, 
52Retinal prints, 
6, 51, 52INDEX255Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Reuse, see Data reuseRisk adjustment, 
2, 13, 113, 127Rochester Area Hospital Corporation
(RAHC), 56-57Rochester Healthcare Information (RHI)
Group, 
56, 57SSt. Louis metropolitan area, 
97-98Sampling frames, 
72Satisfaction with services, 
3, 33, 46, 47,54, 60, 96n, 97-98Science Applications International Corpo-
ration, 34nScorecards, 
see Report cards
Screening procedures, 
46, 74Secondary patient records, 
5, 37, 42, 42n, 
141, 241Secondary use, 
158-160, 171Security, 
see Data security;System security
Selective contracting, 
77, 78, 79, 119Self-insured health plans, 
37, 64, 75,78-79, 152, 159-160
Severity adjustment, 
2, 46, 113Sexual preference, 154Side effects, 
46Small-area variations, 
65, 70Social functioning, 
46, 99Social Security numbers (SSN), 
19, 25,52, 165, 167-170, 209Social service agencies, 
65, 80, 141Socioeconomic status, 
37, 44, 65Southeast Organ Procurement Foundation,
74Soviet Union, 
164Staff management, 
73, 74, 79Standards and standardization
of coding and definitions, 
6, 7, 31, 76,87, 89data exchange, 31, 43n, 89, 239-240obstacles to, 
31, 76privacy safeguards, 
21, 139-140
nState laws, 6, 32, 35, 37, 50, 51, 60, 79n,107, 182privacy, 
17, 140, 147, 149, 151, 152,159, 186-189, 191Statewide databases. 
29-30, 32, 35, 43,50, 55, 70, 80-81and mortality rate studies, 
71-72public disclosure, 
96-97, 98Statistical disclosure limitation, 
101-102
n,171Stigmatization, 
157, 161, 162Strategic planning, 
73, 77-78Substance abuse, 
82, 149Surgical procedures, 
46, 71-74, 79, 96, 98,99, 119, 123-135
Surveys and questionnaires, 
41, 51, 60,97-98, 171national, 
30, 42, 43, 47, 84on privacy concerns, 
137, 156, 159, 164,171-172
, 211Sweden, 
164Symbolic data presentation, 
104, 105Systematic error, 
86nSystem security, 
153, 154-155
, 242-243
of HDOs, 
22, 36, 189, 200-201TTask Force on Privacy, 
139Tax Reform Act, 
168, 192Technology assessments, 32, 62, 72-73nTelecommunications, and privacy, 
138,152, 157, 200-201Telephone Consumer Protection Act, 
138Terminology, 
31, 89Therapeutic procedures, 
46, 119, 153Therapists, 
99Third-party administrators (TPAs), 
37, 64,76, 77, 159, 243Third-party payers (TPPs), 
64, 70, 77,141, 243precertification programs, 
76-77, 141See also
 Insurance claims;
Insurance premiums;
InsurersTimeliness of data, 33, 49-50, 54, 62limitations of databases, 
31, 84in public release, 
3, 8, 11, 12, 91, 92,106, 118Training programs, 64Transaction systems, 
59, 60Transmission of data, 
59, 76medical histories, 
2, 32privacy issues, 
137-138, 141, 142,151-152
, 157, 200-201
standardization, 
31, 89See also
 Networks (data)Transplantation, 
79, 80Transportation barriers, 
65Traumaidentification of victims, 
52registries, 
42, 68, 79-80INDEX256Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and PrivacyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UUnderuse of health care, 
48, 62, 79-80Uniform Health Care Information Act,
149, 203Unique identifiers, 
25, 49, 52, 139n,164-165
, 209, 243for providers, 
52-53See also Universal identifiersUnited Network for Organ Sharing, 
74United States Renal Data System, 
74Universal identifiers, 
25, 52, 53, 164-165
,209, 243Unnecessary health services, 
62Updating of data, 50, 54U.S. Congress, 138-139Uses of databases, 
3, 4, 29, 32, 41, 61-65,70-84limitations on, 
30-31, 84, 107-108U.S. News & World Report, 
97Utilization management, 
see Case man-
agementUtilization patterns, 
30, 54, 65, 70, 98VValidity, 
6, 31, 70, 85, 86, 87-88, 90, 243of analytic techniques, 
7, 8, 36, 113and public disclosure, 
11, 92-93, 95, 98,99, 101, 108, 112, 113Vermont Health Care Authority (VHCA),
58-59, 60Voluntary database participation, 
6, 60WWallet incident, 
170Washington Checkbook, 97Washingtonian, 
97Washington State, 50, 60, 79, 185nWisconsin, 
97Work Group on Computerization of
Patient Records, 
89Workgroup on Electronic Data Inter-
change (WEDI), 
76, 139, 181-182Workplace health and safety, 
80, 99INDEX257