DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/23439The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in AchievingHealth Equity: Workshop Summary82 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-43891-9 | DOI 10.17226/23439Karen M. Anderson and Steve Olson, Rapporteurs; Roundtable on the Promotion ofHealth Equity and the Elimination of Health Disparities; Board on PopulationHealth and Public Health Practice; Health and Medicine Division; NationalAcademies of Sciences, Engineering, and MedicineThe Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Karen M. Anderson and Steve Olson, 
Rapporteurs
Roundtable on the Promotion of Health Equity
and the Elimination of Health DisparitiesBoard on Population Health and Public Health Practice
Health and Medicine DivisionWorkshop SummaryTHE PROMISES AND PERILS OF DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITYThe Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 
 500 Fifth Street, NW 
 Washington, DC 20001
This activity was supported by contracts between the National Academy of Sciences 
and the Aetna Foundation, The Kresge Foundation (245367), Merck & Co., Inc. 
(APA-2013-1223), the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention] (200-2011-38807, TO#34), and the U.S. Depart-ment of Health and Human Services [Health Resources and Services Administra-tion] (HHSH25034010T). Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations 
expressed in this publication do not necessarily re˚ect the views of any organization 
or agency that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-43891-9International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-43891-8Digit Object Identi˜er:
 10.17226/23439Additional copies of this report are available for sale from the National Academies 
Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or 
(202) 334-3313; http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2016 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2016. 
The promises and perils of digital strategies in achieving health equity: Workshop 
summary.
 Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi: 10.17226/23439.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 was established in 1863 by an Act of Congress, 
signed by President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution to advise 
the nation on issues related to science and 
 
technology. Members are elected by 
their peers for outstanding contributions to research. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is 
president.The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964 under the 
 
charter of the National Academy of Sciences to bring the practices of engineering to 
advising the nation. Members are elected by their peers for extraordinary contri
-butions to engineering. Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president.
The National Academy of Medicine
 (formerly the Institute of Medicine) was 
established in 1970 under the charter of the National Academy of 
 
Sciences to 
advise the nation on medical and health issues. Members are elected by their 
peers for distinguished contributions to medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau 
is president.The three Academies work together as the 
National Academies of Sciences, Engi
-neering, and Medicine
 to provide independent, objective analysis and advice to 
the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform 
public policy decisions. The Academies also encourage education and research, 
recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and increase public under
-standing in matters of science, engineering, and medicine. Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
at www.national-academies.org
. The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vPLANNING COMMITTEE ON THE PROMISES AND PERILS OF 
DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
1GILLIAN BARCLAY 
(Co-Chair), Aetna FoundationANTONIA M. VILLARRUEL
 (Co-Chair), University of PennsylvaniaCAROLINE MCKAY, 
U.S. Outcomes Research, MerckMELISSA SIMON, Northwestern UniversityROHIT VARMA,
 University of Southern California
1  The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine™s planning committees 
are solely responsible for organizing the workshop, identifying topics, and choosing speakers. 
The responsibility for the published workshop summary rests with the workshop rapporteurs 
and the institution.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiROUNDTABLE ON THE PROMOTION OF HEALTH EQUITY 
AND THE ELIMINATION OF HEALTH DISPARITIES
1MILDRED THOMPSON 
(Co-Chair), PolicyLinkANTONIA M. VILLARRUEL
 (Co-Chair), University of PennsylvaniaPATRICIA BAKER, 
Connecticut Health FoundationGILLIAN BARCLAY, 
Aetna FoundationANNE C. BEAL, 
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute
NED CALONGE, The Colorado Trust
IRENE DANKWA-MULLAN, 
National Institutes of Health
JAMILA DAVISON, 
ACM Medical Transition Care
FRANCISCO GARCIA, Pima County Department of Health
ALLAN GOLDBERG, Merck & Co., Inc.
J. NADINE GRACIA, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
JEFFREY A. HENDERSON,
 Black Hills Center for American Indian 
HealthEVE J. HIGGINBOTHAM, University of PennsylvaniaCARA V. JAMES, 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
OCTAVIO MARTINEZ,
 Hogg Foundation for Mental Health
NEWELL MCELWEE, 
Merck & Co., Inc.
PHYLLIS W. MEADOWS, 
The Kresge FoundationAMELIE G. RAMIREZ, University of Texas Health Science Center
MELISSA SIMON, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
CHRISTINE TORBERT, 
Health Resources and Services Administration
PATTIE TUCKER, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
ROHIT VARMA, 
University of IllinoisŒChicagoWINSTON F. WONG, 
Kaiser PermanenteTERRI D. WRIGHT, 
American Public Health AssociationHMD StaffKAREN M. ANDERSON, Senior Program Of˜cerCOLIN FINK, Senior Program Assistant
ROSE MARIE MARTINEZ, 
Senior Board Director
ANNA MARTIN, 
Senior Program Assistant1  The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine™s forums and roundtables 
do not issue, review, or approve individual documents. The responsibility for the published 
workshop summary rests with the workshop rapporteurs and the institution.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixThis workshop summary has been reviewed in draft form by individuals 
chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. The purpose of 
this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published workshop summary as sound 
as possible and to ensure that the workshop summary meets institutional 
standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. 
The review comments and draft manuscript remain con˜dential to protect 
the integrity of the process. We wish to thank the following individuals for 
their review of this workshop summary:Gillian Christie, The Vitality Institute
Chazeman S. Jackson, U.S. Department of Health and Human ServicesElizabeth O˜li, Morehouse School of MedicinePattie Tucker,
 Centers for Disease Control and PreventionAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they did not see the ˜nal draft of the work
-shop summary before its release. The review of this workshop summary 
was overseen by Derek Yach,
 The Vitality Group. He was responsible for 
 
making certain that an independent examination of this workshop sum-mary was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that 
all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal 
content of this workshop summary rests entirely with the rapporteurs and 
the institution.ReviewersThe Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
 xiii1 INTRODUCTION OF THE WORKSHOP 1 Highlights of the Workshop, 3
 Organization of the Report, 4
2 TECHNOLOGY AND HEALTH DISPARITIES
 5 Equity at the Henry Ford Health System, 6 The Potential of Technology, 7
 The Perils of Technology, 8
 Engaging Communities, 9
 The Diversity of Hope, 11 Realizing the Promise of Mobile Technologies, 11
 Mobile Technologies and Health Disparities, 12
 Using Mobile Technologies to Change Behavior, 13
3  
ENGAGING PROVIDERS AND RACIAL/ETHNIC 
 MINORITY PATIENTS IN DIGITAL STRATEGIES
 15 Creating a Movement for Change, 16
 The Value of Theories, 18
 A Health Literacy Perspective on Health Disparities, 19
 Designing Systems for Health Literacy and Equity, 22
ContentsThe Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii
 CONTENTS
4  
EXAMPLES OF ENGAGING RACIAL/ETHNIC MINORITY COMMUNITIES IN DIGITAL HEALTH STRATEGIES
 27 Reducing Digital and Health Inequities in Latina Immigrant 
Communities, 28 A Tailored Web-Based Intervention for Young MSM in 
 Southeast Michigan, 30
5 POLICY AND TECHNOLOGY PERSPECTIVES
 35 Top-Down and Bottom-Up Approaches to Policy, 36
 The Policy Perspective from an Integrated Health Care Delivery 
 System, 38
 Observations from a Technology Developer, 41
6 SYNTHESIS OF WORKSHOP MESSAGES 43 Generating Evidence of Effectiveness, 43 Privacy and Sustainability, 44
 The In-Person Component, 44 Involving Communities, 45
 Scalability and Adaptability, 46
 Involving Providers, 46
REFERENCES 47APPENDIXESA  
EXAMPLES OF EHEALTH SOLUTIONS FEATURED 
 AT THE WORKSHOP
 49B WORKSHOP AGENDA 57C SPEAKER BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES
 61The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acronyms and AbbreviationsACA Affordable Care ActCBPR community-based participatory researchCHESS Community Health Engagement Survey Solutions
EHR electronic health record
GIS geographic information system
HARC HIV/AIDS Resource CenterHIPAA
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HITECH Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical 
HealthHIV/STI human immunode˜ciency virus/sexually transmitted illnessICD International Statistical Classi˜cation of Diseases and 
Related Health Problems
IOM Institute of MedicineIPV interpersonal partner violence
LGBTQ lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer
m(Dad) Mobile DadxiiiThe Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv
 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
MSM men who have sex with men
MVP moderate to vigorous physical activity 
NIH National Institutes of Health
NSF National Science Foundation
PHR personal health record
SNAP Supplemental Nutrition Assistant ProgramWIN Women-Inspired Neighborhood
YMSM young men who have sex with men
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Introduction of the Workshop
1Health care is in the midst of a dramatic transformation in the United 
States. Spurred by technological advances, economic imperatives, and gov-ernmental policies, information technologies are rapidly being applied to 
health care in an effort to improve access, enhance quality, and decrease 
costs. At the same time, the use of technologies by the consumers of health 
care is changing how people interact with the health care system and with 
health information.These changes in health care have the potential both to exacerbate and 
to diminish the stark disparities in health and well-being that exist among 
population groups in the United States. If the bene˜ts of technology ˚ow 
disproportionately to those who already enjoy better coverage, use, and 
outcomes than disadvantaged groups, health disparities could increase. 
But if technologies can be developed and implemented in such a way as 
to improve access and enhance quality for the members of all groups, the 
ongoing transformation of health care could reduce the gaps among groups 
while improving health care for all. As a recent report from the Institute of 
Medicine (IOM) stated, ﬁFacilitating patient and population contribution 
to, and control of, their health information has the potential to provide fur-1  The planning committee™s role was limited to planning the workshop, and the workshop 
summary has been prepared by the rapporteurs as a factual account of what occurred at the 
workshop. Statements, recommendations, and opinions expressed are those of the individual 
presenters and participants and are not necessarily endorsed or veri˜ed by the National Acad-emies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. They should not be construed as re˚ecting any 
group consensus.
1The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
ther insights into, and opportunities to address, disparities in underserved 
populationsﬂ (IOM, 2011, p. 38).
To explore this potential, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineer
-ing, and Medicine™s Roundtable on the Promotion of Health Equity and the 
Elimination of Health Disparities held a workshop at Wayne State Univer
-sity on October 2, 2014. The focus of the workshop was on (1) how com-munities are using digital health technologies2 to improve health outcomes 
for racial and ethnic minority populations, (2) how community engagement 
can improve access to high-quality health information for members of these 
groups, and (3) models of successful technology-based strategies to reduce 
health disparities. Box 1-1 lists the goals of the workshop.
The workshop was held in Detroit, Michigan, on the campus of Wayne 
State University, to emphasize both the promises and the perils cited in 
the workshop™s title. Detroit has some of the worst health disparities in 
the nation, yet it is also at the center of work on reducing these dispari-ties, noted M. Roy Wilson, the president of Wayne State University and a 
former of˜cial at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in charge of the 
NIH health disparities research agenda. Wayne State University has the only 
NIH perinatal research branch outside of the NIH campus in Bethesda, 
Maryland, partly because of the high infant mortality rate in the city (dis-cussed in more detail in Chapter 2). Wayne State also has been a leader in 
other areas related to health disparities. The Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer 
Institute has been looking at the determinants of health among survivors of 
cancer who have access to the Internet and those who do not. A research 
project in the medical school is looking at the effect of text message remind-ers about adherence to blood pressure medication. An interdisciplinary 
team has developed a sensor that includes a heart monitor and a Bluetooth 
connection to a smartphone to identify potentially dangerous heart rate 
increases. ﬁWe are very proud of everything that is going on here,ﬂ said 
Wilson.
This report provides a summary of the presentations at the workshop 
and the discussions that occurred among workshop participants. (Com-ments made by presenters during the discussion sessions generally are 
included in the summaries of their talks.) The observations made in the 
report are of the workshop as a whole and should not be seen as the con
-clusions of the workshop participants, the Roundtable on the Promotion of 
Health Equity and the Elimination of Health Disparities, or the Academies. 
However, they provide many valuable insights into future steps that could 
be taken to reduce health disparities in the United States. 
2  For the purposes of this workshop, ﬁdigital health technologiesﬂ encompasses all types of 
personal technology. However, the majority of the technologies described in this summary are 
cell phone based or interactive websites.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION OF THE WORKSHOP
 3HIGHLIGHTS OF THE WORKSHOP
In the ˜nal session of the workshop, Gillian Barclay, vice president of 
the Aetna Foundation, summarized some of the main messages that she 
heard during the presentations and discussions. The following draws on 
Barclay™s remarks and on comments made over the course of the day to 
identify the major ideas that arose during the workshop:
Ł The main point gleaned from the workshop, said Barclay, is that 
technology ﬁis really all about people.ﬂ Addressing racial and 
ethnic health disparities and increasing health equity in the United 
States ﬁgoes back to the foundation of placing people ˜rst and not 
technology ˜rst,ﬂ she said.
Ł Community engagement is essential in designing, evaluating, and 
adapting technology-based interventions aimed at improving health 
in racial and ethnic minority groups.
Ł Reducing health disparities requires going beyond both the use of 
technology and health care in general to a ﬁhealth-in-all-policiesﬂ 
approach. Education, transportation, and other sectors can all 
contribute to the reduction of disparities.
Ł Systems and patterns are major determinants of health disparities. 
Looking at the potential of technology to reduce health disparities 
requires consideration of these systems and patterns, not just par-ticular events.BOX 1-1 Goals of the Workshop
  
Discuss the opportunities to use digital health technologies as a population 
health strategy to reduce health disparities and promote health equity in the 
United States. 
  
Explore how racial and ethnic minority populations and communities in the 
United States can be engaged in efforts that use digital health strategies to 
reduce racial and ethnic health disparities. 
  
Develop effective strategies that engage racial and ethnic minority populations 
and communities in using digital health strategies to reduce health disparities. 
  
Explore the different types of digital health technologies used in efforts to 
reduce health disparities and promote health equity in the United States. 
  
Highlight examples of digital health strategies designed to reduce health dis
-parities and promote health equity in the United States. 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
ORGANIZATION OF THE REPORT
Following this introduction to the report, Chapter 2 summarizes the 
remarks of the two keynote presenters at the workshop, both of whom 
provided overarching views of health disparities and technology issues on 
local, regional, and national levels.Chapter 3 examines a wide range of issues associated with the use of 
technology to reduce health disparities, including health literacy, commu
-nity engagement, and the role of theory in program development. Chapter 4 
looks in greater detail at two speci˜c programs as a way of exploring how 
these issues play out in practice.
Chapter 5 considers the broader policy and technology issues that 
shape health equity initiatives. In Chapter 6, two respondents identi˜ed 
the key messages emerging from the presentations and discussions at the 
workshop.Appendix A provides descriptions of nine programs that workshop par
-ticipants learned about during a ﬁvirtual poster sessionﬂ at lunch. Appen-dix B contains the workshop agenda and Appendix C gives biographies of 
the speakers at the workshop.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Technology and Health Disparities
Important Points Highlighted by the SpeakersŁ The tremendous expansion in the use of technology provides 
many opportunities to work with communities to reduce health 
disparities. (Nilsen, Wisdom)
Ł In particular, mobile technologies have a unique potential to 
reduce disparities because of their extensive use in racial and 
ethnic minority communities. (Nilsen, Wisdom)
Ł As just one example, a community online campaign in the city 
of Detroit has substantially reduced the infant mortality rate 
in targeted communities. (Wisdom)
Ł The use of technology can be resisted if it does not produce ben-e˜ts that outweigh the time and efforts its use entails. (Nilsen)
Ł Community engagement can help shape interventions that effec-tively address the needs of the community. (Nilsen, Wisdom)
Globally, more people own a mobile phone than own a toothbrush, 
noted Kimberlydawn Wisdom, senior vice president of community health 
and equity and chief wellness and diversity of˜cer in the Henry Ford 
Health System, in her opening keynote address at the conference. Seventy-seven percent of U.S. seniors own a cell phone or smartphone. By 2020, 
a projected 200 billion smart devices will communicate through wireless 
technologiesŠthe equivalent of 26 devices for every person on the planet 
(Cisco, 2015). Already, 42 percent of U.S. hospitals are using digital health 
5The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
technology to treat patients, and technology use is growing ﬁat an expo-nential pace,ﬂ said Wisdom.
EQUITY AT THE HENRY FORD HEALTH SYSTEM
The Henry Ford Health System, which was founded by Henry Ford in 
1915 and has ˜ve hospitals in southeastern Michigan, has a major focus 
on the elimination of health and health care disparities, said Wisdom. Its 
vision statement is ﬁtransforming lives and communities through health and 
wellnessŠone person at a time,ﬂ and one of the seven pillars upholding 
that mission is community. The system has pursued its goal of health and 
health care equity through grant funding and system support, but support 
for the mission also has been personal. Wisdom recounted an episode when 
she wanted to publish a paper showing that African Americans were having 
poorer outcomes related to diabetes care than their Caucasian counterparts 
in the health plan. She received the full support of the system™s chief execu
-tive of˜cer to do so. ﬁI cannot underscore that enough, because having 
individuals like that who will say, ‚Do the thing that is right, even though 
it may not re˚ect perfectly favorably on the organization,™ shows that we 
are paying attention to these things,ﬂ Wisdom said.
She also described an initiative from the 1990s in which the Detroit 
Piston™s basketball player Joe Dumars participated in what was called the 
African American Initiative for Male Health Improvement. ﬁAs we talk 
about eliminating disparities, you need to somehow ˜nd the route that is 
going to be most culturally appropriate to get the change that you need,ﬂ 
Wisdom explained.
The Institute of Medicine report 
Unequal Treatment: Confronting 
Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care (IOM, 2002) provided tre-mendous momentum by demonstrating ﬁthat the work we were doing was 
absolutely important and that those disparities were profound and per-sistent,ﬂ said Wisdom. The 
National Healthcare Disparities Report 2012 (AHRQ, 2013) likewise drew attention to what Wisdom was seeing in the 
clinic: vast differences in care and in outcomes for people of color versus 
the white population.When Wisdom returned to the Henry Ford Health System after serving 
as surgeon general for the State of Michigan, she inserted into her terms for 
returning that health disparities be integrated into the results presented to the 
board. That led to the launch in 2009 of a health care equity campaign with 
the goal of increasing ﬁknowledge, awareness, and opportunities to ensure 
that health care equity is understood and practiced by Henry Ford providers 
and other staff, the research community, and the community at large.ﬂ
11  More information about the campaign is available at http://www.henryford.com/healthcare
 equitycampaign (accessed May 18, 2016). 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY AND HEALTH DISPARITIES
 7THE POTENTIAL OF TECHNOLOGY
The Henry Ford Health System has been working directly with com-munities to eliminate the causes of disparities. For example, it launched a 
LiveWell Center of Excellence, which involved the development of a stra
-tegic plan, the launch of a new website (HenryFordLiveWell.com), and the 
convening of a childhood obesity prevention initiative. It also has worked 
with thousands of young people in the community to drive environmental 
and behavioral change.Technology has played a greater and greater role in these efforts, 
 
Wisdom observed. For example, young people use technology extensively, 
so the task with them has been to use technology as a tool to advance the 
system™s messageŠincluding working with a local rapper to develop a 
health-promoting song that was posted on YouTube.
The Henry Ford Health System also has been using a variety of tech
-nologies to communicate with and monitor patients remotely to improve 
health outcomes. Electronic medicine-dispensing systems can reduce the 
risk of medication mismanagement. Telehealth systems can help patients 
with chronic disease manage their own care and help prevent visits to 
emergency rooms and hospitalizations.With the Partnership for a Healthier America led by First Lady Michelle 
Obama, the system has joined in the Healthy Hospital Food Commitment, 
which includes a third-party vendor that audits compliance.2 The com-mitment includes a smartphone app that builds menus, provides complete 
nutrition information, offers other healthy living tools, and supports the 
5-2-1-0 message (targeted at children), which stands for consumption of 
5 or more fruits and vegetables per day, 2 hours or less of recreational 
screen time, 1 hour of physical activity, and 0 sugar-sweetened beverages. 
ﬁWe know that many disparities exist around diabetes related to weight,ﬂ 
said Wisdom, adding ﬁWe are trying to ˜nd ways to use technology to 
engage young people and their families.ﬂ
The Henry Ford Health System also has been working with three 
other major health systems in the area to address the infant mortality chal-lenge. As Wisdom noted, in the city of Detroit, an average of about 200 
babies die per year. ﬁIt is astounding that you could be here with these 
four  mega-health-systems, [and] with the NIH perinatal branch right here, 
and yet we see these appallingly high infant mortality rates,ﬂ she said. In a 
collaborative effort, the four health systems have come together as leaders, 
funders, strategists, communicators, and implementers to address these and 
other disparities.2  The third-party audit is conducted by the Altarum Institute, Center for Active Design, 
Food & Nutrition Policy Consultants LLC, RTI International, and the Rudd Center for Food 
Policy and Obesity.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
As part of its effort to eliminate infant mortality, the system has received 
a grant from the W.K. Kellogg Foundation to use social media to inspire 
change through the Women-Inspired Neighborhood (WIN) network. A 
recently launched website (www.WINnetworkDetroit.org) seeks to empower 
not just low-income pregnant women but women of reproductive age, 
 
mothers, and caregiversŠﬁthe grandmothers and the aunts and the sisters,ﬂ 
said Wisdom. The network is active on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and 
blogs. ﬁIf we are going to address disparities, we are going to have to reach 
people in the model and medium in which they are most comfortable.ﬂ
In three neighborhoods with high infant mortality where the network 
is active, more than 200 women have delivered without an infant death. 
ﬁ[We have] driven the infant mortality rate to zero. We are really pleased 
with that,ﬂ Wisdom explained.
3One interesting observation has been that a major contributor to infant 
mortality is social isolation. ﬁYou would think, with all this technology, 
how could people experience social isolation? But there is a tremendous 
amount of people feeling disconnected,ﬂ she said. In response, the network 
has been developing ways to hold virtual sessions with women to teach and 
reassure them even when it is dif˜cult for them to travel.
THE PERILS OF TECHNOLOGY
Technology is a ﬁtremendous tool,ﬂ said Wisdom, but it also has 
potential perils. As an example, Wisdom cited the recent effort to collect 
data about race, ethnicity, and primary language at a detailed level. To 
develop a common platform, the system borrowed a tool developed by 
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation called We Ask Because We Care. 
However, collecting race, ethnicity, and primary language data ﬁis a heavy 
lift at the point of service,ﬂ which led to resistance from the frontline staff, 
she explained.The use of the electronic health record (EHR) to reduce disparities 
is another example of potential dif˜culties. ﬁMany individuals, whether it is 
meaningful use or in other arenas, have access to the technology, but using 
it in a way that can truly improve outcomes and close the health disparities 
gap is a major issue,ﬂ said Wisdom. With EHRs, providers can have their 
ﬁfaces glued to a screen,ﬂ giving them less time to interact personally with 
patients, adding that ﬁit is great to have this technology, but if it limits that 
face-to-face time, if it limits the ability to really understand and communi-cate well to patients, it could have an unintended consequence.ﬂ
In addition, the Henry Ford Health System uses a tool known as 
MyChart to give patients access to their medical record. But surveys have 
3  The previous infant mortality rate was 15 deaths per 1,000 births.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY AND HEALTH DISPARITIES
 9shown that only about 12 percent of adults in the system have pro˜cient 
health literacyŠde˜ned as a patient™s ability to obtain, understand, and act 
on health informationŠwhich has consequences in terms of patient use of 
health information. (Health literacy is discussed in more detail in the next 
chapter.) Wisdom noted, ﬁOne of the things that worries me is that, as we 
try to close the digital divide, unintended consequences of widening the 
divide in terms of outcomes could be an issue.ﬂ
Additional challenges include 
Ł  evaluating tools like MyChart to ensure that different racial/ethnic 
population subgroups are using it at the same rate,
Ł  the potential loss of personal interactions as technology becomes 
more prominent in health care, and
Ł  making the data accessible in communities.
Real-time data are important to eliminate disparities, because much of 
the public health data related to disparities are dated, said Wisdom, adding, 
ﬁWe need to be able to understand, in real time, what the data show, as 
well as communicate that to the community, so they can become partners 
in helping us eliminate health and health care disparities.ﬂ
ENGAGING COMMUNITIESAs was discussed throughout the workshop, community engagement 
has been a key component of the Henry Ford Health System™s efforts. For 
example, the system has used community-based participatory research to 
bring audiences to the table, where their voices can be heard while initia-tives are being planned. Focus groups are another way to involve com-munities, although Wisdom said that communities need to be involved in 
meetings in an ongoing way. 
On our evaluation team for our WIN Network Detroit, we had a com-munity health worker at every single meeting [who provided] invaluable 
information. For instance, we were saying how do we incentivize our 
target women to do certain things. She said a lot of the women are hav-ing case workers come to their home because they want child protective 
services and people coming to review their home setting, what they are 
doing, and how they are evolving as mothers and caretakers. They said 
having them go through a class and giving them a certi˜cate to show their 
caseworker would be of tremendous value. That is better than a $5 or 
$10 gift certi˜cate to go buy something at Target. Give them a certi˜cate 
to show that they are meeting the requirements in order to protect their 
children and keep their families. That kind of informationŠI would have 
never come up with that.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
Many of the community health workers are from the neighbor-hoods they (the community health workers) are serving. The women with 
whom they work see them as best friends. ﬁThey are my aunt. They are my 
 
con˜dante. . . . For the medical community, we want the data. We want 
all the hard stuff. [But] those relationships are key. They share informa
-tion that they ordinarily would not share with their provider,ﬂ Wisdom 
explained.Community health workers are directly involved in the research and 
outreach being done by the system. They have been included in abstracts 
presented at national meetings. One community health worker spoke at the 
American Public Health Association meeting and ﬁhad the room in tears,ﬂ 
according to Wisdom, adding, ﬁShe did a much better job than I did in 
terms of engaging the audience.ﬂ
People who are not traditional health care professionals also need to 
be empowered, she said. For example, when students learn about healthy 
eating, they can be ambassadors to their peers. ﬁIn many ways, they are 
our secret weapon, because . . . other students in their class will listen a lot 
better to them, particularly when they are in the lunch line, than they will 
to somebody coming in with a white coat saying you ought to do this,ﬂ she 
said. The system also has been examining technology that can help people 
learn through games, and it is very interested in mobile applications that 
are patient centered and easily accessible, even for patients who are not 
highly health literate.A researcher at the Henry Ford Health System recently received a 
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute grant to pursue patient 
engagement and patient-driven research in an effort to increase dissemi-nation and implementation. The objectives are to understand the choices 
patients face, to align research questions and methods with patient needs, 
and to provide patients and clinicians with information for better pro-cesses and decisions. ﬁWe are going to learn a lot in that process,ﬂ said 
Wisdom.
The Henry Ford Health System is collaborating with more than 40 
leading nonpro˜t health care organizations to create a menu of proven com-munity health practices that work ﬁfrom the top of the mission statement 
to the bottom line,ﬂ Wisdom observed. The objective is to show that there 
is an economic case around eliminating health and health care disparities. 
Another objective is to make technology the servant and not the master of 
the vision, in part by developing speci˜cations and a framework for the 
development and acquisition of information technology that forms a single 
integrated system for clinical and community settings.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY AND HEALTH DISPARITIES
 11THE DIVERSITY OF HOPE
The world will look much different in 5 years as technologies develop 
and as policies and laws such as the Affordable Care Act continue to be 
implemented, Wisdom said. Health care will be much more patient and 
community centered, with health care professionals supporting the efforts 
of individuals. ﬁIt is going to become very exciting,ﬂ she noted.
Individual habits also can change. For example, Wisdom pointed to 
the spreading idea that sitting is the new smoking, adding that ﬁI envision 
a future where at meetings like this people will be standing and walking 
even 2 miles an hour on some kind of device. . . . If you have gone to your 
meetings for the day, you will have gotten your 10,000 or 20,000 steps in 
because you have been in meetings all day.ﬂ At Henry Ford Health System, 
for example, some meetings are done while walking around the building.
Winston closed by showing a mural that is composed of many hun
-dreds of individual drawings submitted by people in the community. Each 
small tile in the mural represents the artwork of someone who was asked 
to envision the future, and contributors can zoom in to their drawings on 
a special website. The mural4 is being put on buildings in three neighbor-hoods in Detroit ﬁas a way to show that we are there and you have a voice 
and we want together to bring hope to the community,ﬂ she concluded.
REALIZING THE PROMISE OF MOBILE TECHNOLOGIESFor much of the history of the computer age, computers have been tied 
to plugs, whether for power or for Internet access, which meant that some 
people could access and use computers while others could not, observed 
Wendy Nilsen, health scientist administrator at the Of˜ce of Behavioral and 
Social Sciences Research and program director for the Smart and Connected 
Health program at the National Science Foundation (NSF), in the second 
keynote address of the workshop. But now the world has gone mobile, 
and ﬁMobile is where we can ˜nally reduce the digital divide,ﬂ she began.
At the National Institutes of Health, mHealth refers to any wireless 
device carried by or on a person that accepts or transmits health data and 
information. Such devices include sensors, such as implantable miniature 
sensors and nanosensors, monitors such as wireless accelerometers and 
blood pressure and glucose monitors, and mobile phones and tablets.
Mobile technologies ﬁcan expand the things we care about in health to 
the real world instead of having it stay only in rari˜ed academic centers,ﬂ 
4  An image of the mural is available in the speaker presentation by Kimberlydawn Wis
-dom, posted on the Roundtable website at: http://www.nationalacademies.org/hmd/Activities/
 SelectPops/HealthDisparities/2014-OCT-02.aspx (accessed May 18, 2016) and on the Project 
S.N.A.P. webpage: http://projectsnap.org/mural/winnetworkdetroit (accessed May 18, 2016). 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
said Nilsen. These technologies can generate user-friendly tools for enhanc
-ing health. They can change the questions people ask about their own 
health and about the information available to them. These technologies 
can scale up to entire populations, and they can facilitate more ef˜cient and 
representative clinical trials. Nilsen discussed each of these topics in turn.
MOBILE TECHNOLOGIES AND HEALTH DISPARITIES
mHealth technologies can help reduce disparities in a variety of ways, 
Nilsen observed. First, they are used very widely. African Americans lead 
whites in their use of mobile phones, with Latinos only a few percentage 
points behind, and African Americans and Latinos lead whites in their use 
of mobile data applications. Those with less education and lower incomes 
use cell phones almost as much as others. Not everyone has access to mobile 
technologies all the time. Some people might lose coverage for a while, but 
they tend to get it back, Nilsen acknowledged.
According to national surveys, about two-thirds of cell phone owners 
˜nd themselves checking their phone for messages, alerts, or calls even 
when they do not notice the phone vibrating or ringing. Nilsen cited a 
recent newspaper article saying that many people begin to panic when 
they cannot check their cell phone for 4 hours or more. ﬁIf you walk out 
the door this morning without your laptop, without your ID badge, you 
are going to keep going. You are going to ˜gure out a way around it. If 
you walked out the door without your phone, are you going back?ﬂ she 
wondered.Young adults are leading the way in the use of mobile data applica
-tions. They also are pioneering new ways of using mobile technologiesŠfor example, by taking pictures of visible health problems and sending 
them to their health care providers. Older Americans still lag in their use 
of cell phones but increasing numbers are discovering the value of these 
technologies.One great advantage of mobile technologies is the degree to which they 
can be customized by languages, applications, ringtones, and other features, 
including how they are decorated. These technologies are ﬁintimate in a 
way that we have never had technology intimate before,ﬂ said Nilsen.
Mobile technologies can centralize communication. They can be a 
health hub, transferring photos, to-do or to-ask lists, and messages among 
patients and a care team. They can provide patients with interventions 
and information programs alongside self-tracked information. Patients can 
ask questions when those questions occur to them, not in a rushed clini-cal encounter. Mobile technologies also could allow patients to respond 
to short and brief questionnaires rather than long forms. ﬁWhy can™t we 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY AND HEALTH DISPARITIES
 13think the way industry has been thinkingŠgetting a lot of information, 
constantly updated, but in the same way doing it simply?ﬂ Nilsen asked.
Finally, mobile technologies can greatly increase the representativeness 
of clinical research. Patient-generated data can be combined with clinical 
information, assessment data, and treatment plans to make what Nilsen 
called a ﬁfabulous health stew.ﬂ Technology could gather the information 
that is routinely gathered in doctors™ of˜ces, such as weight and blood 
pressure information, and it can collect such information in an ongoing 
way and not at one point. Very few patients ever go to academic medical 
centers, which tend to see only the most complex and hardest cases, yet this 
is where most research is carried out. Technologies could make it possible 
to do such research remotely, she said, adding, ﬁWe can have high touch 
when we need, but can we have tech touch the rest of the time, so people 
do not have to come to an academic center?ﬂ
USING MOBILE TECHNOLOGIES TO CHANGE BEHAVIOR
Mobile technologies are clearly changing behavior, said Nilsen, though 
not always for the better. ﬁThink about what Madison Avenue is doing. 
They are using YouTube. They are using Twitter. They are using apps. They 
are using all of this to change behavior. Let us change it back. Let us get it 
the way we need it,ﬂ she commented.
Mobile technologies provide opportunities for engagement that rival 
unhealthy competition, Nilsen said. Mobile technologies provide the poten-tial to make healthy behaviors enjoyable and desirable. They can get people 
moving and eating better. They provide real-time information when and 
where people need it, and they are integrated into people™s lives. ﬁThink 
of how we can capture all that glitzy world that we never could touch in 
health,ﬂ she said. For example, smartphones could tell when someone is at 
a fast food restaurant and suggest healthy options. Another example Nilsen 
mentioned is the iPeriod app, which allows women to track their menstrual 
cycles, adding ﬁWhy aren™t we thinking about how you partner with iPeriod 
to make sure not only are you tracking your period, so you are not getting 
pregnant, but what are you doing about your diabetes, too?ﬂ
Sensors that collect information across populations and over time also 
can change behaviors. For example, body sensors being used by overweight 
young Latinas are being embraced by those who use them, she explained, 
adding, ﬁThese girls love to show off their sensors. . . . The moms said, 
‚We want to do it, too.™ﬂ Text messages can be designed for people to 
manage chronic diseases. Health care providers can intervene remotely 
with greater frequency than for traditional care, with real-time manage-ment and a reduction in acute care. People can use their technologies to 
have private or dif˜cult questions answered, enabling a proactive, timely, 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
person-centered approach to health care. Wireless sensors can connect with 
the electronic health record, providing information for predictive health 
assessment frameworks.
To reduce disparities, people need actionable data, said Nilsen, explain
-ing, ﬁIt has to be good for something. It cannot just cause a liability. It has 
to be able to provide information to everybody that works.ﬂ Communities 
also need to be integral to the planning effort, said Nilsen. ﬁWhat I think 
would work does not matter. I am not the one it is going to target,ﬂ she 
said. Only by spending lots of time talking with people, from high users to 
nonusers, is it possible to ˜gure out what will work. ﬁWhen they use their 
device, what kind of things would work for them? How would it work for 
them? That is when it is successful,ﬂ she said.
One way to teach people about these approaches is to involve young 
people, who may not be formally trained but are intuitively good at using 
devices. In Nilsen™s work, young people have become very involved. ﬁI 
work at NSF, and one of the things that we ˜nd is [young people] are very 
interested in this area, even in high school, looking at how do you build an 
app, how do you build a program, how do you think about that,ﬂ she said.The missing link, said Nielsen in response to a question, is user-centered 
designŠcreating technologies, programs, and information that people want to use. Industry has much to teach health care about this issue, as do the 
users of technologies and communities as a whole. Technologies such as 
YouTube have been successful in capturing huge audiences. If such tech
-nologies could be directed to reducing health disparities, great progress 
could be made. People are using technology to change behavior, Nilsen 
concluded, adding, ﬁYou can too.ﬂ
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Important Points Highlighted by the SpeakersŁ Digital technologies have attributes that distinguish them from 
other interventions to reduce health disparities, including high 
rates of use in racial and ethnic minority communities. (Horn, 
Parker)Ł Greater communication between the developers and users of 
technology could reduce the disconnection between where digi
-tal strategies are developed and where the needs are greatest. 
(Horn, Norman, Parker)Ł The optimal use of technologies requires having good theories 
about why and where they work. (Norman, Parker, Pavel)
Ł As people are overwhelmed by the amount and complexity 
of information they receive, they can be expected to question 
some of the systems enabled by digital technologies. (Parker)
Ł Patients are the experts on their own health, which requires 
that health care systems ˜nd ways to engage patients more 
effectively. (Horn, Parker)
Four presentations at the workshop examined the broad issues that 
affect any effort to use technology to reduce health disparities. These issues 
range widely, from health literacy to community engagement, from the role 
of theory in program development to the key role of design in technology 
development. The overall picture that emerged from the presentations is of 
a complex but navigable path toward greater health equity.
3Engaging Providers and Racial/Ethnic 
Minority Patients in Digital Strategies
15The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
CREATING A MOVEMENT FOR CHANGE
ﬁWhy do we think digital strategies will make a difference in address
-ing health disparities?ﬂ asked Ivor Horn, medical director of the Center for 
Diversity and Health Equity and professor of pediatrics at the University 
of Washington School of Medicine. ﬁThere are so many interventions that 
have been developed over the years, and yet health disparities persist in 
racial and ethnic minority communities across the country. How is this 
different from the behavioral interventions that we have done?ﬂ she asked.First, she said, mobile technologies are different than other innovations 
in health care. As observed in the keynote addresses (see Chapter 2), racial 
and ethnic minorities have been early adopters of mobile technologies. 
With smartphones in particular, racial and ethnic minorities have overtaken 
whites in their use of the technology.
Second, racial and ethnic minorities are leaders in the online com-munity. For example, African Americans spend more than twice as much 
time per person on Web-hosting sites compared with the average of all 
con sumers. ﬁRacial and ethnic minorities are not just consumers,ﬂ said 
Horn,  ﬁThey are actually producers of information,ﬂ which translates into 
an ability to in˚uence the content of the discussion in mainstream media.
Third, racial and ethnic minorities have a clear interest in using digi-tal health. In a recent survey done by Horn and her colleagues of African 
American parents in an urban clinic, 90 percent said that they want to 
receive health information online. Other studies have shown that solid 
majorities of parents in urban pediatric clinics use smartphones as their 
primary way of getting online, Horn said, explaining, ﬁNot only are they 
there, not only are they making a difference, but they are really interested 
in having a health discussion.ﬂ
Despite the tremendous opportunity to use digital strategies to address 
health disparities, progress has been slow. One major problem, Horn 
observed, is that there is a disconnection between where digital strategies 
are developed and where the needs are. ﬁThe motivation for the develop-ment of digital strategies is primarily driven by ˜nancial gain rather than 
improving health outcomes. As a result, there is very little motivation to 
commit to the sometimes lengthy process . . . of developing an evidence base 
to determine which tools move the needle. Without evidence, providers are 
not going to adopt them,ﬂ she explained.
Another barrier to progress is that the effort to reduce health disparities 
does not present a common enemy against which multiple stakeholders can 
rally. Action against climate change faces a similar obstacle, Horn noted. 
People can take many different approaches to address climate change, from 
driving an electric car to recycling and composting, but the policy frame-work and infrastructure do not exist to focus and magnify these efforts.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGAGING PROVIDERS AND RACIAL/ETHNIC MINORITY PATIENTS
 17New technologies are driving a shift in communication, said Horn. In 
health care, providers are trained to communicate with each other. Now, 
technology is forcing providers to learn how to communicate with patients 
and with the community in ways they have not done before. She explained:To do this, we have to go to the patient and to the community to under
-stand what the need is, because now they are communicating back to us. 
We have not necessarily been trained to listen. We have been trained to 
hear, but we do not listen. We hear what we want to hear through our lens 
of what we are trained to do and to put it into our differential diagnosis, 
but then we do not hear the relevant thing that we need to hear because 
we have already moved on while they are still communicating. We need to 
start ˜guring out how to make that paradigm shift.
Digital health strategies need to be grounded in the appropriate infra-structure and policies if they are to be effective, Horn said. Also, to be 
sustainable, these strategies need to be connected to grassroots efforts, orga-nizations, and infrastructure. ﬁRosa Parks was not just a seamstress who 
sat down on the bus and decided she did not want to get up,ﬂ said Horn. 
ﬁShe was part of a strategic grassroots movement connected to a plan to 
in˚uence policy and make changes.ﬂ
Digital health strategies present a unique opportunity to address health 
disparities, but ﬁwe need to leverage the trusted leadership of online racial 
and ethnic minority communities to draw attention to the injustice of health 
inequities,ﬂ Horn stated. Doing so would create a call to action and enable 
people to become learners in the context of a community where leaders 
already exist.As an example, Horn described a series of focus groups on technology 
use done with sickle cell patients who were transitioning out of pediatric 
care facilities into adult care facilities. When asked how they already were 
using technology in their day-to-day lives, focus group members said they 
were, for example, texting their parents to get lists of medications, or using 
games to distract themselves when they were having a pain crisis. ﬁWhat-ever you create needs to be hackable,ﬂ said Horn, ﬁmeaning that the patient 
who has it needs to be able to make it their own.ﬂ Horn also works with 
children as young as 2 years old who are creating digital narratives using 
a tablet. ﬁThey are teaching us how to utilize that tool if we listen, if we 
look, if we pay attention,ﬂ she said.
In taking on this kind of work, several important questions need to be 
answered, Horn noted. Where are the communities online? Who are the 
leaders in those communities? How can the health care community work 
with those leaders to ensure the information people receive is the right 
information?Partnering with racial and ethnic minority developers needs to be 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
paired with outreach to of˚ine organizations and systems, such as churches 
and community organizations that can push for better access to health care, 
Horn said. The Affordable Care Act has increased coverage in particular 
communities, such as the Hispanic community and states that are offering 
increased coverage. ﬁWe need to encourage patients and communities to 
drive and push for that and ˜ght for that. Without these tangible, sustain
-able movements for change, we will just be wearing more stylish Google 
glasses and quantifying ourselves while people continue to prematurely die 
all around us,ﬂ she concluded.
THE VALUE OF THEORIES
ﬁEvidence, as important as it is, is not enough,ﬂ said Misha Pavel, pro-fessor of practice jointly appointed between the College of Computer and 
Information Sciences and the Bouvé College of Health Sciences at North-eastern University. ﬁIt is not enough to know that something worked or it 
did not work. We need to know why, because if we don™t, we don™t know 
what to change,ﬂ he said.
Technology has the potential to create important changes in behavior 
over the next decade, and, as Pavel said, ﬁBehaviors are killing us.ﬂ At least 
40 percent of premature mortality is the result of people™s behaviors. The 
problem is that behaviors are hard to change. Sexual behaviors, alcohol 
and drug use, smoking, a sedentary lifestyle, and even sleeping patternsŠwhich are closely related to stress and its negative consequencesŠare deeply 
engrained behaviors.Human behaviors produce health states and biological indicators that 
can be measured. However, a connection needs to be drawn between what 
is being measured and what is of concern, Pavel stated. For example, blood 
pressure is of interest for what it signi˜es about the health of the cardio
-vascular system. ﬁWe need to have some way of transforming what we 
measure to what we want to know,ﬂ said Pavel, ﬁthen we can close the loop 
and intervene in an optimal way.ﬂ
The proliferation of mobile technologies can help greatly both with the 
measures of health indicators and with interventions. Indicators that can be 
measured range all the way from glucose levels to a person™s mood. Mobile 
technologies also can sense the context a person is in and initiate questions 
or interventions at the appropriate time. For example, they can remind 
someone to take a medicine or make a measurement when that person is 
in the right circumstance.
However, the optimal use of technologies requires having a good 
theory about why and where they work. A good theory ﬁis going to not 
only drive your design, but also the questions that you ask,ﬂ said Pavel. 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGAGING PROVIDERS AND RACIAL/ETHNIC MINORITY PATIENTS
 19Even when a theory is wrong, demonstrating that it is wrong can result 
in progress.
Mobile technologies can be used to do much more than has been done 
to date, Pavel observed. For example, he described a randomized controlled 
trial on the use of mobile technologies to change people™s weight. One 
group got a traditional weight control intervention, while another group 
received an intervention that used mobile technologies. ﬁWhat we do is 
build these two process models to characterize outreach performance. Once 
you have a model, then you can develop the most optimal intervention that 
maintains the weight,ﬂ he explained.
A major conclusion was that the use of mobile technologies worked for 
some people and not for others. The challenge thus has evolved from under
-standing the behavior of groups to modeling the behaviors of individuals to 
be able to predict which individuals will bene˜t from an intervention. Pavel 
explained, ﬁWhat we need to do is model [the behavior of] individuals and 
be able to predict what they will do.ﬂ
Older people can pose unique problems, Pavel noted in response to a 
question, because many of them ﬁapproach technology with suspicion.ﬂ 
For example, one of older patients™ highest concerns is cognitive decline. In 
response, ﬁWe use games and cognitive games that enable them to practice 
various cognitive skills,ﬂ he noted. Also, using Skype, older patients can 
˜nd each other and build communities, adding ﬁWe would have never been 
able to anticipate that.ﬂ
In response to another comment, Pavel pointed to the dif˜culty of keep-ing up with technology. A study done of a technology, like personal digital 
assistants, can be obsolete by the time the study is published because the 
technology is no longer being used. At the same time, mobile technology 
provides very rapid access to information and data. ﬁWe can collect data 
in a way we have never been able to do before. As a result, we are begin-ning to think about randomized controlled trials and evidence gathering as 
a much more dynamic process. . . . But there is also always going to be a 
bit of a gap,ﬂ he noted.A fundamental need, Pavel concluded, is for a vision of what health 
care will look like in 20 years. Then steps can be taken to help the system 
evolve toward that vision. Developing the basic principles that will drive 
progress entails making dif˜cult social and economic decisions, but ﬁwe 
have to face it,ﬂ he concluded.A HEALTH LITERACY PERSPECTIVE ON HEALTH DISPARITIES
ﬁHow do you engage providers and patients in digital strategies to pro-mote health equity and reduce disparities?ﬂ asked Ruth Parker, professor of 
medicine, pediatrics, and public health at the Emory University School of 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
Medicine. The research on this question is nascent, Parker noted, and many 
questions need to be answered, including the following:
Ł Which digital strategies would do this?
Ł What are patient-centered, health-literate digital strategies?
Ł What is known about the value of strategies, in terms of both 
quality and cost, as the affordability of health care delivery is 
addressed?Ł How do trust, civility, and social impactŠfor example, the effects 
of digital technologies on the environmentŠcome into play?
Parker focused mostly on issues of health literacy during her talk, since, as the Institute of Medicine has observed, ﬁEfforts to improve quality, to 
reduce costs, and to reduce disparities cannot proceed without simultaneous 
improvements in health literacyﬂ (IOM, 2004, p. xiv). In an effort to de˜ne 
health literacy, a group of authors in the discussion paper 
Ten Attributes of 
Health Literate Health Care Organizations identi˜ed the following qualities 
(Brach et al., 2012): 1. Has leadership that makes health literacy integral to its mission, 
structure, and operations.
 2.
 Integrates health literacy into planning, evaluation measures, 
patient safety, and quality improvement.
 3.
 Prepares the workforce to be health literate and monitors progress.
 4. Includes populations served in the design, implementation, and 
evaluation of health information and services.
 5.
 Meets the needs of populations with a range of health literacy skills while avoiding stigmatization.
 6. Uses health literacy strategies in interpersonal communications, 
and con˜rms understanding at all points of contact.
 7.
 Provides easy access to health information and services and naviga-tion assistance. 8.
 Designs and distributes print, audiovisual, and social media content 
that is easy to understand and act on.
 9.
 Addresses health literacy in high-risk situations, including care 
transitions and communications about medicines.
10.
 Communicates clearly what health plans cover and what indi
-viduals will have to pay for services.
Many of these attributes have direct parallels with the health literacy 
of individuals. As an example, Parker cited the ˜nal attribute on coverage 
and cost. ﬁA lot of the transformation of health care organizations will 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGAGING PROVIDERS AND RACIAL/ETHNIC MINORITY PATIENTS
 21come with cost transparency,ﬂ she said, because people do not want to 
waste money.
The main lesson that Parker drew from this list is that patients are 
the real experts. As one of Parker™s patients once told her, ﬁI know what I 
know. I also know more than I think I do.ﬂ Therefore, to work effectively 
with patients, the health care system will need to partner with them, Parker 
explained. Health care systems also need to ˜nd ways to engage patients 
more effectively, she said later in response to a question. ﬁI have never 
heard anybody say, ‚I get to go to the doctor today.™ It™s ‚I have to go.™ 
Anything we can do to try to make it engaging, to try to make it more fun, 
that is a good thing,ﬂ she said.She described several projects in which partnerships and engagement 
led to important advances. During the surge of H1N1 cases in the United 
States, she and her colleagues worked with the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention to develop an online self-triaging ˚u website. With input 
from experts and from interviews with potential users, the developers put 
together a list of questions that would help someone know whether to go 
to an emergency room or stay home and treat their aches and fever. ﬁEvery
-body on my team got the ˚u, by the way, [but] I feel that you really do 
have to work with the target population to ˜gure out what is going on,ﬂ 
she explained. These conversations require learning to listen. Listening to 
people ﬁis the hardest part of communication,ﬂ Parker said, ﬁbecause we 
do not always hear what we want to hear.ﬂ
Another example was text4baby, in which the major mobile carriers in 
the United States waived the fees for text messages sent to pregnant women 
and mothers with babies in the ˜rst year of life. About 650,000 women 
signed up to use the system, which is still ongoing. To develop the messages, 
Parker and her colleagues went into the ˜eld and tested the messages with 
potential users. For example, the original message, ﬁThe ˚u can be danger-ous for pregnant women & their babies. Talk to your doctor about seasonal 
˚u & H1N1 ˚u shots,ﬂ was changed on the basis of this input to ﬁIf you 
get the ˚u while you are pregnant, you and your baby can get very sick. Ask your doc if you need a ˚u shot.ﬂ Besides changing the message from passive 
to active voice, the new message provided a more speci˜c action step by 
asking about getting a ˚u shot. ﬁWe tested all these early messages to get 
input from the ground before they were launched,ﬂ said Parker.
Evaluations of the text4baby project have found that text messaging is 
more common among the high-risk population than among other popula-tions (Gazmararian et al., 2012, 2014; Poorman et al., 2014). In addition, 
successful enrollment was more likely with higher health literacy.
However, these evaluations also identi˜ed several major issues that 
need to be addressed, including a lack of good theories of behavior change, 
small sample sizes, high drop-off rates, missing control groups, reliance 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
on self-reports, and a failure to tie outcomes to content. Future research, 
said Parker, needs to look at such issues as navigating mHealth initiatives 
despite lower health literacy, the use of prepaid phone cards, the delivery 
of supplemental information (such as videos, icons, or verbal narratives), 
better enrollment strategies, the effect on behaviors, and the relative effect 
of the program at different literacy levels.
Parker also discussed a study of Internet and mobile phone use among 
older Americans. In a study of about 430 subjects drawn from an academic 
medical center and four community primary care clinics, a signi˜cantly larger 
fraction of those patients with adequate health literacy had Internet access 
in their home compared to those with limited health literacy. The same is 
true for access to the Internet anywhere other than the home. These ˜ndings 
provide many opportunities for continued exploration, Parker noted.
Summing up, Parker pointed to several new directions for research and 
interventions that could help reduce health disparities. Both high-tech and 
low-tech solutions need to be evaluated, she said. Patient input and engage-ment need to be maximized to re˚ect patients™ needs, she added, while more 
practical metrics of technology use and its impact are developed. Health 
care providers also need to be educated about patient-centered, health-lit-erate digital strategies, she emphasized, with identi˜cation of best practices 
and the competencies that providers should have. ﬁI have never found a 
health of˜cer or a medical student who regularly advises patients on where 
to go for good evidence-based and useful information on the Internet or on 
their phone,ﬂ she said.During the discussion session, Parker pointed brie˚y to some of the 
privacy issues associated with digital technologies. For example, her elderly 
patients often tell her that they would like to send and receive photographs 
of their medications to know what they should be taking. But health sys-tems are concerned that doing so will raise privacy concerns. Photographing 
medications and taking pictures of clinical wounds or conditions such as 
wounds or rashes is ﬁa hot zone for action,ﬂ she said, ﬁbecause patients like it and it is user friendly. But systems do not know what to do with that.ﬂ
She concluded by quoting Kelly Johnson™s advice to ﬁkeep it simple, 
stupid.ﬂ ﬁThis is still the hallmark of great design,ﬂ she said. ﬁSimplicity 
should be the key goal.ﬂDESIGNING SYSTEMS FOR HEALTH LITERACY AND EQUITY
When the World Wide Web ˜rst became widely available in the 1990s, 
Cameron Norman, principal of CENSE Research + Design and an adjunct 
professor in the Dalla Lana School of Public Health at the University of 
Toronto, began working on eHealth literacy, which he de˜ned as ﬁthe 
ability to seek, ˜nd, understand, and appraise health information from 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGAGING PROVIDERS AND RACIAL/ETHNIC MINORITY PATIENTS
 23electronic sources and apply the knowledge gained to addressing or solving 
a health problemﬂ (Norman and Skinner, 2006, p. e9). But this was early 
in the history of the Web, he added. Since then, his views have evolved. In 
a 2011 paper, he wrote:
Just as the ˜eld of eHealth is dynamic and evolving, so too is the context 
where eHealth literacy is applied and understood. The original [model] of 
eHealth literacy and the scale used to assess it were developed at a time 
when the ˜rst generation of Web tools gained prominence before the rise 
of social media. The rapid shifts in the informational landscape created 
by Web 2.0 tools and environments suggests it might be time to revisit the 
concept of eHealth literacy and consider what a second release might look 
like. (Norman, 2011, p. e125)
The Web originally was designed to communicate information to the 
world. In the health context, the idea was that framing and delivering 
information the right way would get people to change their behavior. But 
technologies and platforms such as mobile computing, interactive video, 
Facebook, and Twitter have changed the Web, Norman said. ﬁNow we 
realize that it is much more about being able to create part of the conversa
-tion and lead the conversation.ﬂ Many interesting conversations happening 
today are not being led by experts but by members of the public. The one-way push of information remains part of the picture, but it is just a small 
part of a much more complicated world.In an earlier era, communicating was about knowing an audience and 
addressing it directly. The problem with that view is that addressing an 
audience requires accepting at the outset the basic premises that unite the 
audience. ﬁArtists do not address themselves to audiences,ﬂ Norman said, 
citing the work of the anthropologist Edmund Snow Carpenter. ﬁThey cre
-ate audiences. The artist talks to himself out loud. If what he has to say is 
signi˜cant, others hear and are affected,ﬂ he explained.
In the context of health disparities, Norman said that digital media now 
provide the ability for people to ﬁtake ownership of the issues and say, ‚If 
others are not going to do it for us, we will do it for ourselves. We will cre
-ate our own audiences.™ﬂ This is a powerful possibility, said Norman, but 
it also presents challenges.First, the volume of content that these technologies can provide is 
overwhelming. ﬁDoes anybody in the room here think that they do not 
have enough e-mail?ﬂ he asked. And e-mail is just one channel. Text mes
-sages, Facebook posts, tweets, and other electronic intrusions all compete 
for one™s time.
Second, the systems created around information technologies frame the 
context of information. Norman quoted the historian of technology Melvin 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
Kranzberg, who established as his ˜rst law of technology that ﬁtechnology 
is neither good nor bad; nor is it neutralﬂ (Kranzberg, 1995, p. 5). People 
are expected to make complex health decisions using sophisticated infor-mation that is coming at them at light speed. As people are overwhelmed 
by the amount and complexity of information they receive, they can be 
expected to question some of the systems enabled by digital technologies. 
People need to think about what they are gaining and what they are giving 
up through their use of technology, Norman observed. ﬁWhat are we hiring 
this technology to do?ﬂ he asked.
The systems created around technologies also have distinct drawbacks. 
An example is the ad content and other distractions, such as click bait, 
transmitted with electronic information to support those communications. 
Norman explained that ﬁyour life is time. The more time you are spending 
on this, [the more] it is part of your life. But is that the life you want?ﬂ
Finally, technology is inserting itself into parts of people™s lives that 
were once technology free, ﬁlike walking a dog, or walking across the street 
with a friend, or spending time with your friends or loved ones, or having 
lunch, or going on a trip and visiting the sites, or exercising,ﬂ he noted. 
New technologies can lock people into systems, Norman stated, and people 
can no longer think about systemic structures when they are locked into 
those systems. Health disparities originate in systemic structures and pat-terns of behaviors, said Norman. These structures include how workplaces, 
communities, and social systems are set up. Technology has the potential to 
change these structures and patterns of behavior, he said, ﬁbut only if we 
are thinking about it in those terms.ﬂ
The only way to change systemic problems is to think and act sys-temically, Norman explained. That requires individuals making individual 
choices collectively in collaboration with one another. ﬁWe need to be 
thinking about what are individuals doing, but we cannot do that divorced 
from the idea of what happens within the networks in which people inter-act,ﬂ he noted. What is important is to pay attention to what is adding 
value, Norman said. People may use a technology in a way that was not 
planned but that nevertheless adds value to their lives. Also, technologies 
need to ˜t into the fabric of everyday life and not be simply an add-on if 
their use is to be sustainable.Systemic change also involves the concept of design, said Norman, 
which he views as a way of creating new things. As Nobel laureate Herbert 
Simon once observed, ﬁA designer is anyone who devises a course of action 
that seeks to change current situations into preferred onesﬂ (Simon, 1981, 
p. 129). Technologies can be designed for the collective well-being, or they 
can continue to focus people on events. ﬁWe need to be clear about our 
intentions,ﬂ said Norman, because design is about ﬁmaking intent come 
alive.ﬂThe Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGAGING PROVIDERS AND RACIAL/ETHNIC MINORITY PATIENTS
 25He closed with an observation that is attributed to Paul Batalden, 
Professor Emeritus of the Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth: ﬁEvery 
system is perfectly designed to get the results it gets.ﬂ To change the system, 
he said, ﬁWe have to listen, and then we have to lead.ﬂ
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Important Points Highlighted by the Speakers 
Ł Culturally appropriate interventions delivered through online 
technologies can meet the information needs of racial and 
 
ethnic minority communities. (Ginossar)Ł Challenges include the lack of continuous funding, the fact 
that local heroes move, and continually changing models and 
technology. (Ginossar)
Ł Community-based participatory research can be a way of con-necting technology and community so long as the community 
is integral to the process. (Baumeister, Ginossar, Loveluck)
Two presentations at the workshop looked in more detail at speci˜c 
examples of successful efforts to engage racial and ethnic minority com-munities in digital health strategies. One considered the use of technolo-gies in a Latina immigrant community in New Mexico; the other focused 
on men who have sex with men (MSM) in the Detroit metropolitan area. 
Though the targeted populations were quite different, both demonstrated 
how technology-based interventions can reach communities in ways that 
more traditional interventions cannot.
4Examples of Engaging Racial/Ethnic 
Minority Communities
 in Digital Health Strategies
27The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
REDUCING DIGITAL AND HEALTH INEQUITIES 
IN LATINA IMMIGRANT COMMUNITIES
Tamar Ginossar, who teaches courses in health communication at the 
University of New Mexico, offered a speci˜c example of how partnerships 
between universities and local communities can reduce health disparities. 
She works with a community group called La Comunidad Habla,  Spanish 
for ﬁthe community speaks.ﬂ The goal of the partnership is to reduce dispar-ities in a Latina immigrant community, but the same model can be applied to 
similar collaborations in many different community settings, Ginossar said.New Mexico is a majority minority state, with Latinos comprising 
47 percent of the population, followed by non-Hispanic whites and Native 
Americans. The state has one of the highest poverty rates in the nation, 
which in turn leads to health disparities. It also has the lowest rate of 
broadband access at home.
La Comunidad Habla works predominantly in Southeast Albuquerque, which is close to the University of New Mexico. Known as the international 
district in recognition of its diversity, it is the most ethnically diverse area 
in the state, in part because of its central location and relatively affordable 
housing. Up to 80 percent of the properties are rentals, ﬁwhich makes 
building social capital dif˜cult,ﬂ said Ginossar, ﬁbecause people do not own 
their homes, and they move in and out of the area.ﬂ
Despite increases in online access, the digital divide persists, she con-tinued. Latinos in particular are digitally marginalized in access to infor-mation technologies, in having a lower representation in the information 
technology workforce, and in their lack of culturally relevant content on 
the Web. This digital divide has marginalizing social and economic effects. 
ﬁTo make informed decision making, we need access to credible informa
-tion,ﬂ  Ginossar said, adding, ﬁWe know from the general population that 
people with access to health information online report much better health 
outcomes. Whom are we leaving out?ﬂ
Providing online access to digitally marginalized communities is nec-essary but not suf˜cient to bridge the digital divide, she said. Culturally 
appropriate interventions are needed as well to meet the information needs 
of these communities, said Ginossar, and these interventions need to pro
-vide support and culturally appropriate, low-literacy-level content.
Created in 2002 as a community outreach project of the Young Chil
-dren™s Health Center, a University of New Mexico pediatric clinic,
 La 
 Comunidad Habla
 was founded as a community digital media group to 
provide women with technological and health advocacy leadership in the 
community (Ginossar and Nelson, 2010a,b). It began with evening com-puter classes in Spanish for women, with child care provided, ﬁwhich is a 
crucial component,ﬂ Ginossar emphasized. The project provided opportuni
-The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXAMPLES OF ENGAGING RACIAL/ETHNIC MINORITY COMMUNITIES
 29ties for community members to access health information and technology, 
in part through a bilingual online health care resource directory (http://www.mycommunitynm.org). With relatively few ˜nancial resources, it 
reached and trained more than 1,000 community members and providers.
When Ginossar began working with the group, she was very interested 
in how people were using the Internet for health information seeking. She 
found that community members were particularly interested in the behav-ioral health of children. ﬁA lot of parents have questions about the devel-opment and behavior of children in all communities. There is still a lot of 
stigma attached to it and not enough services to access,ﬂ she explained. A 
literature review revealed that most children who need evaluation and treat-ment for behavioral health and developmental disorders do not receive it. 
Children are typically diagnosed after they enter school, but interventions 
are often most effective in younger children. ﬁWe are missing the crucial 
years of early intervention,ﬂ Ginossar said.
The scienti˜c literature also showed that the less stigma parents feel 
about accessing mental health care for their children and the more knowl-edge they have about early childhood development and behavior, the more 
likely they are to access services. To reduce stigma and build knowledge, 
Ginossar and her colleagues created a collaboration with mental health 
experts that had two objectives: ˜rst, to examine low-income Latina com-munity members™ information needs and information sources regarding 
early childhood behavior and development; second, to develop educational 
outreach to community members and key stakeholders. Drawing on the 
results of focus groups conducted both in English and in Spanish, the col-laboration created educational materials, including an illustrated story, or 
historieta, that combined education and entertainment.Ginossar ended by listing some of the future research goals for the col-laboration. One is to create a larger intervention to meet parental informa-tion needs and decrease the digital divide. This larger intervention could be 
systematically examinedŠfor example, Ginossar said that she was particu-larly interested in the differences and similarities between digital and print 
media, because the community organizations were using both.
The collaboration wants to build additional collaborations with health 
care providers in the community. It also wants to work with day care 
centers in the community to reach parents and caretakers. ﬁDay care in 
this community can be a great place to have interventions, and they are 
very interested in that because of their needs for accreditation,ﬂ Ginossaur 
added.Challenges include the lack of continuous funding, the fact that local 
heroes move, and continually changing models and technology. Also, com
-munity leaders continue to face various barriers, including a lack of broad-band access at home.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
Tensions can arise between the different requirements of community 
organizations and academia, Ginossar acknowledged. A lot of what goes 
on in academia is not relevant to communities or can take a long time to 
explain. Community-based participatory research involves two cultures 
coming together, which requires communication about expectations. For 
example, academics often move from project to project, which is incon-sistent with the cultures of communities. But for academics to avoid what 
has been called ﬁhelicopter research,ﬂ they need the policy and institutional 
support to remain involved with communities even after the funding is 
gone. Ginossar said that she has been fortunate to work for an institution 
that appreciates community-based participatory research and the time it 
takes.Finally, Ginossar laid out a potential model for communityŒacademic 
collaborations:Ł Identify content area with the community.
Ł Review the literature to support the need.
Ł Cocreate research questions with the community.
Ł Build on community models.
Ł Create multidisciplinary collaborations with health care providers 
and additional stakeholders.Ł Identify funding sources.Ł Write grant proposals.
Ł Write additional grant proposals.
Ł Hope that your community partners can wait.A TAILORED WEB-BASED INTERVENTION FOR YOUNG MSM
 IN SOUTHEAST MICHIGANThree-quarters of Michigan™s HIV/AIDS cases are in Southeast 
 Michigan, 
with more than 60 percent of the HIV cases in the Detroit Metro Area 
accounted for by MSM. Furthermore, six of the nine counties in Southeast 
Michigan account for the majority of the new cases of chlamydia, gonorrhea, 
and primary and secondary syphilis. Jimena Loveluck, president/CEO of the 
HIV/AIDS Resource Center (HARC), and Jose Bauermeister, associate profes
-sor of health behavior and health education and the director of the Center 
for Sexuality and Health Disparities (SexLab) at the University of Michigan 
School of Public Health, described the tailored Web-based technology they 
have developed to attack these problems by encouraging HIV and sexually 
transmitted infection (STI) testing among young MSM between the ages of 
15 and 24 years.
Get Connected (Bauermeister et al., 2015a) is an adaptation of the 
Project Connect Health Systems Intervention (Dittus et al., 2014) developed 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXAMPLES OF ENGAGING RACIAL/ETHNIC MINORITY COMMUNITIES
 31for adolescent heterosexual populations. The adaptation acknowledged the 
need to address structural barriers affecting service efforts aimed toward 
HIV/STI prevention and care among young men who have sex with men 
(YMSM), and the importance of using technology to reach this population. 
The intervention was developed through a community-based participa
-tory research approach and was informed by existing mixed-methods data 
focused on YMSM in Southeast Michigan.
Loveluck brie˚y laid out some of the principles on which community-
based participatory research (CBPR) is based (Israel et al., 1998). CBPR 
recognizes the community as a unit of identity, builds on strengths and 
resources within the community, facilitates collaborative and equitable 
involvement of all partners in all phases of the research, and integrates 
knowledge and intervention for mutual bene˜t of all partners. Speaking as 
a program director, Loveluck said ﬁWe have been involved in everything 
from designing the intervention and study tools to helping to think about 
coding of data. We have learned a lot along the processŠand not just me 
as the director of the organization but many staff.ﬂIn the case of Get Connected, CBPR focuses on issues of concern to the 
community by addressing structural vulnerability among YMSM of color. 
It also enables the community to use data to advocate for change. In addi-tion, the program has given HARC an opportunity to showcase its work 
on a national and even an international scale. As Loveluck said in response 
to a question, ﬁWe have to hold our academic institutions accountable for 
sharing the resources and providing some of the capacity building in com
-munities. . . . Academic institutions really want to work with community 
partners, but that has to be done in an equal manner.ﬂ
Get Connected has looked at both HIV vulnerability and protective 
factors. The barriers to accessing HIV services include cost, transportation 
to services, age-related barriers, beliefs and risk perceptions, the perceived 
credibility and competence of providers, medical mistrust, the dif˜culty of 
navigating services, and discrimination. To overcome these barriers, Get 
Connected brought together a variety of groups, including the SexLab at 
the University of Michigan, the Center for Health and Communications 
Research at the University of Michigan, a community advisory board made 
up of service providers, and a youth advisory board, which helped tailor 
the messages used in the program. Another component of the program was 
ﬁsecret shoppersﬂ (Bauermeister et al., 2015b)Štwo men per site who went through the process of HIV and STI testing to rate or evaluate the sites 
based on a set of criteria. 
These criteria included structural characteristics, such as the hours a 
clinic was open, whether it was close to public transportation, how long 
testing would take, and information about insurance and fee scales. The 
evaluators also considered such questions as whether the site was youth 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
friendly, whether it was LGBTQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer) 
inclusive, whether it was sex positive in terms of its counseling and mes-sages, and whether it had a focus on goal setting and diversity. ﬁNobody has 
stopped to ask what it is like for a young man to go get tested in these set-tings,ﬂ Bauermeister pointed out, adding ﬁThe trust and respect of the users 
themselves, and making sure that they are also making decisions, are vital.ﬂ
Bauermeister described the randomized controlled trial conducted as 
part of the research project that involved 130 young men in Southeast 
Michigan who had engaged in sex with a male partner in the past 6 months. 
One group (the tailored intervention condition) received content developed 
in the Get Connected project, which is tailored to re˚ect age, race/ethnicity, 
sexual identity, history of HIV and STI testing, barriers to testing (such as 
homelessness, residential instability, or discrimination), sources of support, 
and personal values. They then received information about the locations of 
test sites. The comparison condition only received the testing directory. ﬁWe 
thought it would be unethical to not give young men a chance to ˜nd out 
where to get tested,ﬂ Bauermeister said regarding the inclusion of a testing 
directory as the comparison group, adding ﬁEven though it makes it harder 
for us scienti˜cally to ˜nd the difference between the arms, from a public 
health and practice perspective, it is the right thing to do.ﬂ
Both the tailored site and the test locator conditions had very high satis
-faction and acceptability by young men. In addition, 30 days after they had 
received the intervention, more than 30 percent of the men who received 
the tailored content had been tested for HIV and/or STIs, ﬁwhich is huge,ﬂ 
according to Bauermeister.
1 The testing identi˜ed one previously unknown 
HIV case and two previously unknown STI cases that were treated. In addi-tion, four HIV-positive participants reported visiting their care providers 
after participating in the intervention.A particularly interesting result was a reduction in the number of part-ners among men in the intervention in the following 30 days. Even among 
those who did not get tested before the 30-day follow-up, there were clini-cally meaningful reductions in perceived barriers to testing and fears about 
getting tested, along with increased urgency to get tested and to talk with 
partners about testing or delaying sex until each person™s status was known.
At the time of the workshop, Get Connected was seeking funding for 
a demonstration project to expand the program to the Atlanta Metro and 
the MinneapolisŒSt. Paul regions. It also was planning to switch from secret 
shoppers to a Yelp-like review system, collect a greater number of time points 
postintervention, shift the site more toward videos and interactivity than text, 
and work to extend it from a mobile-friendly to a mobile-based system.
Bauermeister concluded with several lessons drawn from the experi-1  In the control group, 28 percent of the men reported getting tested for HIV.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXAMPLES OF ENGAGING RACIAL/ETHNIC MINORITY COMMUNITIES
 33ences with Get Connected. CBPR can be a way of connecting technology 
and community, but the community needs to be integral to the process. Spe
-ci˜c areas of HIV education can be targeted in outreach and testing efforts 
with providers and clients. And YMSM can be empowered to understand 
and navigate their testing and counseling sessions.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Important Points Highlighted by the SpeakersŁ Social media and mobile technologies generally do not intersect 
with the large-scale data initiatives being promoted by govern-ment policies. (Guillermo, Ziv)
Ł Barriers to eHealth adoption include a lack of access to tech-nologies, little interoperability of tools across platforms, the 
linguistic or cultural competency of tools, limitations caused 
by disability or technological literacy, patient and physician 
awareness and incentives, inadequate health literacy, and pri
-vacy concerns or distrust. (Guillermo, Raymond)
Ł Ways to overcome these barriers include improving the digital 
literacy of consumers and safety net providers, supporting 
eHealth tools that feature user-centered design, and support
-ing technology capacity building for safety net providers. 
(Guillermo)Ł A registry of commercial products that have viability and reli-ability would enable patients and providers to ˜nd good solu-tions to their problems. (Guillermo)
Following the presentations of the La Communidad Habla and Get 
Connected programs, the workshop participants turned to the broader 
policy and technology issues that shape such initiatives. Policy can either 
support or hinder the use of technology toward achieving and creating 
5Policy and Technology Perspectives
35The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
health equity, which means that policy actions can be a critical factor in 
the success of interventions.TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP APPROACHES TO POLICY
The integration of health information technology and eHealth is being 
prompted in part by federal policy, observed Tessie Guillermo, president 
and CEO of ZeroDivide, which is a mission-driven consulting organization 
that helps communities transform themselves through the adoption and 
integration of technology. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA) regulations, the Health Information Technology for Economic 
and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, incentives for meaningful use of elec
-tronic health record (EHR) technologies, and revision of the 
International 
Statistical Classi˜cation of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD) all 
have helped drive the digitization of health care.
Even apart from these policies, the health care industry has been rapidly 
changing. One new emphasis, as the industry moves away from a fee-for-
service model toward a fee-for-value world, is population health manage
-ment, noted Guillermo. In one formulation of that transition, information 
technology is at the core of population health management, with data driv-ing a virtuous loop of continuous improvement. But a better way to view 
this transition is by placing the patient in the center of an integrated health 
care ecosystem, with technology feeding into the system, said Guillermo. In 
either formulation, information ﬁis a constant.ﬂ
Today, the pieces of the health ecosystem are not well connected, 
Guillermo pointed out. Very few community health centers or primary care 
medical homes have adopted a working EHR, and most will not achieve 
meaningful use anytime soon. To navigate the system to achieve good out
-comes, reduce costs, and improve care management, patients and health 
care providers have to navigate around processes that today stand outside 
an integrated system.
Many of these processes involve technology. Social media promote 
services to new consumers, enable the sharing of stories, and help build 
communities. Mobile technologies also can promote services along with 
extending care and providing customer service. Consumers want to take 
advantage of these technologies, as surveys have repeatedly documented. 
The problem, said Guillermo, is that these technologies generally do not 
intersect with the large-scale data initiatives being promoted by policies. 
The result is likely to be a ﬁlong, expensive, dif˜cult, and complexﬂ process 
of building capacity and managing change to combine the two separate 
approaches, she explained.
ZeroDivide has been doing research in recent years on the barriers 
to greater use of eHealth approaches by low-income, immigrant, non-The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY AND TECHNOLOGY PERSPECTIVES
 37English-speaking, disabled, rural, and other underserved populations. As 
part of this research, it has categorized eHealth tools into three categories 
of decreasing complexity: messaging tools, disease management tools, and 
tethered personal health records (PHRs) and patient portals.
The evidence shows that messaging and disease management applica
-tions are effective in reaching underserved patients and improving their 
engagement, Guillermo observed. However, these solutions have yet to be 
brought to commercial scale by large health systems and insurers. Also, 
applications tend not to be tied to existing hospital and health system 
records, which presents challenges. Instead, they have been implemented 
primarily via pilot programs run by departments of health and academic 
medical centers. As a result, Guillermo said, ﬁThings that work are not get-ting fast enough into the hands of people that can use them.ﬂ
PHRs and patient portals hold signi˜cant potential to engage and 
empower patients, Guillermo said. However, they are generally tied to 
successful electronic medical record systems, which mean that safety net 
providers are less likely to offer them. Also, they generally have poor 
usability and design when compared with Web 2.0 tools and mobile apps. 
Even within integrated health systems, there are signi˜cant demographic 
disparities in their adoption. ﬁAll of these problems are things that we have 
to address . . . on an industry-wide and a population-wide health scale,ﬂ 
she added.Guillermo cited a number of other barriers to eHealth adoption, includ-ing a lack of access to technologies, little interoperability of tools across 
platforms, the linguistic or cultural competency of tools, limitations caused 
by disability or technological literacy, patient and physician awareness and 
incentives, inadequate health literacy, and privacy concerns or distrust. She 
also pointed to the results of focus group research with racial and ethnic 
minority women, ages 30 to 64, who were making health decisions in their 
households and were themselves at risk for a chronic disease. They gener-ally have access to the Internet, ﬁMaybe not the highest speed or most 
affordable, but they have it,ﬂ she explained. But they are discouraged by 
what they see, she said, adding ﬁIt doesn™t re˚ect them. They want personal
-ized, culturally competent technology solutions.ﬂ
In response to a question about privacy concerns, Guillermo pointed 
in particular to the need for a balance between the fear of data being used 
for the wrong purpose and the use of data for health equity objectives. 
Everyone in the health care ecosystem has a responsibility for maintaining 
the con˜dentiality of data, she said. Also, technologies can help inform 
patients about how their data will be used so they can have more control 
over that use. In contrast, if data are written on paper, ﬁit could just be left 
on the table,ﬂ Guillermo noted. Education around privacy, con˜dentiality, 
and the regulation of data uses is as important as the development of the 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
tools, she said. ﬁThe privacy and security barrier is a major obstacle to get 
past for certain segments of the population. We need to acknowledge the 
importance of protecting information and communicateﬂ the security steps 
being taken, she said.
The focus groups resulted in a set of recommendations that Guillermo 
cited. One is to improve the digital literacy of both consumers and safety 
net providers, who are interacting with patients around the use of these 
tools. Another is to support eHealth tools that feature user-centered design. 
A third is to support technology capacity building for safety net providers. 
Today, community health centers are being supported to adopt electronic 
medical records. However, they are not receiving much support for the test
-ing and use of consumer-facing tools or the other infrastructure tools that 
support operational processes within their clinics.Policy approaches can be both top-down and bottom-up, Guillermo 
noted in closing. Top-down federally instigated policies include meaning
-ful use requirements, innovation grants and funds for eHealth pilots, and 
a central database or registry of approved education resources and apps. 
For example, a registry of commercial products that have viability and 
reliability would enable patients and providers to ˜nd good solutions to 
their problems.Bottom-up community programs also are important, said Guillermo. 
These include community-led marketing and awareness campaigns, forums 
to bring patients and developers together, and community eHealth pilots. 
Communities and academic institutions could form partnerships to develop 
these approaches, where funding, intellectual property, and revenue streams 
are shared.Increasingly, ﬁThere is an attentiveness to the need to bring providers, 
patients, investors, and innovators together to begin to do deep dives into 
solving some of these barriers,ﬂ said Guillermo, adding, 
People have to be open to that, to not stay in their enclaves, where we are 
comfortable. . . . The people in this room, you all know that. You are a big 
part of the solution. I would hope that, because of forums like this, there 
will be opportunities for more of this to happen in an accelerated way.
THE POLICY PERSPECTIVE FROM AN INTEGRATED 
HEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM
Kaiser Permanente has ﬁa lot at stake with regards to eHealth 
equity,ﬂ said Brian Raymond, senior health policy consultant at the Kaiser 
 
Permanente Institute for Health Policy. Kaiser Permanente operates in seven 
regions, serving eight states and the District of Columbia, and has more 
than 10 million members. The intersection of health information technol-The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY AND TECHNOLOGY PERSPECTIVES
 39ogy, health care delivery, and the communities, individuals, and families 
that the system serves are directly linked to eHealth equity.
Kaiser Permanente has made a very large investment in health informa
-tion technology. Its EHR system, known as HealthConnect, is deployed in 
all of its facilities across the nation and is the largest health information 
technology system in use today in the United States. The system integrates 
appointments, registration, billing, and back of˜ce health care functions; 
supports inpatient care, outpatient care, and ancillary services; and includes a data repository and patient portal. The system provides patients with 
secure e-mail to their providers, online access to test results, online appoint
-ment scheduling, prescription re˜lls, and video appointments with primary 
care providers. Today, one-third of Kaiser Permanente™s primary care visits 
are conducted by e-mail, and 27 percent of the HealthConnect transactions 
were conducted via mobile devices. HealthConnect is ﬁtransforming care 
for our members,ﬂ said Raymond.
These changes are producing quality improvements in care, explained 
Raymond. Kaiser Permanente™s care ratings for chronic conditions and 
cancer prevention have risen from the middle of the pack to above the 
90th percentile since HealthConnect was implemented. All seven of Kaiser 
 
Permanente™s Medicare plans are among the top 10 plans, as determined by 
the National Committee for Quality Assurance, and the Southern  California 
plan has been the top-rated plan for the past 3 years.
1Despite these quality improvements, ﬁhealth disparities persist among 
Kaiser Permanente members,ﬂ Raymond observed. He showed a series of 
charts documenting differences in the occurrence of obesity, asthma, dia
-betes, and hypertension in the San Francisco Bay Area, with areas of poor 
health corresponding largely with low-income communities and communi-ties of color. ﬁThat is a major concern for us,ﬂ he said.
To ensure the bene˜ts of health information technologies accrue to all 
its members, not just those with access to technologies and the resources 
and skills to use them, Kaiser Permanente researchers have been study
-ing potential disparities in the use of HealthConnect by its members. For 
example, Zhou et al. (2010) found that secure e-mail use by patients was 
associated with a 2.0 to 6.5 percent improvement in performance on mea
-sures of the Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set, such as 
glycemic (HbA1c), cholesterol, and blood pressure screening and control 
measures. This ˜nding highlights outcome disparities between users and 
nonusers of secure e-mail, Raymond observed.
Research also has demonstrated that Kaiser Permanente members who 
are registered for access to their personal health records are more likely to 
1  Kaiser Permanente, unlike other health systems, is not based on a fee-for-service model; 
this may contribute to their innovations and investments to reduce disparities.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
be non-Hispanic whites than the nonusers of the system. Similarly, African 
Americans and Latinos in northern California were more likely than non-Hispanic whites to request a password for the patient portal but never 
log on. A study in Georgia found that Kaiser Permanente members with a 
postgraduate education more frequently registered for access to the patient 
portal than adults with a high school education or less. ﬁTogether, these 
˜ndings document to us that there are potential eHealth disparities among 
our membership,ﬂ said Raymond, adding ﬁThis is a concern that we need 
to keep on our radar and track and address.ﬂTo reduce these disparities, Kaiser Permanente has identi˜ed and 
implemented actionable strategies to ensure that health information tech
-nology addresses the needs of at-risk and traditionally underserved popu-lations. One approach has been to segment the at-risk population into 
three groups: ﬁhavesﬂ who currently have information technology access 
and want to use it for their health, ﬁwantsﬂ who want access to eHealth 
and could have it if they receive appropriate assistance, and ﬁdon™t wantsﬂ 
who do not want access to eHealth. For the ﬁhaves,ﬂ the strategy is to 
focus on content and functionalityŠfor example, making sure that the 
patient portal has information that is accessible, useful, and relevant to 
that population. Marketing is also important for these individuals, in that 
they may not be aware that a patient portal exists or that it may have 
content that is valuable to them.
For the ﬁwants,ﬂ the strategy is to focus on increasing technology 
access and skill development, such as through a broadband or computer 
access program in an underserved area or a computer literacy program. A 
secondary strategy for this segment is to offer alternatives to technology 
by providing high-quality care and services through low-technology com-munication channels.For the ﬁdon™t wants,ﬂ high-quality alternatives to technology also are 
needed, Raymond observed, including traditional in-person visits, phone 
calls, and print material. Also for this segment, marketing could raise their 
awareness of the potential value of eHealth to them. ﬁMaybe if it is not to 
them, it is for a caregiver,ﬂ Raymond said. ﬁMaybe they are not interested 
themselves, but they have a proxy who would be interested in using the 
system on their behalf,ﬂ he added.
Kaiser Permanente does not have all the answers to eHealth equity, but 
it has ﬁskin in the game,ﬂ said Raymond. ﬁWe recognize that we have a role 
to continue playing in terms of advancing research and better understand-ing both the bene˜ts of our health information technology system and the 
potential risk that it poses.ﬂ
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.POLICY AND TECHNOLOGY PERSPECTIVES
 41OBSERVATIONS FROM A TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPER
At the technology conferences he attends, presenters sometimes ask 
for a show of hands to determine how many people use iPhones, Android 
phones, or Windows phones, noted Noam Ziv, the founder and CEO of 
Kesembe, Inc. But if someone asked an audience to hold up their hands if 
they had ever been sick, every hand would be raised. For that reason, the 
integration of technology into health care is obviously of interest to tech-nology developers.Ziv offered several observations about technology and health based 
on his experiences and what he had heard at the workshop. He began by 
noting that communication is the most prevalent utility in the world. Even 
in places where there is no electricity, people still use cell phones, adding 
that ﬁThey have solar chargers. They ˜nd ways to share cell phones. It is 
absolutely amazing.ﬂTechnology developers tend to think in terms of scalability. If adding 
another person to a service requires hiring a person to support that service, 
ﬁit is not going to scale,ﬂ said Ziv. Today, eHealth applications tend to 
require a high level of expertise to use, which requires extensive support. 
The way to reach large populations and reduce costs is to have fewer people 
serving larger populations. This requires making technologies more acces-sible and usable at all education levels. ﬁLiteracy can be improved, but also 
things can be simpli˜ed,ﬂ he said. iPads, for example, do not ship with 
manuals because they are designed to work as soon as they are turned on.
The cost of technologies has been declining, Ziv pointed out, but the 
cost of connectivity, especially in the United States, has not. The United 
States is not a low-cost wireless or Internet provider; nor is it the world™s 
leader in speed or coverage. The environment that keeps connectivity costs 
high could be changed, Ziv noted, but doing so requires changing regula-tions. For example, regulations about what people can store on their phones 
increases complexity and costs. New policies also could help in places 
where connectivity is slow or nonexistent.Much more of health care can move online, Ziv noted. He explained:
Think about what the banks have done for us. It used to be that whenever 
you wanted a transaction, you would go to the bank. There will be a teller, 
one-to-one. You would stand in line. You would tell them, ﬁI would like 
to deposit a check, . . . what is the balance of my account?ﬂ 
Today, people get their banking information online, deposit checks 
electronically, and use automated teller machines for cash. They go to their 
banks only on rare occasions.
ﬁWe have to create similar analogies for health care systems,ﬂ said Ziv. 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
ﬁWe need to be able to deposit our health data electronically. We need to 
be able to interact with our health information or health systems when and 
where and how it is convenient to us. To do that, we need to be able to 
automate more of these processes,ﬂ he added.Technologies also can bene˜t health care providers by helping them 
make medical recommendations and eliminating wrong answers. Devel-oping such applications poses challenging and complex problems, Ziv 
acknowledged, pointing to regulatory hurdles that essentially say, ﬁyou can™t 
make a medical recommendation as a machineﬂ without going through a 
daunting approval process. But regulations could be changed to enable such 
advances. Also, as Ziv pointed out, not everything can be regulated. People 
need to learn about the perils as well as the promises of technology.
Finally, companies are interested in health technologies because of the 
business opportunities they provide. For example, companies are offering 
cloud-based Web services partly because of the demand for those ser
-vices but also to build markets for their products. Ziv also mentioned the 
 
Qualcomm Tricorder XPrize, which is a $10 million global competition to 
stimulate innovation and integration of precision diagnostic technologies.
2 The device has to be operable by a patient, not a trained physician, which 
will improve both usability and health literacy.
2  More information is available at http://tricorder.xprize.org (accessed May 18, 2016).
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In the ˜nal session of the workshop, two respondents re˚ected on 
the main messages that they heard in the presentations and discussions 
over the course of the day. Hayley Thompson is associate professor in the 
department of oncology at the Wayne State School of Medicine and has 
done research on the use of digital technologies with cancer patients. Andre 
Blackman is a consultant with the ˜rm Pulse + Signal and co-founder of 
the FastForward Health Film Festival. Several roundtable members also 
participated in the conversation, resulting in a wide-ranging summary and 
extension of the day™s discussions.
GENERATING EVIDENCE OF EFFECTIVENESS
Interventions need evidence that demonstrates their effectiveness, said 
Thompson. Yet the time from ﬁdiscovery to disseminationﬂ can be an issue 
for interventions. Creating an evidence-based program requires getting 
support for the program, implementing it, gathering and analyzing data, 
demonstrating ef˜cacy, and moving toward dissemination. The length of 
this process can be daunting for academic researchers, who need to pro-duce results to advance in their careers. Yet academic researchers need to 
be involved in the process of generating evidence because of the expertise, 
theory, and methods that they can contribute, Thompson said. Institutions 
therefore may need to do more to support researchers who want to pursue 
this work.
One way to involve institutions is to do more education about 
community-based participatory research. For this research to succeed, said 
6Synthesis of Workshop Messages
43The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
Thompson, institutional review boards, reviewers, and other parts of the 
research ecosystem need to know more about the methods, practices, and 
processes of this research.
At the same time, research could be sped up through innovative 
approaches. Traditional randomized controlled trials are not always neces
-sary to demonstrate ef˜cacy, Thompson observed. Methods like pragmatic 
trials, comprehensive dynamic trials, or rapid learning cycles can produce 
valuable evidence and move the ˜eld forward.
PRIVACY AND SUSTAINABILITY
Blackman began by emphasizing the intersection of policy and privacy, 
which came up periodically during the workshop. eHealth applications 
generate data that are both medically and commercially valuable. Com-panies such as Apple are paying attention to how data from digital health 
applications are shared. But patients need to have control over the sharing 
of information, he said.
He also pointed toward the importance of sustainability. People™s lives 
are so full, change is so rapid, and people are exposed to so much informa-tion that a short-term campaign cannot be expected to have a lasting effect. 
Instead, sustainability needs to be integrated into interventions, he said, 
so that change is built into the context of people™s lives. The design of an 
intervention can be a critical factor in its sustainability, he pointed out, and 
guides to human-centered design exist and could be used toward this end.
THE IN-PERSON COMPONENTTechnology is a valuable tool, said Blackman, but it cannot replace 
person-to-person contact, especially in communities likely to experience 
health disparities. ﬁThere is no substitute for getting down and talking to 
people about how this is going to be useful, why this is important in your 
lives, why it is important for your family, and getting feedback from them.ﬂ 
The two-way exchange of information requires listening and ˜nding out 
what is important in people™s lives. ﬁThat is where we can begin to tailor 
a lot of these initiatives and tools around what is actually important in 
people™s lives,ﬂ he explained.
Health is something that people tend not to think about when they 
are feeling ˜ne, but people need to be engaged even when health is not 
forefront in their minds, said Blackman. Integrating health into the things 
that are forefront in their mind would be one way to pursue this goal. A 
single father with three children who is working multiple jobs does not have 
time to think about eating ˜ve fruits and vegetables per day. But if healthy 
eating could be made part of the issues that concern such a father, prog
-The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYNTHESIS OF WORKSHOP MESSAGES
 45ress could be made. Also, the social determinants of health are extremely 
powerful, Blackman reminded the workshop participants. Thinking about 
how health interacts with transportation, family issues, or other things 
that are important in people™s lives could improve health while addressing 
nonhealth issues as well.
Focusing on the social determinants of health emphasizes the impor-tance of multidisciplinary research, Thompson added. She is a psycholo-gist who partners with anthropologists so they can go into people™s homes 
and ˜gure out how technology ˜ts into their lives and can more effectively 
meet their needs. For this kind of research, a multidisciplinary perspective 
is critical, she said. The use of technology in health care also requires the 
use of people throughout a community, such as community health workers 
and community leaders, she said. This is particularly the case with the most 
marginalized communities, such as people involved with substance abuse, 
the criminal justice system, or the foster system.
INVOLVING COMMUNITIES
Thompson returned to the need to fully engage community members 
and stakeholders in the process of tool development and tool evaluation. 
Furthermore, communities are not just the people who live in speci˜c neigh-borhoods. Online communities, thought leaders, and content creators are 
examples of dispersed communities that can help build a movement for the 
use of technology to reduce health disparities. A useful guide, she added in 
response to a question, is critical race theory,
1 especially in its application 
to public health.
Involving communities means arranging for feedback from community 
members at all stages of a project, Blackman said, adding ﬁFrom the jump, 
we need to make sure that the people who we are looking to serve are a part 
of it . . . so that we are able to create things that matter.ﬂ Such feedback can 
contribute to the rapid development of a program, even if it means that a 
program fails quickly so developers can pursue other ideas.
Blackman also cited several additional communities that should be 
involved, such as racial and ethnic minority technology entrepreneurs, 
educators, and workforce development organizers. ﬁIntroduce yourself to 
these kinds of leaders; let them know what you are about,ﬂ and then let 
them help you, he said.
Winston Wong, medical director for Kaiser Permanente Community 
1  Critical race theory looks at the relationships among race, racism, and power. It is an 
activist approach that is based on the assumptions that racism is ordinary and acceptable, 
white privilege exists, and the belief that the concepts of race and racism are social constructs 
rather than a biological reality.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
Bene˜t, commented on the need for technology companies to be more 
accountable to the diversity of American society. These ˜rms can create 
opportunities for diverse groups to help create and use technologies. In this 
way, they can address some of the broader determinants of health that help 
generate disparities. The guiding principle, he said, should be ﬁno technol
-ogy without me.ﬂSCALABILITY AND ADAPTABILITY
An interesting discussion took place regarding the extent to which an 
intervention can be scaled up without losing the cultural competency that 
helped make the original intervention effective. Thompson emphasized the 
importance of building feedback into an intervention so it can be adapted 
to new circumstances while it is being scaled up.
Mildred Thompson asked if scalability is always possible: ﬁIf I create 
a community-based program here in the city of Detroit, and I have worked 
with my community partners and members, and we have some effective 
outcomes in terms of healthŠand we have worked closely for years on 
this initiativeŠwhy would I expect that to work in exactly the same way 
in Chicago?ﬂ A better way to think about scalability may be in terms of 
the methods, ideas, and templates that people elsewhere can use to design 
their own intervention. In particular, added Toni Villarruel, Dean of the 
University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, there may be critical ele-ments that need to be sustained while other elements can be changed. ﬁWe, 
as researchers, have the obligation to help people ˜gure out what we have 
learned and how that can be used in their community,ﬂ she said.
INVOLVING PROVIDERS
Finally, Thompson pointed to an obstacle not much discussed at the 
workshop, which is the willingness of health care providers to accept 
and adopt technologies. ﬁSome of our research across institutions here in 
Detroit shows that there is not always uniform acceptance of a new technol-ogyﬂ by providers, she said. Providers may see new technologies as taking 
valuable time to learn and to use, even when they are bene˜cial to patients. 
At Kaiser Permanente, the use of technology is ﬁpart of the organizational 
culture, but that is not the case everywhere,ﬂ she concluded.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AHRQ (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality). 2013. 
National Healthcare Disparities 
Report 2012 No 13-0003: Washington, DC.
Bauermeister, J. A., E. S. Pingel, L. Jadwin-Cakmak, G. W. Harper, K. Horvath, G. Weiss, 
and P. Dittus. 2015a. Acceptability and preliminary ef˜cacy of a tailored online HIV/
STI testing intervention for young men who have sex with men. AIDS & Behavior 19(10):1860-1874.Bauermeister, J. A., E. S. Pingel, L. Jadwin-Cakmak, S. Meanley, D. Alapati, M. Moore, M. 
Lowther, R. Wade, and G. W. Harper. 2015b. The use of mystery shopping for quality 
assurance evaluations of HIV/STI testing sites offering services to young gay and bisexual 
men. AIDS & Behavior
 19(10):1919-1927.Brach, C., D. Keller, L. M. Hernandez, C. Baur, R. Parker, B. Dreyer, P. Schyve, A. J. 
 Lemerise, 
and D. Schillinger. 2012. 
Ten attributes of health literate health care organizations. 
Dis-cussion paper. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine.
Cisco. 2015. Cisco announces intent to acquire OpenDNS. newsroom.cisco.com (accessed 
May 18, 2106).Dittus, P. J., C. J. De Rosa, R. A. Jeffries, A. A. A˜˜, W. G. Cumberland, E. Q. Chung, E. 
Martinez, P. R. Kerndt, and K. A. Ethier. 2014. The Project Connect health systems 
intervention: Linking sexually experienced youth to sexual and reproductive health care. 
Journal of Adolescent Health
 55(4):528-534.Gazmararian, J. A., B. Yang, L. Elon, M. Graham, and R. Parker. 2012. Successful enrollment 
in Text4Baby more likely with higher health literacy. 
Journal of Health Communication 17(Suppl. 3):303-311.
Gazmararian, J. A., L. Elon, B. Yang, M. Graham, and R. Parker. 2014. Text4baby program: 
An opportunity to reach underserved pregnant and postpartum women? Maternal and 
Child Health Journal
 18(1):223-232.Ginossar, T., and S. Nelson. 2010a. La Comunidad Habla: Using Internet community-based 
information interventions to increase empowerment and access to health care of low 
income Latino/a immigrants. 
Communication Education 59(3):328-343.References47The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
Ginossar, T., and S. Nelson. 2010b. Reducing the health and digital divides: A model for 
using community-based participatory research approach to E-health interventions in 
low income Hispanic communities. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication 15(4):530-551.IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2002. 
Unequal treatment: Confronting racial and ethnic dispari
-ties in health care.
 Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM. 2004. Health literacy: A prescription to end confusion. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.IOM. 2011. Digital infrastructure for the Learning Health System: The foundation for con-tinuous improvement in health and health care: Workshop series summary.
 Washington, 
DC: The National Academies Press.Israel, B. A., A. J. Schulz, E. A. Parker, and A. B. Becker. 1998. Review of community-based 
research: Assessing partnership approaches to improve public health. Annual Review of 
Public Health 19:173-202.Kranzberg, M. 1995. Technology and history: ﬁKranzberg™s laws.ﬂ 
Bulletin of Science, Tech
-nology, and Society 
15(1):5-13.Norman, C. 2011. eHealth literacy 2.0: Problems and opportunities with an evolving concept. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research
 13(4):e125.Norman, C. D., and H. A. Skinner. 2006. eHealth literacy: Essential skills for consumer health 
in a networked world. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research
 8(2):e9.Poorman, G., Elon, R. Parker. 2014. Is health literacy related to health behaviors and cell 
phone usage patterns among the text4baby target population? Archives of Public Health 
72(1):13.Simon, H. A. 1981. 
The sciences of the arti˜cial,
 2nd ed. Boston, MA: MIT Press.
Zhou, Y. Y., M. H. Kanter, J. J. Wang, and T. Garrido. 2010. Improved quality at Kaiser 
Permanente through e-mail between physicians and patients. 
Health Affairs (Millwood)
 29(7):1370-1375.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49COMMUNITY HEALTH ENGAGEMENT 
SURVEY SOLUTIONS (CHESS)
Denise Stevens, Matrix Public Health SolutionsCommunity Health Engagement Survey Solutions (CHESS) is a novel 
ﬁmHealthﬂ or mobile health strategy for addressing gaps in racial and ethnic 
health equity developed by Matrix Public Health Solutions in New Haven, 
Connecticut. CHESS partners with nonpro˜t youth groups and community 
improvement organizations to collect data on the neighborhood environ-ment using mobile technology. These data provide a starting point for dia
-logue and strategic planning to take action on health promotion and disease 
prevention in the neighborhood.CHESS™s mobile technology tools include surveys and geographic infor
-mation system (GIS) mapping to systematically assess four health risk factors 
in a neighborhood: food, physical activity, tobacco, and alcohol. Participants 
such as a youth ﬁhealth explorerﬂ team in the Williamsburg neighborhood 
of Brooklyn, were trained to use a CHESS app on a digital tablet to survey 
the streets, food stores, restaurants, ˜tness facilities, and parks, among 
other features, within a 400-meter walking radius of their school. The 
work helped the youth to understand how the environments where they live 
encourage or discourage healthy eating, physical activity, and tobacco use, 
which in turn in˚uences their behavior and resulting health.
CHESS analyzes and interprets the gathered data through visual maps 
and quantitative summaries and then, based on that evidence, applies public 
AExamples of eHealth Solutions 
Featured at the Workshop
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
health expertise to identify potential strategies for intervention and com-munity development to improve access to healthy food and opportunities 
for physical activity in the neighborhood. For more information, visit http://
www.matrixphc.com/chess and watch a video at vimeo.com/104497828.
DOUBLE UP FOOD BUCKS
Liz Kohn, Fair Food Network
Double Up Food Bucks (http://doubleupfoodbucks.org) is a healthy 
food incentive project of the Fair Food Network, a national nonpro˜t 
based in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Launched in 2009, Double Up makes it 
easier for low-income families in the federal food stamp programŠthe 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP)Što eat fresh fruits and 
vegetables while supporting local farmers and economies. When recipients 
spend SNAP dollars at farmers™ markets, they receive up to $20 of match
-ing credit in Double Up Food Bucks that they can use to buy additional 
Michigan-grown produce. The project has been an innovator in developing 
new mobile payment processing technology for use at the markets.
Since its initial start in ˜ve farmers™ markets in Detroit, Double Up has 
spread to more than 150 sites across Michigan and northern Ohio with the 
help of funding from George Soros™s Open Society Foundations. In 5 years, 
the project tallied more than 200,000 SNAP/Double Up customer visits at 
participating sites and more than $5 million of income earned for  Michigan 
farmers and vendors. In 2013, Double Up began expanding into some 
grocery stores in a partnership with the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
The Double Up model includes a uniform design and brand, centralized administration, and a comprehensive communications strategy, including 
dynamic social marketing. It depends on strong partnerships with local and 
statewide organizations and agencies. Evaluation work shows that SNAP 
customers at farmers™ markets report eating more produce and buying 
fewer unhealthy snacks.EATFRESH.ORG
Adrienne Markworth, Leah™s Pantry
EatFresh.org is a healthy eating resource that offers multilingual infor
-mation via its website, social media, and mobile technology to low-income 
Californians who receive food stamp assistance through CalFresh and 
SNAP. Funded with support from the Aetna Foundation, the website is a 
project of the Human Services Agency of the City and County of San Fran
-cisco, with nutrition and culinary content managed by Leah™s Pantry (http://
leahspantrysf.org/what-we-do-1). The EatFresh site launched in October 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 512013 with the goal of encouraging cooking at home with fresh foods and 
minimally processed, nonperishable ingredients. Content can be viewed in 
Chinese, English, and Spanish.The website has more than 400 recipes for tasty and healthy yet afford
-able dishes as well as a ﬁDiscover Foodsﬂ section that gives basic informa-tion on food ingredients. EatFresh hopes to help users better understand 
the link between lifestyle or diet choices and prevention of chronic diseases, 
and to show them that healthy change can happen even though barriers 
exist. The site also offers healthy lifestyle tips and an ﬁAsk the Dietitianﬂ 
community forum.CalFresh, county health departments, food banks, and other agencies 
around California have integrated EatFresh.org as a nutrition education tool. 
As of September 2014, nearly 45,000 unique visitors had frequented the 
EatFresh.org website, 25 percent of them through a smartphone. Users may 
sign up to receive weekly EatFresh tips via e-mail or text. The project™s edu
-cational materials are available at http://leahspantrysf.org/eatfresh-toolkit.
FIND MI CAREHanna Harp, Greater Detroit Area Health Council
Find MI Care is a free website and mobile application that simpli˜es 
the task of ˜nding local, low-cost health care in Michigan. Recognizing a 
need for patients to receive better coordinated health care treatment close 
to home, the nonpro˜t Greater Detroit Area Health CouncilŠa coalition 
addressing health care quality, access, and cost in Southeast MichiganŠ
 created this search tool with a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foun
-dation. Visitors to the www.˜ndMIcare.org website can select the health 
services they are looking for from a menu of options (ranging from primary 
care and specialty services to medication assistance), and then specify their 
zip code or region. A list of clinics in the area is generated, with a brief 
description of each facility and important notes, such as whether it provides care to uninsured individuals. Hospitals, physicians, and community groups 
can use Find MI Care to help connect Michigan residents to health care 
resources. The tool can be downloaded as a free smartphone app.
GET CONNECTEDJose Bauermeister, University of Michigan School of Public Health
 Jimena Loveluck, HIV/AIDS Resource CenterGet Connected is a tailored, Web-based health intervention that aims to 
increase awareness about sexually transmitted illnesses (STIs) among young men who have sex with men (YMSM), and to link them to health clinics 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
that can provide testing for those diseases in a culturally sensitive manner. 
This work builds upon an existing community-based participatory research 
project on HIV and STIs at the University of Michigan. Researchers at the 
university™s Center for Health Communications Research and the Center for 
Sexuality & Health Disparities created the Get Connected website with sup-port from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National 
Association of County and City Health Of˜cials.
Get Connected seeks to reach young gay or bisexual men in Southeast 
Michigan who use e-technologies such as websites and smartphones to meet 
partners. The Web intervention was developed with input from a youth 
advisory board, community provider advisors, and local HIV/AIDS organi-zations. The website provides information on STIs, walks users through the 
thought process of why they would or would not wish to undergo testing, 
and uses tailored messaging on values and barriers to try to motivate them 
to get tested.Get Connected also offers an STI testing-site search tool that helps users 
˜nd high-quality, local clinics with the services they need, and the website 
generates a list of questions, which users can print out or receive by e-mail 
or text to ask the health provider during their appointment. The researchers 
have been studying whether Get Connected effectively increases STI testing 
among the website™s users (see http://chcr.umich.edu/project.php?id=1108), 
and the researchers are expanding their intervention to mobile devices.
LET™S GET HEALTHY! AND 5-2-1-0 KIDS!
Sharon Milberger, Henry Ford LiveWell
Let™s Get Healthy! is a healthy living education program developed 
for overweight children ages 9 to 13 by the Henry Ford Health System™s 
LiveWell division. The 10-week program partners each youngster with 
a parent to work with a multidisciplinary team that includes a pediatri-cian, behavioral therapist, registered dietitian, and athletic trainer. This 
team offers guidance and insight, with a goal of education and behavioral 
changes rather than weight loss. The dietitian helps each family to build 
healthy meal plans and realistic lifestyle changes. The team instructors try 
to convey engaging messages to reshape the way the child thinks about 
food, nutrition, and exercise.
Participants learn about mindful eating, portion sizes, label reading, 
fast food and snack choices, quick and healthy meals, smart grocery shop-ping, and maintaining a food journal. Behavioral modi˜cations are encour-aged through setting goals and maintaining and celebrating successes, and 
through conversations on topics such as staying motivated, stress, and time 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 53management. Kids and families also learn fun and affordable ways to exer-cise and tips on maintaining an active lifestyle.Let™s Get Healthy! recommends the ﬁ5-2-1-0ﬂ guidelines for daily 
nutrition and ˜tness: 5 fruits and vegetables, 2 hours or less of screen time, 
1 hour or more of physical activity, and 0 sugar-added beverages. Henry 
Ford LiveWell has created a fun, interactive game app called ﬁ5-2-1-0 
Kids!ﬂ with messages about eating right and staying active. Families can 
download the game for free from the Apple and Android app stores. For 
more information about Let™s Get Healthy! visit http://henryfordlivewell.
com/body.cfm?id=991&fr=true.
MOBILE DADShawna Lee, University of Michigan School of Social Work
Mobile Dad (mDad) Baby Book is an interactive mobile technology 
application that enhances the engagement of fathers with their families. 
Researchers at the University of Michigan created this smartphone app at 
the request of the U.S. Air Force (USAF) to help military members who are 
fathers stay involved with their young children while deployed away from 
home, and to ease the transition when they come back.
Mobile Dad is a cross between a digital baby book and a parent edu-cation resource, and fathers can use it independently or with spouses or 
partners. The app allows users to upload pictures, videos, and audio record-ings of their child to track his or her growth. Twice a week, fathers receive 
brief messages on their iPhone, iPad, or iPod Touch that are tailored to 
their child™s age and developmental milestones. If an infant turns 6 months 
old, for instance, the parent will receive a noti˜cation that the baby can 
soon start eating solid food. The app can provide more detailed informa-tion about that milestone, along with tips on parenting and fun activities 
to support the child™s healthy growth.
The app is tailored for helping fathers balance military and family life, 
and users can bene˜t from advice shared by other military dads. mDad was 
˜eld tested with 200 USAF mothers and fathers. For more information, visit 
http://chcr.umich.edu/project.php?id=1104.
PLAN PILOT
Tessie Guillermo, ZeroDivide
Plan Pilot is a prototype mobile technology application that draws on 
health plan datasets to make shopping for health insurance an easier and 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
less confusing experience. It was developed by the San FranciscoŒbased 
consulting organization ZeroDivide, which seeks to transform underserved 
communities through technology, including eHealth or electronic health 
resources tools. The Plan Pilot app is a ˜nalist in the Plan Choice Challenge 
sponsored by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation in summer 2014 to 
spark the development of new apps and tools that allow consumers to com-pare costs, features, and ratings of health insurance plans and choose the 
best plan to suit their needs in the new marketplaces created by the Afford
-able Care Act (ACA). App developers were given access to a set of data on 
cost-sharing features of plans offered in the health insurance market places 
in every state and Washington, DC.
ZeroDivide describes Plan Pilot as ﬁa responsive Web application that 
helps consumers make wise decisions, live healthier lives, and save money 
on the true total cost of health care.ﬂ Many Americans who enrolled in 
health plans through the insurance marketplaces under the ACA have 
reported dissatisfaction with their choice, and only 60 percent were con˜-dent they would be able to pay for a major illness or injury. ZeroDivide™s 
consumer research identi˜ed confusion, complexity of choices, and poor 
customer experiences as the major challenges in making good decisions 
about buying health insurance. The Plan Pilot app will help users ﬁnavigate 
their health care coverage with personalized recommendations about plan 
and provider quality as well as savings for prescription drugs.ﬂ
Y-MVP TEEN FITNESS CHALLENGE
Lori Benson, YMCA of Greater New York
The Y-MVP Teen Fitness Challenge is an 8-week YMCA training pro
-gram that is innovatively integrated with a digital game to get teenagers 
engaging in moderate to vigorous physical (MVP) activity every day. The 
YMCA of Greater New York developed the challenge to incorporate online 
game design techniques that grab the interest of young people. What started 
as a pilot program in spring 2013 at the Bedford-Stuyvesant Y in Brooklyn 
and the Harlem Y in Manhattan is expanding to all YMCA sites across 
New York City by 2015.
Teens who register for Y-MVP meet once per week in small classes with 
a trained coach who takes them on a series of ˜tness ﬁquestsﬂ or activities. 
At the end of each session, participants are assigned a ˜tness ﬁmissionﬂ that they must complete before they meet next. An accompanying interactive 
digital app and a dynamic badge system tracks, motivates, and rewards 
the teens™ efforts. The youths access the Y-MVP app on a tablet at the gym 
to record their workouts and monitor their progress toward successfully 
reaching the activity goals set by their coach. Along the way, they earn and 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 55accumulate digital badges that can ultimately be exchanged for incentives 
such as t-shirts and water bottles. Participants share their accomplishments 
on social media sites.
Y-MVP is supported by Aetna Foundation, American Express, the 
Hive Digital Media Learning Fund, and the PepsiCo Foundation. For more 
details, visit http://www.ymcanyc.org/association/pages/y-mvp or watch a 
video at www.youtube.com/watch?v=9x7t2k_4Kdo&feature=youtu.be.
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.57BWorkshop Agenda
Digital Health Strategies, Health Disparities, and Health Equity: 
The Promises and Perils of Technology: A Public Workshop
October 2, 2014
The Margherio Family Conference Center 
403 East Can˜eld StreetWayne State University 
Detroit, MI
Objectives of the Meeting
Ł To discuss the opportunities to use digital health technologies 
as a population health strategy to reduce health disparities and 
promote health equity in the United States. 
Ł To explore how racial and ethnic minority populations/
 communities in the United States can be engaged in efforts that 
use digital health strategies to reduce racial and ethnic health 
disparities. 
Ł To develop effective strategies that engage racial and ethnic 
minority populations/communities in using digital health strat-egies to reduce health disparities and promote health equity. 
Ł To explore the different types of digital health technologies 
used in efforts to reduce health disparities and promote health 
equity in the United States. 
Ł To highlight examples of digital health strategies designed to 
reduce health disparities and promote health equity in the 
United States.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
8:00 am Welcome and Introduction
  
Toni Villarruel, Ph.D., FAAN, Professor and Margaret Bond 
Simon Dean of Nursing, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Nursing  
Gillian Barclay, D.D.S., Dr.P.H., Vice President, Aetna 
Foundation M. Roy Wilson, M.D., M.S., President, Wayne State University
8:30 am  Keynote: Overarching Views
 Kimberlydawn Wisdom, M.D., M.S., Senior Vice President of 
Community Health & Equity and Chief Wellness Of˜cer, 
Henry Ford Health System, Chair, Gail and Lois Warden 
Endowment on Multicultural Health
 Wendy Nilsen, Ph.D., Health Scientist Administrator, Of˜ce 
of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research, National 
Institutes of Health10:00 am 
 Break10:15 am
 Panel 1: How do we engage providers and racial and ethnic 
minority patients in digital strategies with the goal to reduce 
health disparities and promote health equity?
 Moderators: Rohit Varma, M.D., M.P.H., University of 
Southern California, and Winston Wong, M.D., M.S., 
Kaiser Permanente Ivor Horn, M.D., M.P.H., Medical Director of the Center for 
Diversity and Health Equity and Professor of Pediatrics, 
University of Washington School of Medicine
 Misha Pavel, Ph.D., Professor of Practice, Northeastern 
University 
 Ruth Parker, M.D., Professor, Emory University
11:30 am
 Discussion with Panel 1
11:45 am
 Panel 2: How do we engage racial and ethnic minority 
communities in digital health strategies with the goal to 
reduce health disparities and promote health equity?
 Moderator: Caroline McKay, Ph.D., Merck & Co., Inc.
 Cameron Norman, Ph.D., M.A., M.Des., adjunct lecturer, 
Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of 
Toronto
 Tamar Ginossar, Ph.D., Assistant Professor, University of 
New MexicoThe Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 59 Jose Bauermeister, Ph.D., M.P.H., Director, Center for 
Sexuality & Health Disparities, University of Michigan 
School of Public Health 
 Jimena Loveluck, President and Chief Executive Of˜cer, 
HIV/AIDS Resource Center12:45 pm
 Discussion with Panel 2
1:00 pm Lunch and Technology Speed Dating: Virtual Poster Session 
Elliman Building (directly across the street)
 Ł Get Connected!, Jose Bauermeister, Ph.D., M.P.H., 
University of Michigan, School of Public Health, and 
Jimena Loveluck, HIV/AIDS Resource Center Ł EatFresh.org, Adrienne Markworth, Leah™s Pantry 
 Ł PlanPilot, Tessie Guillermo, ZeroDivide
 Ł Y-MVP Teen Fitness Challenge,
 Lori Benson, YMCA of 
Greater New York
 Ł 5-2-1-0 Kids!, Sharon Milberger, Sc.D., Henry Ford 
LiveWell
 Ł Double Up Food Bucks, Liz Cohn, Fair Food Network
 Ł Find MI Care,
 Hanna Harp, Greater Detroit Area Health 
Council Ł mDad (Mobile Device Assisted Dad),
 Shawna Lee, 
Ph.D., M.S.W., M.P.P., University of Michigan
 Ł CHESS, Denise Stevens, Ph.D., MatrixPHC2:45 pm Panel 3: Policy and Technology Perspectives
 Moderator: Terri Wright, Ph.D., M.P.H., American Public 
Health Association Noam Ziv, Founder, Kesembe Inc.
 Brian Raymond, M.P.H., Senior Policy Consultant, Kaiser 
Permanente Institute for Health Policy
 Tessie Guillermo, President and Chief Executive Of˜cer, 
ZeroDivide3:45 pm Discussion with Panel 3
4:00 pm Synthesis and Further Discussion Panel
 Moderator: Toni Villarruel, Ph.D., FAAN, Professor and 
Margaret Bond Simon Dean of Nursing, University of 
Pennsylvania School of Nursing
 Andre Blackman, Founder and Chief Executive Of˜cer, Pulse 
and SignalThe Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
 Hayley Thompson, Ph.D., M.S., Associate Professor, Wayne 
State University School of Medicine4:45 pm Concluding Remarks Gillian Barclay, D.D.S., Dr.P.H., Vice President, Aetna 
FoundationRoundtable InformationŁ Project website for the Roundtable on the Promotion of Health 
Equity and the Elimination of Health Disparities: http://www.
 nationalacademies.org/hmd/Activities/SelectPops/ HealthDisparities.aspxŁ The website provides listserv sign-up, information on upcoming 
meetings, meeting materials such as presentations and webcasts, 
and roundtable products.Ł Project e-mail: healthequityrt@nas.edu
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.61Jose Bauermeister, M.P.H., Ph.D.,
 is the John G. Searle Assistant Professor 
of Health Behavior and Health Education, and director of the Center for 
Sexuality & Health Disparities (SexLab) at the School of Public Health. 
Locally, Dr. Bauermeister has led an academicŒcommunity partnership 
focused on addressing the structural barriers fueling the HIV/sexually trans-mitted infection (STI) disparities faced by black and Latino young men who 
have sex with men (YMSM) in the Detroit Metro Area. Dr. Bauermeister is 
also principal investigator and co-investigator of several projects examin-ing HIV/STI prevention among YMSM, with a focus on how to integrate 
existing (e.g., condom use) and forthcoming (e.g., Pre-Exposure Prophy-laxis; rectal microbicides) prevention technologies into HIV/STI preven-tion for YMSM. In light of his expertise, he serves as a member of the 
Behavioral Science Working Group of the Microbicides Trials Network. 
Dr. Bauermeister is also co-investigator on several projects examining the 
social and behavioral correlates of young adult well-being, as measured 
by HIV/AIDS risk, substance use, and psychological well-being. He is co-
 investigator of the Pediatric HIV/AIDS Cohort Study, one of the largest 
prospective biomedical studies of perinatally infected adolescents in the 
United States. Dr. Bauermeister serves on the editorial boards of the 
Journal 
of Youth & Adolescence
, Archives of Sexual Behavior, AIDS and Behav-ior, and Health Education & Behavior. He is chair of the American Public 
Health Association™s HIV/AIDS Section.
Andre Blackman is a connected agent of change within the health com-munity. He is very interested in the intersection of media, technology, and 
CSpeaker Biographical SketchesThe Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
design as it relates to the sustainable improvement of public health and 
health care, as well as the stories that result from these new ideas. Through 
his consulting ˜rm, Pulse + Signal, Andre aims to empower a new genera-tion of thought leaders to do great work through digital branding, effec-tive coaching, and strategic digital public relations/communications. He 
is passionate about purposefully connecting the organizations and leaders 
changing the health landscape in our society with the resources to create 
sustainable change. Andre has been involved in traditional and digital 
campaigns for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the 
National Institutes of Health focused on areas such as disease informat-ics, HIV/AIDS, and diabetes. Andre also serves on the following advisory 
boards: Mayo Clinic Center for Social Media; SXSW Interactive Conference 
Advisory Board; Center for Health Media & Policy; National Health Com
-munications, and Marketing and Media Conference. He is the co-founder 
of the FastForward Health Film FestivalŠan event dedicated to highlight-ing the stories of forward thinking in health initiatives around the world.
Tamar Ginossar, Ph.D.,
 teaches courses in health communication, includ-ing a class about health, culture, and diversity as part of the B.A./M.D. 
program at the University of New Mexico. Additional courses include 
advanced quantitative research methods, intercultural communication, 
and organizational communication. Dr. Ginossar has held two previous 
faculty appointments at the Department of Communication in Tel Aviv 
University and as research faculty with the University of New Mexico 
School of Medicine. Her research interests focus on health communication 
and reducing health disparities. She is particularly interested in how com-munities and individuals are using new communication technologies for 
information exchange and advocacy. She lived and traveled internationally 
in the Middle East, Europe, Asia, and Latin America. Her research focuses 
on health communication and reducing health disparities. More speci˜cally, 
Dr. Ginossar is interested in how communities and individuals are using 
new communication technologies for information exchange and advocacy, 
and in how they seek and share information, and in designing interventions 
using community-based research approaches to reduce health disparities.
Tessie Guillermo
 is the president and CEO of ZeroDivide, a consulting 
organization focusing on technology adoption and innovation to improve 
health, economic opportunity, and civic engagement of disadvantaged 
communities. Ms. Guillermo served for 15 years as CEO of the Asian 
and Paci˜c Islander American Health Forum, a national health policy/
 advocacy organization. She was appointed by President Clinton in 1999 as 
an  inaugural member of the President™s Commission on Asian Americans 
and Paci˜c Islanders. Ms. Guillermo recently completed a 10-year tenure as 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 63a member of the board of directors of The California Endowment, serving 
for 3 years as chairwoman. She serves as an executive member of the Board 
for Dignity Health, and is a board member of the Nonpro˜t Finance Fund 
and the California State University East Bay Education Foundation, where 
she graduated with a B.A. in economics. She is a graduate of the Gallup 
Leadership Institute and was a 1997 fellow of the Asian Paci˜c American 
Women™s Leadership Institute.
Ivor Horn, M.D., M.P.H.,
 is medical director of the Center for Diversity 
and Health Equity at Seattle Children™s Hospital, and professor of pediatrics 
at the University of Washington School of Medicine. Dr. Horn is a National 
Institutes of HealthŒfunded researcher in the area of health communica-tion with underrepresented racial and ethnic minority communities using 
mobile technology innovations. She is principal investigator on a study of a 
text-message-based health communication intervention to improve asthma 
outcomes in an urban disadvantaged population. Dr. Horn was also the 
project director as part of the collaborative team funded by the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) to develop technology-enabled 
tools to facilitate transitions in care for patients with sickle cell anemia at 
Children™s National Health Systems. The project, a collaboration between 
Children™s National Health Systems, Cincinnati Children™s Hospital Medi
-cal Center, The Lewin Group, the National Institute for Children™s Health
-care Quality, and Nemours, was part of AHRQ™s Accelerating Change and 
Transformation in Organizations and Networks (ACTION) Program. On a 
national level, Dr. Horn is a board member and communication director for 
the Academic Pediatric Association (the leading professional organization 
for general academic pediatrician researchers). Dr. Horn has served as ˜rst 
author on two seminal papers about the approach to child health dispari-ties research. Dr. Horn is also a community-based primary care pediatri
-cian with more than a decade of experience providing care and conducting 
research in communities of color. 
Jimena Loveluck is president/CEO of the HIV/AIDS Resource Center 
(HARC) in Ypsilanti, Michigan. She has a master™s degree in social work 
from Boston College, specializing in community organization and social 
policy and planning. After completing her M.S.W. in 1990, Ms. Loveluck 
began working for the Massachusetts Department of Public Health AIDS 
Bureau, where she conducted HIV counseling and testing services in hos-pital and clinic settings, and also staffed the Massachusetts AIDS Hotline. 
Ms. Loveluck left the state level after 2 years to become director of HIV 
Services at Whittier Street Neighborhood Health Center, a federally quali
-˜ed health center in Roxbury, Massachusetts. She returned to Michigan in 
1999 and became the president/CEO of the HARC in November 2000. She 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
has been involved in community-based participatory research in collabora-tion with The Center for Sexuality and Health Disparities at the University 
of Michigan™s School of Public Health since 2009.
Wendy Nilsen, Ph.D.,
 is a health scientist administrator at the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) Of˜ce of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research 
and the program director for the Smart and Connected Health program at 
the National Science Foundation (NSF). Dr. Nilsen™s scienti˜c focus is on 
the science of human behavior and behavior change, including using tech-nology to better understand and improve health, adherence, the mecha
-nisms of behavior change, and behavioral interventions in complex patients 
in primary care. More speci˜cally, her efforts in mobile and wireless health 
(mHealth) research include serving as the NIH lead for the NSF/NIH Smart 
and Connected Health announcement, convening meetings to address 
methodology in mobile technology research, serving on numerous federal 
mHealth initiatives, and leading the NIH mHealth training institutes. Dr. 
Nilsen is also the chair of the Adherence Network, a trans-NIH effort to 
enhance and develop the science of adherence. She is also a member of the 
Science of Behavior Change, Health Economics, and HMO  (health main-tenance organization) Collaboratory working groups. These projects are 
initiatives funded through the Common Fund that target behavioral and 
social sciences research to improve health across a wide range of domains. 
Dr. Nilsen also chairs the NIH Integrating Health Strategies workgroup 
that supports the science of behavioral treatments for patients with multiple 
chronic conditions in primary care. At NSF, she leads the Smart Health pro
-gram, which targets science at the intersection between computer science, 
engineering, medicine, and health, broadly de˜ned.
Cameron Norman is the principal of CENSE Research + Design and an 
adjunct professor in the Dalla Lana School of Public Health at the Uni-versity of Toronto. Cameron™s research interests focus on the intersection 
of systems science, design, and behavior science for health promotion and 
organizational change. The emphasis of his work is on program evalu-ation and modeling approaches to understanding complexity in social 
and health environments. Dr. Norman holds undergraduate and master™s 
degrees in psychology and a doctorate in public health sciences from the 
University of Toronto, and completed a Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research postdoctoral fellowship in Systems Thinking and Knowledge 
Translation jointly at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver 
and the Centre for Global eHealth Innovation in Toronto. He recently 
completed a Master of Design in Strategic Foresight and Innovation at 
OCAD University. 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 65Ruth Parker, M.D.,
 is a professor of medicine at the Emory University 
School of Medicine. She is also associate director of the Faculty Develop-ment program in the Division of General Medicine, and holds a secondary 
appointment at Emory™s Rollins School of Public Health. Over the past 15 
years, Dr. Parker has focused extensively on health care issues of under
-served populations, particularly health literacy. She helped create a widely 
used measurement tool to quantify patients™ ability to read and understand 
health information. Dr. Parker currently serves as consultant and advisor to 
numerous federal agencies, professional societies, and members of industry 
on their initiatives related to health literacy.
Misha Pavel, Ph.D., is a professor of practice jointly appointed between 
the College of Computer and Information Sciences and the Bouvé College 
of Health Sciences at Northeastern University. Dr. Pavel came to Boston 
from the position of program director of Smart and Connected Health on a 
leave from Oregon Health and Science University where he was a professor 
at the Department of Biomedical Engineering, with a joint appointment in 
the Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology. He is 
also a visiting professor at Technical University of Tampere. Previously he 
served as chair of the Department of Biomedical Engineering (he founded 
in 2001) and as director of the Point of Care Laboratory, which focuses on 
unobtrusive monitoring, neurobehavioral assessment, and computational 
modeling in support of health care, with a particular focus on chronic dis-ease and elder care. His earlier academic appointments included positions at 
New York University and Stanford University. In addition to his academic 
career, Professor Pavel was a member of the technical staff at Bell Labo
-ratories in the early 1970s, where his research included network analysis 
and modeling, and later at AT&T Laboratories with a focus on mobile and 
Internet-based technologies. He taught a number of courses in statistics for 
behavioral research at Stanford University and Oregon Health & Science 
University. He was one of the founding members of Oregon Research Cen
-ter for Aging and Technology and is a member of the nascent Consortium 
for Technology for Proactive Care at Northeastern University. He has a 
Ph.D. in experimental psychology from New York University, an M.S. 
in electrical engineering from Stanford University, and a B.S. in electrical 
engineering from the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn. Dr. Pavel is a senior 
member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).
Brian Raymond, M.P.H.,
 is a senior health policy consultant at the  Kaiser 
Permanente Institute for Health Policy. Mr. Raymond analyzes emerging 
policy issues and supports the health policy decision-making process within 
 
Kaiser Permanente. His current areas of focus include eHealth technology 
to address health disparities, obesity prevention, and health in all policies. 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 DIGITAL STRATEGIES IN ACHIEVING HEALTH EQUITY
In addition to policy analysis, Mr. Raymond manages projects and round
-table discussions to produce suggestions for health policy improvement. 
Mr. Raymond received a bachelor™s degree in community health adminis
-tration from the University of California, Davis, and a master™s degree in 
public health from the University of California, Berkeley.
Hayley Thompson, Ph.D., M.S., is currently an associate professor in the 
Department of Oncology at Wayne State University School of Medicine 
and a Scienti˜c Member of the Karmanos Cancer Institute, a National 
Cancer InstituteŒdesignated comprehensive cancer center. Dr. Thompson 
and several investigators in our cancer center are interested in health inter-ventions using mobile devices/social media to reduce disparities. She was 
just awarded a new R01 grant (R01 HS022955), enrolling a population-based sample of approximately 1,230 African American and white breast, 
prostate, and colorectal cancer survivors to assess general eHealth activity 
and personal health history management to develop a software applica
-tion prototype to facilitate access to digital cancer survivorship resources. 
Dr. Thompson also leads an American Cancer Society Research Scholar 
grant for testing an intervention to improve posttreatment resources using 
eHealth technologies to provide better support for Latina breast cancer 
survivors in southwest Detroit.
Kimberlydawn Wisdom, M.D., M.S.,
 is the senior vice president of Com
-munity Health & Equity and Chief Wellness and Diversity Of˜cer at Henry 
Ford Health System. She is a board-certi˜ed emergency medicine physician, 
the chair of the Gail and Lois Warden Endowment on Multicultural Health, 
and Michigan™s and the nation™s ˜rst state-level surgeon general. In 2012 
she was appointed by President Obama to serve on the Advisory Group 
on Prevention, Health Promotion and Integrative and Public Health. Since 
1987 she has been on the faculty of the University of Michigan (UM) Medi
-cal School™s Department of Medical Education and adjunct professor in 
the UM School of Public Health. Dr. Wisdom founded the award-
 winning 
 
African American Initiative for Male Health Improvement (AIMŒHI) 
and most recently, the Women Inspired Neighborhood (WIN) Network, 
which aims to improve access to health care and reduce infant mortality in 
neighborhoods in Detroit. Since 2008, she has chaired the Detroit Infant 
Mortality Reduction Task Force. In 2007, she founded a youth leader
-ship development effortŠGeneration With Promise (GWP)Šdesigned to 
equip youth to drive policy, environmental, and behavioral change in their 
school and community. GWP youth were featured on the cover of 
Modern 
Healthcare in June 2014. Dr. Wisdom is the recipient of numerous awards, 
has authored several peer-reviewed publications and book chapters, and 
The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 67appeared on national television, including ABC™s 
Nightline, and has pre-sented to audiences across the country and internationally.
Noam Ziv is a recognized thought leader, experienced system architect, and 
advisor to numerous startups in wireless communication and mobile health 
care ˜elds, and is the founder and CEO of Kesembe Inc. Mr. Ziv is serving 
as a judge in both Nokia Sensing XPrize Challenge competitions, and as a 
technical advisor to XPrize in the Qualcomm Tricorder XPrize Competi
-tion. Noam worked at Qualcomm for 23 years. His leadership roles there 
included overall technical and system engineering lead for Qualcomm™s 
cellular infrastructure development program, Technical liaison to Nortel, 
Alcatel, and the Electronic and Telecommunications Research Institute 
(ETRI), South Korea. Mr. Ziv was vice president of engineering leading 
Qualcomm™s Corporate Research and Development software organization 
for over a decade. He made signi˜cant contributions to the design and 
implementation of software, hardware, systems, protocols, and custom 
silicon circuits (ASICs). Mr. Ziv is the inventor and architect of Qualcomm™s 
2net platform, and was an active contributor to multiple key technologies 
and products. Mr. Ziv was also a member of the original team that invented 
and implemented CDMA (Code-Division Multiple Access) cellular com
-munication technology. Mr. Ziv earned a bachelor of science in computer 
engineering at the Technion (Israel Institute of Technology) and has been 
granted more than 20 patents.The Promises and Perils of Digital Strategies in Achieving Health Equity: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.