DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/23686A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems Education106 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-45163-5 | DOI 10.17226/23686Committee on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems Education; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and MedicineA 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems Education
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
A Report of
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
This activity was supported by Award No. CNS-1341078 from the National Science 
Foundation. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed 
in this publication do not necessarily re˚ect the views of any organization or 
agency that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-45163-5
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-45163-9
Digital Object Identi˜er:
 10.17226/23686
Additional copies of this report are available for sale from the National Academies 
Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or 
(202) 334-3313; http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2016 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medi
-cine. 2016. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems Education.
 Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press. doi:10.17226/23686.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences
 was established in 1863 by an Act of Con
-gress, signed by President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution 
to advise the nation on issues related to science and 
 
technology. Members are 
elected by their peers for outstanding contributions to research. Dr. Marcia 
McNutt is president.The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964 under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences to bring the practices of engineering to ad
-vising the nation. Members are elected by their peers for extraordinary contribu
-tions to engineering. Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president.
The National Academy of Medicine
 (formerly the Institute of Medicine) was 
established in 1970 under the charter of the National Academy of 
 
Sciences to 
advise the nation on medical and health issues. Members are elected by their 
peers for distinguished contributions to medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau 
is president.The three Academies work together as the 
National Academies of Sciences, En
-gineering, and Medicine
 to provide independent, objective analysis and advice 
to the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform 
public policy decisions. The National Academies also encourage education and 
research, recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and increase public 
understanding in matters of science, engineering, and medicine. Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medi
-cine at www.national-academies.org
. A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Reports
 document the evidence-based consensus of an authoring committee of 

based on information gathered by the committee and committee deliberations. 
Reports are peer reviewed and are approved by the National Academies of Sci
-ences, Engineering, and Medicine.Proceedings
 chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop, sym-posium, or other convening event. The statements and opinions contained in 
proceedings are those of the participants and have not been endorsed by other 
participants, the planning committee, or the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine.For information about other products and activities of the National Academies, 
please visit nationalacademies.org/whatwedo.A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON 21ST CENTURY 
 CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
JOHN A. (JACK) STANKOVIC, University of Virginia, 
Co-Chair
JAMES (JIM) STURGES, Lockheed Martin Corporation (retired), 
Co-Chair
ALEXANDRE BAYEN, University of California, Berkeley
CHARLES R. FARRAR
, Los Alamos 
National 
Laboratory
MARYE ANNE FOX, NAS,
1 University of California, San Diego
SANTIAGO GRIJALVA, Georgia Institute of Technology
HIMANSHU KHURANA, Honeywell International, Inc.
P.R. KUMAR, NAE,
2 Texas A&M University, College Station
INSUP LEE, University of Pennsylvania
WILLIAM MILAM, Ford Motor Company
SANJOY K. MITTER, NAE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
JOSÉ M.F. MOURA, NAE, Carnegie Mellon University
GEORGE J. PAPPAS, University of Pennsylvania
PAULO TABUADA, University of California, Los Angeles
MANUELA M. VELOSO
, 
Carnegie Mellon University
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director, Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Administrative Assistant
CHRISTOPHER JONES, Associate Program Of˜cer
1 NAS, National Academy of Sciences.
2 NAE, National Academy of Engineering.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
FARNAM JAHANIAN, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Chair
LUIZ ANDRE BARROSO, Google, Inc. 
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, NAE, Columbia University
ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC
EDWARD FRANK, Cloud Parity, Inc.
LAURA HAAS, NAE, IBM Corporation
MARK HOROWITZ, NAE, Stanford University
ERIC HORVITZ, NAE, Microsoft Research
VIJAY KUMAR, NAE, University of Pennsylvania
BETH MYNATT, Georgia Institute of Technology
CRAIG PARTRIDGE, Raytheon BBN Technologies
DANIELA RUS, NAE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
FRED B. SCHNEIDER, NAE, Cornell University
MARGO SELTZER, Harvard University
JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia
MOSCHE VARDI, NAS/NAE, Rice University
KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Administrative Assistant
JANEL DEAR, Senior Program Assistant
EMILY GRUMBLING, Program Of˜cer
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
CHRISTOPHER JONES, Associate Program Of˜cer
KATIRIA ORTIZ, Research Associate
For more information on CSTB, see its website at http://www.cstb.org, 
write to CSTB, National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medi
-cine, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or 
e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are ﬁengineered systems that are built 
from, and depend upon, the seamless integration of computational algo
-rithms and physical components.ﬂ1 CPS are increasingly relied on to 
provide the functionality and value of products, systems, and infrastruc
-ture in sectors such as transportation (aviation, automotive, rail, and 
marine), health care, manufacturing, and energy networks. Advances in 
CPS could yield systems that can communicate and respond faster than 
humans (e.g., autonomous collision avoidance for automobiles) or more 
precisely (e.g., robotic surgery); enable better control and coordination of 
large-scale systems, such as the electrical grid or traf˜c controls; improve 
the ef˜ciency of systems (e.g., smart buildings); and enable advances in 
many areas of science (e.g. autonomous telescopes that capture astro
-nomical transients). Cyber-physical systems have the potential to provide 
much richer functionalityŠincluding ef˜ciency, ˚exibility, autonomy, and 
reliabilityŠthan systems that are loosely coupled, discrete, or manually 
operated, but CPS also can create vulnerability related to security and 
reliability.
Building on its research program in CPS, the National Science Foun
-dation (NSF) has begun to explore requirements for education and train
-ing for CPS. As part of that exploration, NSF asked the National Acad
-1 De˜nition from National Science Foundation, 2016, ﬁCyber-Physical Systems,ﬂ pro
-gram solicitation 16-549, NSF document number nsf16549, March 4. https://www.nsf.gov/
publications/pub_summ.jsp?ods_key=nsf16549.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii PREFACE
emies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine to study the topic, organize 
workshops, and prepare interim and ˜nal reports examining the need for 
and content of a CPS education (Box P-1). The results of this study are 
intended to inform those who might support efforts to develop curricula 
and materials (including but not limited to NSF); faculty and univer
-sity administrators; industries with needs for CPS workers; and current 
and potential students about intellectual foundations, workforce require
-ments, employment opportunities, and curricular needs.
The report examines the intellectual content of the emerging ˜eld of 
CPS and its implications for engineering and computer science education. 
Other National Academies reports have examined broader related topics 
such as the future of engineering education more generally
2 and how to 
overcome barriers to completing 2- and 4-year science, technology, engi
-neering, and mathematics degrees.
3 To gather perspectives on these topics, the Committee on 21st Cen
-tury Cyber-Physical Systems Education (committee biographical informa
-2 National Academy of Engineering, 2005, 
Educating the Engineer of 2020: Adapting Engineer
-ing Education to the New Century, 
The
 National Academies Press, Washington, D.C.
3 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 
Barriers and Opportunities 
for 2-Year and 4-Year STEM Degrees: Systemic Change to Support Diverse Student Pathways
 (S. Malcom and M. Feder, eds.), The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2016, 
doi: 10.17226/21739.
BOX P.1
 Statement of Task
An ad hoc committee will conduct a study on
 the current and future needs in 
education for cyber-physical systems (CPS). Two workshops would be convened 
early on to gather input and foster dialogue, and a brief interim report would be 
prepared to highlight emerging themes and summarize related discussions from 

century CPS-capable U.S. workforce. It would explore the corresponding educa
-tional requirements, examine efforts already under way, and propose strategies 
and programs to develop faculty and teachers, materials, and curricula. It would 

the multiple disciplines that are relevant to CPS and how to foster multidisci
-plinary study and work. In conducting the
 study, the committee
 would focus on undergraduate education and also consider implications for graduate education, 


engineering, and technical workforce but would also consider broader needs for 
CPS survey courses.A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 ixtion is provided in Appendix A) convened two workshops and received 
brie˜ngs from additional experts (all presenters and briefers are listed 
in Appendix B, and the workshop agendas are provided in Appendix 
C). The committee™s interim report,
4 released in 2015, summarizes many 
of those presentations and discussions. This ˜nal report also draws on 
an additional set of brie˜ngs (listed in Appendix B) obtained since the 
interim report was issued. Informed by these inputs as well as a review 
of current CPS courses, course materials, and curricula and other informa
-tion compiled for this study, the committee™s ˜ndings and recommenda
-tions are based on the committee™s collective judgment.
The key messages of the reports and the committee™s ˜ndings and 
recommendations are presented in the Summary. Chapter 1 of this report 
explores the need for CPS education, and Chapter 2 highlights the essen
-tial knowledge and skills needed by a person developing CPS. Chapter 3 
provides examples of how these foundations in CPS education might be 
integrated into various curricula, and Chapter 4 discusses how such cur
-ricula might be developed and institutionalized. 
Jack Stankovic and Jim Sturges, 
Co-Chairs
Committee on 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems
  Education 
4 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 
Interim Report on 21st Cen
-tury Cyber-Physical Systems Education
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 
2015.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. The purpose of this 
independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will 
assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible 
and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, 
evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments 
and draft manuscript remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the 
deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals for their 
review of this report:
Ella M. Atkins, University of Michigan,
Robert F. Brammer, Brammer Technology, LLC,
Harry H. Cheng, University of California, Davis,
Elsa M. Garmire, NAE,
1 Dartmouth College,
Scott Hareland, Medtronics,
Mats P. Heimdahl, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Ken Hoyme, Adventium Labs,
Edward A. Lee, University of California, Berkeley,
Jerome P. Lynch, University of Michigan, 
Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, University of California, Berkeley,
Robert F. Sproull, NAE, University of Massachusetts, and
Yannis C. Yortsos, NAE, University of Southern California.
1 
NAE, National Academy of Engineering.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report 
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Philip M. 
Neches, Teradata Corporation, and Samuel H. Fuller, Analog Devices, 
Inc., who were responsible for making certain that an independent exami
-nation of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional pro
-cedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. Respon
-sibility for the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring 
committee and the institution.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Contents
SUMMARY
 11  
THE TRANSFORMATIVE NATURE OF CPS AND 
 13
 WORKFORCE NEEDS
 The Transformative Nature of CPS, 13
 Building a CPS Workforce, 18
 CPS: An Emerging Engineering Discipline, 22
2  
CPS PRINCIPLES, FOUNDATIONS, SYSTEM
 24 
 CHARACTERISTICS, AND COMPLEMENTARY SKILLS
 Principles: Integrating the Physical and Cyber, 25
 Foundations of CPS, 27
 System Characteristics, 30
 Complementary Skills, 32
3 PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 34
 Overview of Relevant Existing Paths and Programs to 
   
CPS Expertise, 36
 K-12 Education Programs, 38
 Vocational and Community Colleges, 39
 Undergraduate Courses, Concentrations, and Programs, 40
 Graduate Degree Programs, 59
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv CONTENTS4 DEVELOPING AND INSTITUTIONALIZING CPS 
 60
  CURRICULA 
  Drawing Students to CPS, 60
 Recruiting, Retaining, and Developing the Needed Faculty, 62
 Curriculum Development and Resources, 65
 Fostering Development of the CPS Discipline and CPS 
   
Education, 67
APPENDIXES
A Biographies of Committee Members and Staff
 71
B Briefers to the Study Committee
 82
C Workshop Agendas
 84
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary
Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are ﬁengineered systems that are built 
from, and depend upon, the seamless integration of computational algo
-rithms and physical components.ﬂ
1 CPS can be small and closed, such as 
an arti˜cial pancreas, or very large, complex, and interconnected, such 
as a regional energy grid. CPS engineering
2 focuses on managing inter
-dependencies and impact of physical aspects on cyber aspects, and vice 
versa. With the development of low-cost sensing, powerful embedded 
system hardware, and widely deployed communication networks, the 
reliance on CPS for system functionality has dramatically increased. These 
technical developments in combination with the creation of a workforce 
skilled in engineering CPS will allow the deployment of increasingly 
capable, adaptable, and trustworthy systems.
CPS ENGINEERING AND THE CPS WORKFORCE
CPS are already widely deployed and used today. Examples include 
automobiles that sense impending crashes and perform various tasks to 
1 De˜nition from National Science Foundation, 2016, ﬁCyber-Physical Systems,ﬂ Pro
-gram Solicitation 16-549, NSF document number nsf16549, March 4, https://www.nsf.gov/
publications/pub_summ.jsp?ods_key=nsf16549.
2 
The committee uses the terms ﬁCPS engineeringﬂ and ﬁCPS engineerﬂ to mean a set of 
skills and knowledge needed to design and build a CPS and a person with those skills; the 
terms are not limited to a set of credentials or to someone who has a degree or certi˜cation 
in CPS.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
protect passengers and medical devices that sense glucose levels or the 
heart™s rhythm and intervene to restore normal body function. As these 
examples illustrate, CPS often support critical missions that have signi˜
-cant economic and societal importance and raise signi˜cant safety and 
cybersecurity concerns. However, today™s practice of CPS system design 
and implementation is often ad hoc, not taking advantage of even the 
limited theory that exists today, and unable to support the level of com
-plexity, scalability, security, safety, interoperability, and ˚exible design and 
operation that will be required to meet future needs.
Engineers responsible for developing CPS but lacking the appropriate 
education or training may not fully understand at an appropriate depth, 
on the one hand, the technical issues associated with the CPS software 
and hardware or, on the other hand, techniques for physical system mod
-eling, energy and power, actuation, signal processing, and control. In 
addition, these engineers may be designing and implementing life-critical 
systems without appropriate formal training in CPS methods needed for 
veri˜cation and to assure safety, reliability, and security. 
A workforce with the appropriate education, training, and skills will 
be better positioned to create and manage the next generation of CPS 
solutions. Building this workforce will require attention to educating the 
future workforce with all the required skillsŠintegrated from the ground 
upŠas well as providing the existing workforce with the needed supple
-mentary education.
 It proved dif˜cult to obtain comprehensive data on industrial demand 
for CPS skills, and the committee was not in a position to commission 
systematic surveys to collect such information itself. Instead, the com
-mittee has relied on the perspectives of industry experts, including those 
who briefed the committee or who participated in the two workshops 
convened during its study. It was also apparent from these presentations 
that the CPS ˜eld will continue to evolve as new applications emerge and 
as more research is done.
FINDING 1.1:
 CPS are emerging as an area of engineering with sig
-ni˜cant economic and societal implications. Major industrial sectors 
such as transportation, medicine, energy, defense, and information 
technology increasingly need a workforce capable of designing and 
engineering products and services that intimately combine cyber ele
-ments (computing hardware and software) and physical components 
and manage their interactions and impact on the physical environ
-ment. Although it is dif˜cult to quantify the demand, a likely implica
-tion is that more CPS-capable engineers will be needed.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3FINDING 1.2: 
The future CPS workforce is likely to include a com
-bination of (1) engineers trained in foundational ˜elds (such as elec
-trical and computing engineering, mechanical engineering, systems 
engineering, and computer science); (2) engineers trained in speci˜c 
applied engineering ˜elds (such as aerospace and civil engineering); 
and (3) CPS engineers, who focus on the knowledge and skills span
-ning cyber technology and physical systems that operate in the physi-cal world. 
The mix of programs offered by universities will re˚ect the perspec
-tives of individual institutions, their resources, and the demand universi
-ties see from students and their employers, and in turn affect the educa
-tional backgrounds of the CPS workforce. Over time, as the ˜eld itself 
changes and matures, education and employer demand will co-evolve.
FINDING 1.3: Given that most entry-level engineering and com-puter science positions are ˜lled by undergraduates, it is important 
to incorporate CPS into the undergraduate engineering and computer 
science curricula.
RECOMMENDATION 1.1:
 The National Science Foundation, 
together with universities, should support the creation and evolution 
of undergraduate education courses, programs, and pathways so that 
engineering and computer science graduates have more opportunities 
to gain the knowledge and skills required to engineer cyber-physical 
systems. The efforts should be complemented by initiatives to aug
-ment the skills of the existing workforce through continuing educa
-tion and master™s degree programs.
CPS PRINCIPLES, FOUNDATIONS, SYSTEM 
CHARACTERISTICS, AND COMPLEMENTARY SKILLS
This section summarizes the knowledge and skills needed to engineer 
CPS. It is derived from an examination of existing courses, programs, 
and instructional materials as well as consideration of the topics high
-lighted in comments from industry experts. The emphasis is deliberately 
on core principles and foundations re˚ecting the challenge of packing the 
material needed to span both cyber and physical aspects into an already 
crowded engineering curricula. 
The committee has identi˜ed the following four broad areas for CPS 
education programs to cover: 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
 Principles
 that de˜ne the integration of physical and cyber aspects 
in such areas as communication and networking, real-time operation, 
distributed and embedded systems, physical properties of hardware and 
the environment, and human interaction. 
 Foundations of CPS
 in (1) basic computing concepts, (2) computing 
for the physical world, (3) discrete and continuous mathematics, (4) cross-
cutting applications, (5) modeling, and (6) system development. 
 System characteristics required of CPS, such as security and privacy; 
interoperability; reliability and dependability; power and energy man
-agement; safety; stability and performance of dynamic and stochastic 
systems; and human factors and usability.
Each area is brie˚y outlined in the sections below (and discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 2).
Principles
CPS bridges engineering and physical world applications and the 
computer engineering hardware and computer science cyber worlds. 
Basic principles of the physical world include physics, mathematical mod
-eling, analysis, and algorithm and systems design and deal with their 
associated uncertainty and risk. Principles of the computer engineering 
and computer science (cyber) worlds deal with embedded computation 
and communications hardware systems, software programming, and net
-working, Because sensors are a key hardware bridge between the physical 
and cyber worlds, it is important to understand the properties of sensors 
and their real-world behavior, and techniques for processing the signals 
they produce. Control theory is an important tenet of CPS; relevant ele
-ments include stability, optimization, and how to control distributed, 
digital systems. 
Foundations of CPS
Drawing on these principles, the committee identi˜ed the following 
six key overarching intellectual foundations for a CPS curriculum:
1.
 Basic computing concepts
 beyond those covered in a couple of intro
-ductory programming courses, such as embedded hardware, data struc
-tur
es, automata theory, and software engineering.
2.
 Computing for the physical world, which involves understanding 
physical world properties, real-time embedded systems, and computing 
resource constraints such as power and memory size. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 53.
 Discrete and continuous mathematics
 beyond calculus, such as differ
-ential equations, probability and stochastic processes, and linear algebra.
4.
 Cross-cutting application of sensing, actuation, control, communica
-tion, and computing re˚ecting the central role of interactions between 
physical and cyber aspects and the reliance on control over communica
-tion networks, sensing, signal processing, and actuation with real-time 
constraints.
5.
 Modeling of heterogeneous and dynamic systems integrating control, 
computing, and communication,
 with emphasis on uncertainty and system 
heterogeneity, including such techniques as linear and nonlinear mod
-els, stochastic models, discrete-event and hybrid models, and associated 
design methodologies based on optimization, probability theory, and 
dynamic programming. 
6.
 CPS system development
, especially for safety-critical, high-
con˜dence, and resilient systems, requires a life-cycle view from initial 
requirements to testing to certi˜cation and in-service use, including for
-mal veri˜cation and validation procedures and adaptable designs that can 
accommodate system evolution.
FINDING 2.1: Core CPS knowledge involves not only an understand
-ing of the basics of physical engineering and cyber design and imple
-mentation, but understanding how the physical and cyber aspects 
in˚uence and affect each other.
RECOMMENDATION 2.1: 
Cyber-physical systems educational pro
-grams should provide a foundation that highlights the interaction of 
cyber and physical aspects of systems. Most current courses fail to 
emphasize the interaction, implying that new courses and instruc
-tional materials are needed.
System Characteristics
Many CPS are large, complex, and/or safety critical. Successful devel
-opment of such systems requires knowledge of how to ensure that sys
-tems possess the following characteristics: 
 Security and privacy,
 Interoperability,
 Reliability and dependability,
 Power and energy management,
 Safety,
 Stability and performance, and
 Human factors and usability. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
These topics are best introduced early and infused throughout the 
CPS curriculum in coursework and projects, much as the best practice in 
engineering is to address these issues from the outset of system design.
Complementary Skills
The growing scale and complexity of engineering systems mean that 
engineers are increasingly working collaboratively with experts from 
multiple disciplines. ﬁSoftﬂ skillsŠin such areas as communication, ˚exi
-bility, and an ability to work on teams, including multiple disciplinesŠare 
of particular importance for CPS engineering because the work is inher
-ently interdisciplinary. The pace of change in science and engineering 
knowledge generally and the newness and rapid ˚ux of CPS suggest that 
CPS courses and programs emphasizing learning and critical thinking, as 
well as speci˜c techniques and methods, are needed.
BOX S.1 Paths for Teaching Cyber-Physical Systems
Potential perspectives and paths for teaching CPS include the following:
 Exposure to CPS in K-12. 

-es in, for example, basic calculus, physics, programming, or robotics could relieve 
some of the pressure on an already-crowded undergraduate curriculum and would 
in any event help ensure that students arrive ready to embark on a CPS-focused curriculum when they begin their undergraduate studies. Existing science, technol-ogy, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) initiatives and the Computer Science 


core concepts.  Vocational and community college programs.
 These programs play sev
-eral roles in developing the workforce: a pathway to 4-year institutions, vocational 
training, and updating the skills of the existing workforce. Adding CPS skills to 
community college programs would not only create paths to 4-year CPS degrees 
but would also train the workforce that will be needed to operate and maintain 
increasingly complex CPS. Mid-career engineers may also need to bolster their 
skills and knowledge as their jobs increasingly involve CPS.
 Inclusion of CPS in introductory engineering and computer science 
courses. The majority of engineers will need a basic understanding in the com
-plexities of building and maintaining CPS. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 7 One or more CPS survey courses taught at the undergraduate level.
 Sur-vey courses provide students with a basic understanding of CPS and the key chal
-lenges to their design, both of which are especially important for domain experts 
from the individual engineering disciplines (i.e., aerospace, civil, and mechanical 
engineering). Engineering programs that include a CPS concentration or focus. Although 


more deliberate approach to teaching CPS foundations; moreover, this may also 
be true of other areas, including civil, chemical, and biomedical engineering. 


The committee be
-lieves that the creation of a new type of engineerŠa CPS engineer who is an 
expert at the intersection of the cyber and physical issuesŠwill be needed to meet 
workforce needs. 

 A handful of graduate degree programs that 

or computer science slant. An M.Sc. program aimed at graduates from other en
-
 Ph.D. programs in CPS.

-
CPS faculty, combined with industry demand for Ph.D. training and sustained 
research funding, is likely to spur institutions to establish Ph.D. programs. If CPS 


industry than will pursue academic careers. PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
There will be multiple paths for attaining CPS knowledge and skills 
(Box S.1). One reason is that the workforce is likely to include both domain 
experts who are knowledgeable about CPS principles and a new type of 
engineer who is an expert at the intersection of cyber and physical issues. 
Another reason is that many different approaches will be undertaken at 
colleges and universities depending on their present circumstances, such 
as existing department structures and curricula, faculty expertise, and 
available resources. 
Designing a CPS degree is quite complex and involves, for exam
-ple, a careful balancing of physical and cyber aspects and general CPS 
and application knowledge. Because CPS degree curricula are in their 
infancy, they will doubtless evolve substantially as CPS are more widely 
deployed. Moreover, CPS programs will doubtless share with most engi
-A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
neering degree programs the challenge of prioritizing topics to ˜t in a 
manageable 4-year program of study.
FINDING 3.1: The diversity of current departmental structures, 
faculty expertise and interests, and curricula suggest that there are 
multiple feasible and appropriate models for strengthening CPS engi
-neering. The committee envisions that universities will (1) enrich cur-rent engineering programs with CPS content, (2) create CPS survey 
courses, (3) create new master™s-level CPS degrees, and, ultimately, 
(4) develop new undergraduate CPS engineering degree programs. 
Many universities may not currently have the expertise or resources 
to establish extensive CPS education programs. A useful alternative in 
these cases would be to forge more limited partnerships among several 
departments to implement jointly taught courses. For example, key CPS 
content could be introduced into mechatronics, robotics, or transporta
-tion courses. Doing so over time could help reduce the burdens associ
-ated with infusing CPS throughout engineering and building the courses 
needed to implement a CPS program.
FINDING 3.2: 
Because CPS engineering centers on the interaction of 
physical and cyber aspects of systems, it will often not be suf˜cient 
to create CPS curricula by simply combining material from existing 
courses. New courses will need to be designed.
RECOMMENDATION 3.1:
 The National Science Foundation should 
support the development of university education programs that 
de˜ne a path and plan for the creation of a cyber-physical systems 
engineering degree. 
RECOMMENDATION 3.2:
 The National Science Foundation, pro
-fessional societies, and university administrations should support 
and consider allocating resources for the development of new cyber-
physical systems (CPS)-focused courses within existing engineering 
programs, new CPS-speci˜c classes for CPS engineering majors and 
minors, and an overall curriculum for an undergraduate CPS engi
-neering degree program.
 RECOMMENDATION 3.3: 
Universities should consider add-ing cyber-physical systems content to freshman-level introductory 
courses for students in all areas of engineering and computer science. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 9RECOMMENDATION 3.4:
 Engineering schools, by-and-large, have 
already redesigned their curricula to emphasize project-based learn
-ing. Because this is especially important for cyber-physical systems 
(CPS) education, these project-based courses should be extended to 
support CPS principles and foundations.
OPPORTUNITIES AND OBSTACLES FOR 
INSTITUTIONALIZING CPS CURRICULA
Several obstacles stand in the way of building successful CPS pro
-grams. The nature of CPS makes it dif˜cult to develop and teach CPS-
focused curricula. Moreover, although students may be interested in CPS 
technologies or in the applications that CPS enable, they may not realize 
that they ought to seek out courses or a program that emphasizes CPS 
knowledge and skills. Also, few mechanisms exist to support extensive 
faculty commitment to a new interdisciplinary discipline, which makes 
it hard to develop, recruit, or retain the faculty needed to provide an up-
to-date CPS education for undergraduate students. Moreover, an array of 
resourcesŠfrom new textbooks to laboratory equipmentŠis needed to 
support any new curriculum.
Drawing Students to CPS
At the undergraduate level, one key will be exposing STEM-oriented 
students to the existence of the ˜eld of CPS, its links to related areas like 
robotics and the Internet of Things (IoT), and the potential bene˜ts of 
its formal study. One important opportunity is to include CPS as part of 
freshman ﬁintroduction to engineeringﬂ programs across engineering and 
not just in computer science and electrical engineering. 
FINDING 4.1: Although there are many STEM courses and programs 
at the high school and undergraduate level that introduce the stu
-dents to some CPS elements, such programs often do not provide a 
broad introduction to CPS foundations and principles and tend to be 
overly focused either on simplistic applications or discipline-centric 
content.
RECOMMENDATION 4.1: 
Those developing K-12 science, technol
-ogy, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs and educat
-ing and training STEM teachers should consider opportunities to 
enrich these programs with cyber-physical systems (CPS) concepts 
and applications in order to lay intellectual foundations for future 
work and expose students to CPS career opportunities.
 A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
FINDING 4.2: 
Incoming college students appear to be unfamiliar 
with the term CPS, CPS concepts, and job opportunities in CPS. They 
are, however, drawn to courses and programs in more widely vis
-ible CPS-related topics such as robotics, the Internet of Things (IoT), 
health care, smart cities, and the Industrial Internet.
RECOMMENDATION 4.2: 
Those developing cyber-physical systems 
engineering courses and programs should consider leveraging the 
visibility of and student interest in areas such as robotics, the Inter
-net of Things, health care, smart cities, and the Industrial Internet in 
descriptions of careers, courses, and programs and when selecting 
applications used in courses and projects. 
Recruiting, Retaining, and Developing the Needed Faculty
Faculty teaching CPS courses will be most effective if they are able to 
draw on expertise in particular aspects of CPS, knowledge of the other 
aspects of a complete CPS system, and domain- or application-speci˜c 
needs. Today, most CPS education (and research) is being performed by a 
small number of faculty members who previously established themselves 
in a related ˜eld and then ventured into this newer, more interdisciplin
-ary ˜eld. 
In the long term, academic institutions will have opportunities to 
recruit new faculty who have graduated with a CPS degree or specializa
-tion and who have a record of conducting CPS-speci˜c research as well 
as people with industrial experience with CPS engineering. Indeed, some 
institutions have already begun explicitly looking for such individuals. 
Both research funding and opportunities for academic advancement are 
needed to develop a pool of faculty. The National Science Foundation™s 
Cyber-Physical Systems program has helped build an academic commu
-nity around CPS and foster links between academia and industry. The 
parallel development of several well-recognized CPS conferences and the 
creation of a new CPS journal have also made it easier for faculty with a 
multidisciplinary pro˜le to establish themselves as CPS researchers and 
still meet the academic evaluation criteria. Nevertheless, it will take time 
and investment to build the necessary complement of faculty to educate 
those who engineer CPS.
 FINDING 4.3: 
Because CPS is a new ˜eld that draws on multiple 
disciplines, not all institutions can be expected to have enough faculty 
with the requisite knowledge to teach all of the courses needed for a 
CPS degree program.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 11RECOMMENDATION 4.3:
 The National Science Foundation should 
support the development of cyber-physical systems faculty through 
the use of teaching grants and fellowships.
Despite the challenges of entering a new ˜eld, young faculty may 
have an advantage becoming leaders in the CPS ˜eld, given the novelty 
of the area, because they do not need to compete with the large number of 
well-established and well-recognized leaders found in more mature ˜elds. 
Developing Needed Courses and Instructional Materials
Although the committee was encouraged by the release of several 
textbooks during the course of its work, the number of textbooks, curricu-lar materials, and laboratory facilities that exist to support CPS remains 
limited. Just as merely regrouping current classes will not yield a CPS 
curriculum, current texts may not fully incorporate the effects of the 
physical system on cyber technology, and vice versa. Furthermore, often 
the complexity of CPS demands that students gain a full understanding 
of how the physical environment impacts these systems. Realistic models 
can provide some of this knowledge, but testbeds will be needed for stu
-dents to fully realize the constraints the physical environment can create. 
These testbeds are expensive to create and maintain, and many universi
-ties do not have, or will not allocate, the resources to create such testbeds. 
FINDING 4.4: 
If they are to teach new CPS courses and build CPS 
programs, universities will need to allocate time and resources to 
develop CPS course materials and to provide the necessary laboratory 
space and equipment (including both virtual and physical testbeds). 
FINDING 4.5: 
Testbeds are needed to provide students with suf˜
-ciently realistic applications and problems. These can be both virtual 
and physical and can be remotely accessed and shared among mul
-tiple institutions and developed and operated in cooperation with 
industry.
RECOMMENDATION 4.4: 
The National Science Foundation, profes
-sional societies, and universities should support the development and 
evolution of cyber-physical systems textbooks, class modules (includ
-ing laboratory modules), and testbeds. These parties should partner 
with industry in developing and maintaining realistic testbeds. 
* * *
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
As CPS become more pervasive, demand will grow for a workforce 
with the capacity and capability to design, develop, and maintain them. 
An understanding of not only the cyber or the physical aspects of systems, 
but also their interactions will become more and more valuable. A work
-force with these skills will be better positioned to help industry pursue 
current and future advances across the myriad applications for CPS. The 
actions recommended in this report point to ways to ensure that aspiring 
engineers and computer scientists are equipped with the skills necessary 
to meet the demand for a modern CPS workforce. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
1The Transformative Nature of 
CPS and Workforce Needs
This chapter discusses the transformative nature of cyber-physical 
systems (CPS), their importance to industry, and the associated workforce 
needs. It looks at broad indicators of the economic importance of CPS 
applications as well as testimony presented to the committee about the 
CPS skills sought by industry. 
THE TRANSFORMATIVE NATURE OF CPS 
The engineered world has seen a major transformation during the last 
few decades. Elements that previously existed in purely mechanical or 
electrical (i.e., physical) form, and in particular those elements describing 
logic, control, and decision-making, increasingly take the form of embed
-ded systems and software (i.e., cyber elements). The acronym CPS is often 
used to describe ﬁengineered systems that are built from, and depend 
upon, the seamless integration of computational algorithms and physical 
components.ﬂ
1 In this de˜nition, ﬁcyberﬂ refers to the computers, soft
-ware, data structures, and networks that support decision-making within 
the system, and ﬁphysicalﬂ denotes not only the parts of the physical 
systems (e.g., the mechanical and electrical components of an automated 
vehicle) but also the physical world in which the system interacts (e.g., 
1 
De˜nition from National Science Foundation (NSF), 2016, ﬁCyber-Physical Systems,ﬂ 
program solicitation 16-549, NSF document number nsf16549, March 4, https://www.nsf.
gov/publications/pub_summ.jsp?ods_key=nsf16549.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
roads and pedestrians). CPS is closely related to terms in common use 
today, such as Internet of Things (IoT), the Industrial Internet, and smart 
cities, and to the ˜elds of robotics and systems engineering (Box 1.1).
Several emerging technology trends support the increased deploy
-ment of CPS:
 Communication networks, databases, and distributed systems 
allow control and decision-making on physical systems to be done 
remotely, collaboratively, and in a distributed manner, which is enabling 
functionality impossible a few years ago. 
 The developments that have given rise to the ˜eld of data science 
make it possible to collect, store, analyze, and act on large amount of real-
world data.
 Decreasing costs of components and systems have allowed the use 
of CPS within everyday devices such as home thermostats and automo
-bile brakes. For example, lower cost sensors are being deployed across the 
board, from the use of sensor nets to detect approaching natural disasters 
such as ˚ooding and earthquakes to those that support safer car travel. 
 Wide deployment and increased reliability of high-speed wireless 
networks support devices that rely on a continuous connection to the 
Internet. 
CPS can be small and self-contained, such as an arti˜cial pancreas, or 
very large and complex, such as a regional energy grid. They are increas
-ingly used to provide economically or societally important capabilities, 
many with critical infrastructure or life-safety implications (Box 1.2). CPS 
can provide extraordinary ˚exibility by allowing unprecedented growth 
in economy, functionality, safety, performance, and accuracy of control 
and operational decision-making. Indeed, virtually all industries have 
embraced CPS. A recent McKinsey Global Institute report on the IoT, for 
which CPS provides the technical foundation, captured some of the eco
-nomic importance of CPS applications succinctly by stating, ﬁthe hype has 
been greatŠthe value may be greater.ﬂ
2 The McKinsey report estimates 
a potential worldwide economic impact of as much as ﬁ$11.1 trillion per 
year in 2025 for IoT applications in nine settingsﬂŠdevices attached to 
or inside the human body, homes, retail environments, of˜ces, factories, 
custom production environments, vehicles, cities, and other outside set
-tings.
3 Gartner recently forecast a 30 percent increase in the number of 
2 McKinsey Global Institute, 2015, The Internet of Things: Mapping the Value Beyond the Hype
, June, http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/business-technology/our-insights/
the-internet-of-things-the-value-of-digitizing-the-physical-world.
3 Ibid, p. 2-3.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TRANSFORMATIVE NATURE OF CPS AND WORKFORCE NEEDS
 15BOX 1.1 Areas Related to Cyber-Physical Systems
and underpins several important technical visions.
 Robotics
 focuses on systems incorporating sensors and actuators that op
-erate autonomously or semi-autonomously in cooperation with humans.
 It encom
-passes an array of topics that include kinematics, dynamics, and path planning; 
robot hardware and control software; perception, sensing, and state estimation; 
and control of manipulators and vehicles. Many robots would be considered CPS, 

CPS are not robots, and some of the topics covered in a robotics program are 

 Systems engineering

such topics as modeling and integration. However, systems engineering typically 
concentrates on the organization, management, and integration required for large 
systems but does not necessarily address the detailed technological needs that 
arise in combining the physical with the cyber aspects of systems. 
 The Internet of Things


-
physical attributes, and virtual personalities and use intelligent interfaces, and 
are seamlessly integrated into the information network, and often communicate 
data associated with users and their environments.ﬂ
 As IoT progresses, it is 
increasingly being applied to applications that require CPS characteristics such 
as control, real-time response, and safety-critical operation. IoT applications like 
smart cities (see below) are rapidly becoming more sophisticated and reliant on 
CPS capabilities.  The Industrial Internet
  3 combines the IoT with the ability to collect and 
analyze large volumes of data to manage industrial systems and operations.  Smart cities is a vision in which urban areas and other communities le
-verage information technology to better manage community infrastructure and 

-plications augment sensing and monitoring with real-time response and control, 
they become reliant on CPS capabilities. 
 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, UAE Section homepage, http://www.

The Internet of Things 2012: New Horizons
, Internet of Things 

3
Pitches an Industrial Internet,ﬂ MIT Technology Review

 

A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
ﬁconnected thingsﬂ from 2015 to 2016 and a threefold increase to over 
20 billion devices in 2020.
4 A related concept is the Industrial Internet, 
which combines IoT and big data analytics for industrial applications. A 
2015 report from GE and the consulting ˜rm Accenture cites projections 
4 
Gartner, Inc., 2015, ﬁGartner Says 6.4 Billion Connected ‚Things™ Will Be in Use in 2016, 
Up 30 Percent From 2015,ﬂ press release, November 10, 2015, http://www.gartner.com/
newsroom/id/3165317.
BOX 1.2 A CPS-Enabled Future
Cyber-physical systems (CPS) can be used to provide economically or soci
-etally important capabilities in the following areas: 
 Transportation.
 CPS is already used in automobiles that can sense im
-pending crashes and perform various tasks to protect passengers. CPS technolo
-gies promise to greatly reduce the annual death toll from car crashes caused by 
human error and to reduce greatly the time wasted and pollution generated by 
highway congestion. CPS technologies for aviation and airport safety technology 
could relieve congestion and enable safe integration of autonomous air vehicles 
into U.S. airspace. 
 Manufacturing. The complexity of what can be designed and built and 
what society demands is constantly increasing. The time scale for product develop
-ment cycles is decreasing, even as product variety is increasing. CPS technologies 


-facturing facilities). Health care.

glucose levels or heart rhythm abnormalities and intervene to restore normal body 
function Applied more broadly, CPS will help to scale access to care for a growing 

in the design of more cost-effective, easier-to-certify, and safer medical products. 
 Energy. Renewable electric energy resources are intermittent and uncer
-tain, necessitating new sensors, switches, and meters, and also an infrastructure 

distribution system that allows consumers to manage their energy use.
 Agriculture. With global population projected to surpass 9 billion people 

between production and consumption,


-

Global Food Losses and Food Waste
, Rome, Italy, http://www.fao.org/food-loss-and-food-waste/en/, p. v.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TRANSFORMATIVE NATURE OF CPS AND WORKFORCE NEEDS
 17that worldwide Industrial Internet spending could reach $500 million by 
2020 and be responsible for as much as $15 trillion of the global economy 
by 2030.
5 At the same time, ˜rms in the information technology sector are 
increasingly investing in CPS areas such as self-driving cars (e.g., Google 
and Uber) and the IoT (e.g., IBM). 
Speaking to the potential of CPS and the technical challenges of real
-izing that potential, in testimony to the House Committee on Science and 
Technology in 2008, Don Winter, vice president for engineering and infor
-mation technology at Boeing Phantom Works, observed the following:
Cyber-physical systems are pervasive at Boeing, and in the aerospace 
industry at large. They are becoming increasingly prevalent in other sec
-tors, notably automotive and energy management. Their importance to 
our products is huge and their complexity is growing at an exponential 
rate.
6The contribution of CPS to aerospace systems has grown dramatically, 
noted Winter, having risen from less than 10 percent of the design, devel
-opment, validation, and certi˜cation cost for transport aircraft in the 1970s 
to about 50 percent by the 2000s. 
It is worth observing that even as it offers enormous safety bene˜ts, 
the adoption of CPS also introduces new risks. For example, although 
it is also susceptible to failure, a purely mechanical linkage may be less 
dangerous than separate sensors and actuators that could lead to failure 
and injury as a result of a software mistake, hardware malfunction, or 
cybersecurity attack. These risks magnify the need for a highly skilled 
workforce.
Foundational advances resulting from academic research will support 
the next generation of CPS that can be designed, implemented, deployed, 
and maintained to meet requirements using emerging functional and non
-functional properties. Advances in achieving functional properties allow 
new solutions to be realized; for example, tomorrow™s solutions will allow 
micro-electric grid transactions for higher energy ef˜ciency and disease 
prevention (not just maintenance). Advances in achieving nonfunctional 
properties (i.e., security, safety, reliability, and dependability) will enable 
future systems to operate with increased con˜dence in the presence of 
riskŠfor example, realizing con˜dence in city-scale autonomous trans
-portation systems. 
5 
General Electric and Accenture, 2014, 
Industrial Internet Insights Report for 2015
, http://
www.ge.com/digital/sites/default/˜les/industrial-internet-insights-report.pdf, accessed 
November 1, 2016.
6 Don C. Winter, 2008, Testimony at a hearing on the Networking and Information Technol
-ogy Research and Development (NITRD) Program, Committee on Science and Technology, 
U.S. House of Representatives, July 31.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
The National Science Foundation (NSF) has an ongoing CPS research 
program that was given additional impetus by recommendations of 
August 2007 and December 2010 reports of the President™s Council of 
Advisors on Science and Technology.
7 Re˚ective of both the diverse appli-cations of CPS and its importance for progress in many sectors, the NSF 
program works with a wide array of federal mission agencies: the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security™s Science and Technology Directorate; 
the U.S. Department of Transportation™s Federal Highway Administration 
and Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Of˜ce; the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration™s Aeronautics Research Mission 
Directorate (ARMD); several institutes and centers of the National Insti
-tutes of Health; and the U.S. Department of Agriculture™s National Insti
-tute of Food and Agriculture.
8 The National Institute of Standards and Technology has established a 
Cyber-Physical Systems and Smart Grid Program Of˜ce pursuing research 
and the development of architectures, frameworks, and standards for CPS 
and CPS applications.
9 Other federal CPS research initiatives include the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency™s Adaptive Vehicle Make 
and High-Assurance Cyber Military Systems programs and the Depart
-ment of Transportation™s Connected Vehicle and Intelligent Transporta
-tion Systems program. CPS research initiatives can also be found in many 
other countries (Box 1.3).
BUILDING A CPS WORKFORCE
It proved dif˜cult for the committee to obtain comprehensive data 
on demand for CPS skills and knowledge. It is especially challenging 
to gather systematic information of the sort requested for an emerging, 
highly interdisciplinary ˜eld like CPS. It is likewise dif˜cult to gather 
even anecdotal information from smaller ˜rms because they tend not to 
have readily identi˜able points of contact on these issues. No surveys 
appear to have been conducted on industrial demand for skills or of 
CPS-related university programs in the United States. Nor do current 
7 
From the President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology reports 
Leadership 
Under Challenge: Information Technology R&D in a Competitive World: An Assessment of the 
Federal Networking and Information Technology R&D Program
, August 2007, and 
Designing a 
Digital Future: Federally Funded Research and Development in Networking and Information Tech
-nology
, December 2010, https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/ostp/pcast/
docsreports; and NSF, 2016, ﬁCyber-Physical Systems,ﬂ program solicitation 16-549.
8 NSF, ﬁCyber-Physical Systems (CPS),ﬂ https://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.
jsp?pims_id=503286, accessed November 1, 2016.
9 National Institute of Standards and Technology, ﬁCyber-Physical Systems,ﬂ https://
www.nist.gov/el/cyber-physical-systems, accessed November 1, 2016.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TRANSFORMATIVE NATURE OF CPS AND WORKFORCE NEEDS
 19government statistics provide suf˜cient granularity to separate out CPS 
positions from other computing or engineering jobs. The committee was 
not in a position to commission systematic surveys of either industry or 
academia to collect such information itself. 
Lacking comprehensive data about workforce needs in CPS, the com
-mittee relied on the perspectives of industry experts who participated in 
BOX 1.3 Global Investments in CPS ResearchThe following are examples of long-term research initiatives in cyber-physical 
systems (CPS): 
 Industry 4.0
 program seeks to use the potential of cyber-
physical systems (the Internet of Things) to maintain industrial leadership. Industry 

intelligent production systems and processes and the realization of distributed and 
networked production sites. The European Union
 (EU) initiated a major joint technology initiative with 


Šby European nations and industry called Advanced 
Research and Technology for Embedded Intelligence Systems
3 and subsequently merged with an integrated circuit technology initiative to create the European Tech
-
and development needs and policies that would foster smart system integration.
4 The current EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (Horizon 

areas, such as smart systems, autonomous systems, intelligent transport systems, 
factory automation, the Internet of Things, and smart communities.
 South Korea
-al IT Industry Promotion Agency (NIPA) programs. CPS was also a major point of 
discussion during a high-level Information and Communication Technology Policy 

5
Digital Economy In Japan and the EU: 
An Assessment of the Common Challenges and the Collaboration Potential

March.
Strategic R&D Opportunities for 
21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems: Connecting Computer and Information Systems with 
the Physical World

3
The Impact of Control Technology
 (T. Samad and 
A.M. Annaswamy, eds.), http://www.ieeecss.org.
4

kt.supa.ac.uk/market/artemis-eniac-eposs.5
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
the two workshops convened during its study as well as a set of brief
-ings. A list of all workshop speakers or briefers to the committee, which 
included a number from industry, can be found in Appendix B. 
Workshop speakers representing a wide array of industry sectorsŠ
automotive, agriculture, medical devices, and space, along with a large 
industrial conglomerate and a vendor of CPS engineering software tools, 
discussed the changing nature of their products, the array of new skills 
needed in their engineering workforce, and the challenges they face in 
developing the necessary talent. A summary of some of their observations 
is provided in Box 1.4. People from diverse industry sectors reported that 
they needed people with CPS engineering skills. In some cases, products 
BOX 1.4 Comments on Industry Need for a CPS-Capable Workforce
Workshop participants and briefers to the committee from several industry 
sectors provided many comments about the growing importance of CPS in industry 
and the resulting demand for CPS skills. These included the following:
 Automotive industry.
 Describing why demand for CPS talent is growing 
in the automotive industry, Craig Stephens, from Ford Research and Advanced 
Engineering, noted that although basic automobile engineering knowledge (such 
as power train, combustion, and emissions) remains fundamental, automotive 
engineers also need to be able to design, develop, and test systems that include 
communication and sensing technologies and more sophisticated computer con
-trols. These new skills are especially important in new applications, such as elec
-
or autonomous driving. Stephens noted that the auto industry has been successful 
in providing the necessary training, but companies like Ford hope that employees 

Inc., cited aeronautics and aerospace as another transportation industry in which 
CPS play an increasingly important role. For example, numerous CPS-intensive 

services) make up the air transportation environment.  Agriculture and construction equipment


increasingly CPS-intensive as well. For example, Deere manufactures partial and 
fully autonomous vehicles, provides mesh wireless and telematics links between 
vehicles, updates and diagnoses faults in its products remotely, and is developing 
applications for the agronomic data that its products collect. Moreover, Williams 
noted, a large industrial farm today is a system of systems and requires a systems 
approach to developing and deploying products and services rather than the tra
-ditional focus on individual products. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TRANSFORMATIVE NATURE OF CPS AND WORKFORCE NEEDS
 21were not being developed because there were not enough people avail
-able with the CPS skills necessary to do the job. In other cases, people 
from industry noted that their workforce would be restructured if more 
CPS-educated individuals were available.
Speaking to the demand for CPS skills, Joseph Salvo, director at GE 
Global Research observed that ﬁgoing forward . . . almost all of our 
employees are going to be touched by this.ﬂ Asked how many CPS engi
-neers Ford Motor Company needed, Craig Stephens, from Ford™s Research 
and Advanced Engineering organization, responded ﬁ[the] short answer 
is, more than we can get.ﬂ 
Given the prevalence of CPS throughout industry, the work of many 
 Medical devices.
discussed the increasing capability of medical devices to monitor and diagnose 
health conditions, be life-sustaining (pacemakers), or simply improve life through 

the skills needed to develop future medical devices. Space. David Nichols and Daniel Dvorak described the CPS needs of 


Curiosity and the 
dealing with autonomy requirements; engineering design at the assembly, subsys
-



who already possess all the needed CPS and other engineering skills. Indeed, 


senior engineers. Tools supporting CPS development

-ware company that develops products that support model-based system engi
-
modeling, algorithm design, control system design, network understanding, and 
engineering process. There is also a new emphasis on CPS skills, including non-
determinism, managing timing and latency, and co-simulation. Mills noted that 


SOURCE: Adapted from National Research Council,
 Interim Report on 21st Centu
-ry Cyber-Physical Systems Education, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
engineers revolves around CPS, whether they consider themselves experts 
in this area or not. Many have not received formal education or training in 
key CPS topics, such as formal methods, veri˜cation, or security, and may 
not fully understand the challenges of designing the software or physical 
systems for life-critical systems. 
Ad hoc CPS system design and implementation runs the risk of not 
supporting the scalability, security, and design ˚exibility required to meet 
today™s and tomorrow™s needs. This is of particular concern given the role 
CPS plays in mission- and safety-critical systems, and the cybersecurity 
challenges faced with all computer systems. Better education and train
-ing and the development of a CPS discipline is therefore a priority, since 
many if not most of the systems that society relies on will be CPS. 
Developing effective CPS solutions requires a workforce that has the 
right mix training and skills. This workforce will include skill levels rang
-ing from those who can help develop sophisticated capabilities to those 
who can help deploy and maintain CPS solutions over long periods of 
time. Engineering projects are by nature collaborative, and engineering 
teams involve a range of expertise, including CPS.
Accordingly, a variety of educational and training regimes will be 
needed. The multidisciplinary skills required will build on existing work
-force capabilities in areas of engineering, computer science, and infor
-mation technology. To that end, part of the effort will need to focus on 
supplementing the skills of the existing workforce, while another part will 
need to focus on a future workforce that has all prerequisite skills built  
in from their education.
FINDING 1.1:
 CPS are emerging as an area of engineering with sig
-ni˜cant economical and societal implications. Major industrial sectors such as transportation, medicine, energy, defense, and information 
technology increasingly need a workforce capable of designing and 
engineering products and services that intimately combine cyber ele
-ments (computing hardware and software) and physical components 
and manage their interactions and impact on the physical environ
-ment). Although it is dif˜cult to quantify the demand, a likely impli
-cation is that more CPS-capable engineers will be needed.
CPS: AN EMERGING ENGINEERING DISCIPLINE 
The emergence of a new ˜eld such as CPS from preexisting domains 
of knowledge is not a new occurrence. In fact, analogies can be drawn to 
the history of computer and software engineering. Electrical engineers in 
the 1940s could not have conceived of computers as commodities. Then, 
a computer was a very large room packed with rack after rack of hot 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TRANSFORMATIVE NATURE OF CPS AND WORKFORCE NEEDS
 23vacuum tube assemblies, relays, huge power supplies, and the unenviable 
punched card reader and line printer. The ˜eld of computer engineering 
slowly emerged as a separate discipline and practice. The separate dis
-cipline and practice of software engineering later answered the need for 
people to more easily and effectively program the computers. It should 
come as no surprise that, much the same way that an army of electrical 
engineers is no longer required to build a computer, there is no longer the 
need for armies of varied engineering disciplines required to build, pro
-gram, and employ small processors with sensors and controllers (either 
attached or built in) as components in other systemsŠor, for that matter, 
as systems themselves. However, although the components and tools for 
designing small, embedded systems are accessible to a hobbyist, the skills 
and knowledge necessary to develop a large system with veri˜able reli
-ability and safety requirements are considerable.
Following a similar pattern, CPS incorporate components of disci
-plines such as embedded systems, software engineering, control systems, 
networking, and systems engineering. In fact, domains such as aerospace 
and mechanical engineering and related ˜elds such as robotics have incor
-porated many CPS principles for some time. The experts in this nascent 
˜eld will be experts on this intersection of disciplines. 
FINDING 1.2:
 The future CPS workforce is likely to include a com
-bination of (1) engineers trained in foundational ˜elds (such as elec
-trical and computing engineering, mechanical engineering, systems 
engineering, and computer science); (2) engineers trained in speci˜c 
applied engineering ˜elds (such as aerospace and civil engineering); 
and (3) CPS engineers, who focus on the knowledge and skills span
-ning cyber technology and physical systems that operate in the physi-cal world. 
FINDING 1.3: Given that most entry-level engineering and com-puter science positions are ˜lled by undergraduates, it is important 
to incorporate CPS into the undergraduate engineering and computer 
science curricula.
RECOMMENDATION 1.1:
 The National Science Foundation, 
together with universities, should support the creation and evolution 
of undergraduate education courses, programs, and pathways so that 
engineering and computer science graduates have more opportunities 
to gain the knowledge and skills required to engineer cyber-physical 
systems. The efforts should be complemented by initiatives to aug
-ment the skills of the existing workforce through continuing educa
-tion and master™s degree programs.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
2CPS Principles, Foundations, 
System Characteristics, and 
Complementary Skills
This chapter examines at a high level the knowledge required to 
engineer cyber-physical systems (CPS). It draws on an examination of 
existing courses, programs, and instructional materials as well as con
-sideration of the topics highlighted in comments to the committee from 
industry experts. Many of these foundations are also present in areas like 
computer science, engineering, and robotics, but the emphasis in CPS is 
on the integration of physical and cyber aspects. The chapter starts with 
a discussion of this integration and associated principles. 
Drawing on these principles, this chapter identi˜ed six foundations 
for a CPS curriculum: basic computing concepts, computing for the physi-cal world, discrete and continuous mathematics, cross-cutting applica
-tions, modeling, and CPS system development. The chapter turns next to 
a discussion of system characteristics such as scale, complexity, and safety 
criticality. These topics are best introduced early and infused throughout 
in CPS coursework and projects, much as the best practice in engineering 
is to address these issues from the outset of system design. The chapter 
closes with a discussion of complementary skills of value for CPS careers: 
learning to learn and critical thinking, soft skills, and entrepreneurship.
Given that the potential content for CPS is broad and evolving, the 
emphasis here is on general principles, foundations, system character
-istics, and skills rather a large array of speci˜c facts or techniques. This 
approach is especially important in light of the wide breadth of material 
relevant to engineering CPS and the emerging and fast-paced nature of 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CPS PRINCIPLES, FOUNDATIONS, CHARACTERISTICS, AND SKILLS
 25the ˜eld. With the right foundations, students will be positioned to learn 
about new developments on the job.
Because engineering courses and curricula are already packed, it is 
not viable to simply add more material to span the physical and cyber 
dimensionsŠand certainly not to double the amount of material. Nor 
can all relevant topics ˜t into the CPS core curriculum or these principles 
and foundations. For example, bio-memetics, an approach that is useful 
in areas such as robotics, is not included. (Robotics is instead treated as 
an elective course in the representative curricula in Boxes 3.4 through 3.7.) 
PRINCIPLES: INTEGRATING THE PHYSICAL AND CYBER 
The core principle of CPS is the bridging of engineering and physical 
world applications and the computer engineering hardware and com
-puter science cyber worlds. Basic principles of the physical world include 
elements of physics, modeling, and real-world intangibles such as uncer
-tainty and risk. Concurrently, the principles of computer engineering 
and computer science worlds deal with embedded systems, networking, 
programming, and algorithms. CPS education thus goes beyond exposure 
to the traditional dynamical systems models (ordinary differential or dif
-ference equations) to an understanding of physical impacts not only at the 
physical layer, but also across the physical-cyber interface. 
Sensors are an example of a hardware bridge between the physical 
and cyber worlds. They are the primary devices that collect data from 
the physical world that are then used as input to the cyber world. Under
-standing the properties and principles of sensors and how to use them 
in a manner that is aware of sensor and real-world constraints is critical. 
Unfortunately, high-level abstractions used to simplify system develop
-ment often have the undesirable side effect of hiding key physical world 
principles that programmers need to know if the CPS they develop are 
to work properly. Once raw data are collected, they are processed via 
signal processing techniques. The required principles of signal process
-ing include linear signals and systems theory, analog and digital ˜lter
-ing, time and frequency domain analysis, convolution, linear transforms 
like the discrete Fourier transform and fast Fourier transform, noise and 
statistical characterization of signals, machine learning, and decision and 
sensor fusion. In CPS, considerations of the implementations of these 
signal processing techniques on embedded CPUs, running in real time 
and with safety critical implications, are necessary, as is the topic of sen
-sor reliability. Often these issues are not considered in classical signal 
processing courses. 
Control is a central tenet of CPS. Relevant elements of control theory 
include stability and optimization as well as control techniques in the 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
context of networks, hybrid systems, stochastic systems, and digital sys
-tems. Of particular importance in the cyber domain are the implications 
for control of distributed systems and the inherent delays they impose.
In today™s networked, wireless, and real-time world, and as cyber-
physical systems become embedded in our economy and society, knowl
-edge of the principles underlying these topics is also necessary for CPS 
engineering. Areas where students need this knowledge include the 
following: 
 Communication and networking. CPS requires an understanding 
from physical-layer principles to protocols, layered architectures, and the 
many real-world properties of wireless communications. 
 Real time. An understanding of topics like real-time scheduling 
theory, temporal semantics in programs, and clock synchronization in 
networks is needed. 
 Distributed systems
. The distributed and networked nature of CPS 
in many of the applications of interest should be included in CPS educa
-tion. Even though distributed systems and networking are covered in 
traditional engineering or computer science curricula, these courses often 
do not address CPS issues. CPS combines the hardware implementation 
with the software that runs the algorithms, all operating in a natural 
world setting. 
 Embedded systems. A strong education and training on the principles 
of embedded software, the many principles of programming, algorithms, 
software design, formal methods, and platforms (architectures and oper
-ating systems) are necessary to enable the development of reliable and 
high-quality cyber components of a CPS system. 
 Physical properties
. It is important to understand and be able to 
model the physical properties of the environments and hardware plat
-forms. Software design principles that address the realisms of the physi
-cal world in such a way as to satisfy safety, reliability, real-time perfor
-mance, risk management, and security requirements need to be part of 
the curriculum.
 Human interaction
. Human factors design, human-in-the-loop con
-trol, and understanding and accounting for the behavioral responses 
of humans are important for many CPS. One important design issue is 
making CPS easy for humans to operate, control, and maintain. Similar 
to other engineering disciplines, hands-on projects and interdisciplinary 
teamwork are also fundamental to understanding and seeing core prin
-ciples applied.
FINDING 2.1:
 Core CPS knowledge involves not only an under
-standing of the basics of physical engineering and cyber design and 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CPS PRINCIPLES, FOUNDATIONS, CHARACTERISTICS, AND SKILLS
 27implementation, but also understanding how the physical and cyber 
aspects in˚uence and affect each other.
RECOMMENDATION 2.1: 
Cyber-physical systems educational pro
-grams should provide a foundation that highlights the interaction of 
cyber and physical aspects of systems. Most current courses fail to 
emphasize the interaction, implying that new courses and instruc
-tional materials are needed.
Examples of curricula that highlight this interaction are provided in 
Chapter 3 (Boxes 3.2 to 3.7).
FOUNDATIONS OF CPS
Drawing on these principles, the committee identi˜ed six key over
-arching foundations for a CPS curriculum (Box 2.1). 
 Foundation 1, 
basic computing concepts
, is included to emphasize 
that the cyber expertise required cannot be achieved with only one or 
two programming classes; it can only be attained with solid training in 
computing that draws on examples and case studies from the physical 
domain. In particular, it is necessary to teach how the properties of the 
BOX 2.1 Foundations of Cyber-Physical SystemsFoundation 1. Basic Computing Concepts
The cyber expertise required for cyber-physical systems (CPS) cannot be 
achieved with only one or two programming classes; it can only be attained with 
solid training in computing. The basic computing concepts listed below should 
be taught using examples and case studies from the physical domain. These 
concepts are as follows: Embedded hardware; Data structures and algorithms;
state machines widely used in CPS) and discrete event systems; Programming; Software engineering and model-based design; and
 Real-time operating systems and programming for networks.
continuedA 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
Foundation 2. Computing for the Physical World
There is a need for computing foundations to embrace physical world prop
-erties and constraints. Real-world complexities often give rise to situations not 
addressed by the software and often result in failures. Software designs and imple-mentations must be aware of the resource limitations of the platforms themselves as well as conditions that the real world imposes on the platform. Students will 
need to understand are the following concepts:
 Properties of sensors and analysis of signals;
 Programming with sensors and actuators in open environments and with 
multiple modalities; Real-time embedded systems;
 Resource management and constraints such as time, memory size, and 
power; and Techniques such as redundancy and fault-tolerance for managing unreli
-ability in physical systems. Foundation 3. Discrete and Continuous Mathematics
Both discrete and continuous mathematics are needed as foundational skills 

-tinuous and discrete systems and having the knowledge to deal with that integra
-tion is critical. Concepts students will need to understand are as follows:
 Probability, statistics, and stochastic processes;

 Calculus and differential equations.
Foundation 4. Cross-cutting Application of Sensing, Actuation, Control, 
Communication, and Computing
This foundation is essential due to the cross-cutting focus of CPS between the physical and cyber aspects of systems, as well as control over communication 
networks and sensing, signal processing, and actuation with real-time constraints. 

signal processing, and embedded software design and implementation are at the 
core of this foundational principle. Concepts will include the following:
 Control principles including linear and nonlinear systems, stochastic sys
-
 Optimization and optimal control of dynamic systems;BOX 2.1 ContinuedA 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CPS PRINCIPLES, FOUNDATIONS, CHARACTERISTICS, AND SKILLS
 29 Networking concepts including wireless communications, synchronous 
and asynchronous communications, and ad-hoc networking; Real-time analysis including task models describing real-world information 
sources, time-triggered or event-triggered control, decision-making with noisy data;
 Signal processing using control, computation, and communication models; Safety, reliability, and dependability;
 Security and privacy; Impact of physical properties on software requirements;  Human factors related to human-in-loop and behavioral aspects; and
 Networked control.Foundation 5. Modeling of Heterogeneous and Dynamic Systems Integrating 
Control, Computing, and Communication
CPS modeling requires a complete picture of control, communications, and 
computing with emphasis on representing and accounts for modularity, abstraction, 
uncertainty, and heterogeneity. Relevant techniques include linear and nonlinear 
models, stochastic models, and discrete-event and hybrid models, and associated design methodologies based on optimization, probability theory, and dynamic 

 Properties of the physical world, including uncertainty and risk;
 Properties of computational devices, including computational and power 
limits;  Properties of communication systems, including limitations of wireless 
communications; Error detection and correction; Merging physical and computational modeling; and

Foundation 6. CPS System Development



 Safety, resilience, security, and privacy;
 Requirement development;
 Assurance cases and hazard analysis;
 Model-based design and tools;
 System design, including design for system evolution and life-cycle 
 Platforms such as the Internet of Things or cloud computing; and
 Testing CPS in the laboratory and in their intended environment.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
physical world have to be addressed in the cyber world to achieve the 
system characteristics listed in the next subsection. 
 Foundation 2, computing for the physical world, highlights the need to 
include properties and constraints of the physical world. Real-world com
-plexities often give rise to situations not addressed by the software, often 
resulting in failures; consequently, it is necessary to have a foundation in 
laws of the physical world. Software designs and implementations need 
to take into account the resource limitations of the platforms themselves 
as well as conditions that the real world imposes on the platform. 
 Foundation 3, discrete and continuous mathematics
, highlights 
advanced math beyond calculus needed for CPS engineering. This re˚ects 
the fact that CPS deals with both continuous and discrete systems, and 
the knowledge on how to deal with that integration is critical. 
 Foundation 4, 
cross-cutting application of sensing, actuation, control, 
communication, and computing
 encompasses knowledge of control, signal 
processing, and embedded software design and implementation that one 
would expect to permeate all aspects of the curriculum 
 Foundation 5, stresses the need for 
modeling of heterogeneous and 
dynamic systems integrating control, computing, and communication
 with an 
emphasis on uncertainty and heterogeneity. Such work is especially chal
-lenging because physical and cyber modeling use different and often 
incompatible models. Focusing on the merging and interactions of models 
across the physical and cyber aspects of systems is necessary. 
 Foundation 6, 
CPS system development
 identi˜es the requirements 
for a life-cycle view of developing a CPS from initial requirements to 
certi˜cation to deployment. Concepts that transcend the entire life cycle 
include safety, resilience, security, and privacy.
SYSTEM CHARACTERISTICS
Building systems that operate with increased con˜dence in the pres
-ence of uncertainty and with acceptable levels of risk requires an under
-standing of how to address relevant design aspects (i.e., security, reliabil
-ity, and dependability). Consider, for example, what it takes to design a 
city-scale autonomous transportation system that people can con˜dently 
use with minimal safety concerns. The committee also sees examples of 
gaps in today™s deployed systems, such as the vulnerability to cyberat
-tacks and poor interoperability. The following attributes and the associ
-ated design approaches and mindset are best introduced early in the CPS 
curriculum and infused throughout in CPS coursework and projects:
 Security and privacy. All information technology-based systems 
are subject to cyberattacks. Many CPS are especially vulnerable either 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CPS PRINCIPLES, FOUNDATIONS, CHARACTERISTICS, AND SKILLS
 31because they are located in open environments or can be communicated 
with wirelessly. Ensuring that those designing such systems are familiar 
with security and privacy risks and techniques for protecting them will 
be crucial. 
 Interoperability
. Especially in large-scale CPS, systems will be com
-posed of components from different vendors, and portions may be oper
-ated by different entities. Realizing the full promise of CPS will require 
interoperability among heterogeneous components and systems. Achiev
-ing interoperability requires knowledge of how to de˜ne and use com
-mon architectures, standardized interfaces, and data standards.
 Reliability and dependability
. Many CPS will be part of our daily 
lives, and their utility will require high reliability and dependability. New 
problems arise because many CPS devices have limited computational 
power, memory, and energy. The best systems are those designed from the 
start with reliability (and safety) in mindŠnot as something to be ˜xed 
during testing. CPS will also need to be robust to uncertainties that may 
be dif˜cult to quantify in the design phase. In order to make sure these 
uncertainties are addressed, they must be tracked and addressed during 
implementation stages.
 Power and energy management
. The compact size and autonomous 
operation of some CPS components make energy management a critical 
engineering design priority.
 Safety
. With the proliferation of CPS into daily lives, it becomes 
exceedingly important to ensure that actions taken on humans and the 
environment are safe and that the risks associated with these actions can 
be assessed and managed. 
 Stability and performance
. The stability of CPS, which are dynamic 
and stochastic systems, involves such factors as the linearity or nonlinear-ity of the system, the bandwidth of the systems, sampling rate, the poles 
and zeroes of the system, the modeling of the noise and uncertainty affect
-ing the system, and limitations of sensors and actuators such as noise 
corruption or saturation. 
 Human factors and usability. Human factors design, human-in-the-loop control, and understanding and accounting for the behavioral 
responses of humans are all important for many CPS applications. For 
instance, critical CPS are used to support the health care and well-being 
of the elderly.
These considerations are often essential in ensuring a system will 
operate with increased con˜dence in the presence of uncertainty and with 
acceptable levels of risk. The importance of improving education in these 
areas is highlighted by the prevalence of cyberattacks against CPS, poor 
usability, and lack of interoperability. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
Most CPS will have to be developed with these system characteristics 
in mind. As a result, these concepts will need to be woven throughout 
a state-of-the-art CPS curriculum at all levels. The challenge in build
-ing software and hardware systems that have these properties is not 
unknown to the computer science and engineering domains. Exploring 
these challenges and learning how to determine if systems have these 
properties are essential to deploying better CPS.
COMPLEMENTARY SKILLS
A 2004 National Academy of Engineering (NAE) report on the future 
of engineering highlights the implications for engineering education of 
the pace of change in science and engineering knowledge and the decreas
-ing length of product cycles.
The comfortable notion that a person learns all that he or she needs to 
know in a four-year engineering program just is not true and never was. 
Not even the ﬁfundamentalsﬂ are ˜xed, as new technologies enter the 
engineer™s toolkit. Engineers are going to have to accept responsibility 
for their own continual reeducation, and engineering schools are going 
to have to prepare engineers to do so by teaching them how to learn.
1This observation is especially apt for an emerging and rapidly chang
-ing area like CPS, and suggests that CPS courses and programs need to 
emphasize ongoing learning and critical thinking about technology as 
well as speci˜c techniques and methods.
The NAE report also takes note of the growing scale and complexity 
of engineering systems, which mean that engineers are increasingly work
-ing collaboratively with experts from multiple disciplines. It describes the 
ﬁsoft skillsﬂ needed to work effectively in such environments:
Essential attributes for these teams include excellence in communication 
(with technical and public audiences), an ability to communicate using 
technology, and an understanding of the complexities associated with 
a global market and social context. Flexibility, receptiveness to change, 
and mutual respect are essential as well. For example, it already is found 
that engineers may come together in teams based on individual areas 
of expertise and disperse once a challenge has been addressed, only to 
regroup again differently to respond to a new challenge.
2The need for such skills is especially acute for CPS, where the engi
-1 
National Academy of Engineering, 2004, 
The Engineer of 2020: Visions of Engineering in the 
New Century
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., p. 24.
2 Ibid., pp. 34-35.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CPS PRINCIPLES, FOUNDATIONS, CHARACTERISTICS, AND SKILLS
 33neering work is inherently interdisciplinary. There are many opportu
-nities to teach students about effective teamwork, especially in project 
activities culminating in a capstone project course.
Another trend in engineering education relevant to CPS is the inte
-gration of entrepreneurship. A 2013 article by Byers et al. observed that
. . . It is no longer enough to come out of school with a purely technical 
education; engineers need to be entrepreneurial in order to understand 
and contribute in the context of market and business pressures. For 
engineers who start companies soon after graduation, entrepreneurship 
education gives them solid experience in product design and develop
-ment, prototyping, technology trends, and market analysis. These skills 
are just as relevant for success in established enterprises as they are in 
startups; students with entrepreneurial training who join established 
˜rms are better prepared to become effective team members and manag
-ers and can better support their employers as innovators.
3Indeed, several speakers at the workshops organized for this study 
observed that engineering students increasingly wish to be entrepreneur
-ial. Given the potential economic impact of CPS, related areas, and their 
applications, there is likely to be growing demand for integrating entre
-preneurship into CPS engineering education. Entrepreneurship would 
naturally ˜t into capstone or other project-based courses.
3 
T. Byers, T. Seelig, S. Sheppard, and P. Weilerstein, 2013, Entrepreneurship: Its role in 
engineering education, 
The Bridge 
43(2):35-40.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
3Paths to CPS Knowledge
Chapter 1 posits that almost all engineering ˜elds will be impacted 
by the wide use of cyber-physical systems (CPS) and that the workforce 
will include domain experts who are knowledgeable of CPS principles, 
including a new type of engineerŠa CPS engineerŠwho is an expert in 
the intersection of cyber and physical worlds. This suggests that mul
-tiple paths to CPS knowledge are required to meet workforce needs. It is 
expected that many different approaches will be undertaken depending 
on the situation at each university or college. 
Anticipating the diverse workforce needs, the challenges associated 
with implementing CPS courses and programs, and a range of approaches 
already under way at universities, this report presents multiple alterna
-tives. One good alternative, especially in the short term (and possibly the 
easiest to implement logistically) is a master™s-level program. This does 
not obviate the need for CPS education at the B.S. level or the long-term 
needs for B.S.-level classes and even degrees. Given that the vast majority 
of engineers are hired at the B.S. level, it does not seem feasible to simply 
defer all CPS education to the master™s level.
Ultimately, the mix of programs offered by universities will re˚ect the 
perspectives of individual institutions, their resources, and the demand 
universities see from students and their employers, and in turn affect the 
educational backgrounds of the CPS workforce. Over time, as the ˜eld 
itself changes and matures, education and the CPS skills that employers 
demand will co-evolve.
In particular, many universities may not currently have the expertise 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 35or resources to establish extensive CPS education programs. A useful 
alternative in these cases would be to forge more limited partnerships 
among several departments to implement jointly taught courses. For 
example, key CPS content could be introduced into mechatronics, robot
-ics, or transportation courses. Doing so over time can help reduce the bur
-dens associated with infusing CPS throughout engineering and building 
the courses one would need to implement a CPS program. For example, a 
theory course developed to include students from computer science and 
mechanical engineering, as well as traditional control theory, will produce 
a new class of the sort that is needed for CPS.
FINDING 3.1: The diversity of current departmental structures, 
faculty expertise and interests, and curricula suggest that there are 
multiple feasible and appropriate models for strengthening CPS engi
-neering. The committee envisions that universities will (1) enrich cur-rent engineering programs with CPS content, (2) create CPS survey 
courses, (3) create new master™s-level CPS degrees, and, ultimately, 
(4) develop new undergraduate CPS engineering degree programs.
RECOMMENDATION 3.1:
 The National Science Foundation should 
support the development of university education programs that 
de˜ne a path and plan for the creation of a cyber-physical systems 
engineering degree. 
In this chapter, the committee provides examples of several paths 
forward. It should be emphasized that these are examples, and a wide 
spectrum of possible solutions from varying perspectives is anticipated. 
This chapter explores the following approaches to CPS knowledge:

Exposure to CPS in K-12,

Vocational and community college programs,

CPS discussions in introductory engineering and computer science 
courses, 

One or more CPS survey courses taught at the undergraduate level, 

Domain-speci˜c degree programs that include a CPS concentration 
or focus, 

A bachelor™s-level CPS degree, and

A master™s-level CPS degree.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
OVERVIEW OF RELEVANT EXISTING PATHS 
AND PROGRAMS TO CPS EXPERTISE
The committee was pleased to discover that a diverse set of CPS 
program models have grown organically from computer science and 
electrical engineering departments. Additionally, several domain areas 
have created programs that support the design in CPS, for example, civil 
engineering masters in intelligent infrastructure. Table 3.1 gives a small 
sampling of CPS academic offerings. 
TABLE 3.1
 Examples of Programs in CPS or Embedded Systems
University/DepartmentSample CoursesName of Degree 
University of 
Pennsylvania Department of Computer 
and Information ScienceCIS 540: Principles of 
Embedded ComputationCIS 541: Embedded 
Software for Life Critical 
ApplicationsM.S. in engineering in 
embedded systemsIllinois Institute of 
Technology
 College of ScienceCS 556: Cyber-Physical 
Systems: Languages and 
SystemsCS 557: Cyber-Physical 
Systems: Networking 
and AlgorithmsMaster™s in computer 
science with a specialization 
in cyber-physical systems
University of Colorado, 
Boulder Department of Electrical, 
Computing and Energy 
Engineering 
ECEN 5613: Embedded 
System DesignECEN 5023: Mobile 
Computing and IoT 
SecurityProfessional master™s 
program (30 hours) or 
certificate (9 hours) 
in embedded systems 
engineering 
Iowa State University College of EngineeringCprE 558: Real Time 
SystemsCprE 588: Embedded 
Computer SystemsEmbedded systems graduate 
certificateUniversity of Illinois College of Electrical and 
Computer EngineeringECE 486: Control 
SystemsCS 431: Embedded 
SystemsUndergraduate 
concentration in cyber-
physical systemsNew York University
 School of EngineeringCS 2204: Digital Logic 
and State Machine 
DesignEL 5483: Real Time 
Embedded SystemsUndergraduate computer 
science degree with a 
concentration in computer 
hardware and embedded 
systems 
University of California, 
BerkeleyEECS 149.1x: Cyber 
Physical SystemsOpen Access online course
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 37The few CPS degree programs that exist at present are at the graduate 
level, which perpetuates the belief that one must become an expert in one 
˜eld before commencing study of CPS. For example, current programs 
require a student to complete a bachelor of science degree in either elec
-trical and/or computer engineering before attempting to augment his or 
her studies with the cyber component, or complete the cyber portion ˜rst 
and add the physical portion afterwards. 
There are a few undergraduate courses offered within existing pro
-grams that offer CPS as a concentration instead of a stand-alone degree 
program. Additionally, there are certi˜cation programs that complement 
the degree programs, as well as certi˜cation specialties. 
The University of California, Santa Cruz, for example, offers an Intro
-duction to Cyber-Physical Systems course through its College of Engi
-neering as a part of the engineering curriculum. This class provides a 
basic overview of concepts and tools of CPS such as ﬁmodeling and 
analysis tools for continuous-time and discrete-time systems; 
˜nite state 
machines; state
˚ow; timed and hybrid automata; concurrency; invari
-ants; linear temporal logic; veri
˜cation; and numerical simulation.ﬂ
1 The 
course provides an introduction to modeling and analysis of CPS. After 
the systems of interest are summarized via examples in engineering and 
science, several models of continuous-time systems and discrete-time sys
-tems are introduced. The main focus is on models in terms of differential 
equations for the modeling of physical processes. Finite state machines 
and state˚ow are introduced and combined with the physical models. 
Applications of the resulting models for design and analysis of embedded 
systems are discussed. With this basic background, the more advanced 
timed automata and hybrid automata models are introduced. Then, linear 
temporal logic, which is the main tool taught in this class, is introduced 
and applied to specify the desired system behavior. Tools for analytical 
study and numerical veri˜cation for the satisfaction of linear temporal 
logic formulas are presented and discussed in numerous applications.
Another example is the University of California, Berkeley, course 
ﬁIntroduction to Embedded Systems,ﬂ an introductory class that intro
-duces the students to the design and analysis of computational systems 
that interact with physical processes. The course uses a textbook
2 written 
by two Berkeley faculty.
Canvassing the offerings available at most universities reveals that 
current courses are not suf˜cient to meet the need of developing engi
-1 
University of California, Santa Cruz, ﬁCMPE249: Introduction To Cyber-Physical Sys
-tems,ﬂ https://courses.soe.ucsc.edu/courses/cmpe249, accessed December 5, 2016.
2 
E.A. Lee and S.A. Seshia, 2015, 
Introduction to Embedded Systems, A Cyber-Physical Systems 
Approach
, Second Edition, http://LeeSeshia.org.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
neers who are adequately skilled in CPS. Few emphasize mission- or 
safety-critical systems, and hands-on project work tends to ignore proper
-ties like fault tolerance and robustness. Also, a focus on developing new 
systems over understanding tools and techniques needed to test and 
maintain current systems was noted. These de˜ciencies are due to a vari
-ety of issues, including a lack of an interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary 
approach, the lack application-based work, limited software engineering 
approaches, lack of integration, composition, and system-level concerns. 
Additionally, interdependencies are not accounted for in the traditional 
engineering coursework. In this approach, systems are broken down into 
components and the students design them, but they do not think about 
how the two are connected. In addition to these analytical skills, CPS also 
requires skill in synthesizing systems from understood components and 
integrating multiple disciplines and perspectives. 
A report of a National Institute of Standards and Technology-spon
-sored workshop on future opportunities for CPS encourages signi˜cant 
enhancements to the engineering curricula in CPS degree programs, 
emphasizing systems sciences, engineering with an enhanced focus on 
multidisciplinary research.
3 Establishing multi-department CPS degrees 
and resources will help to build and sustain the future CPS workforce, 
with the goal of establishing a more formal teaching and training approach 
to CPS.
RECOMMENDATION 3.2:
 The National Science Foundation, pro
-fessional societies, and university administrations should support 
and consider allocating resources for the development of new cyber-
physical systems (CPS)-focused courses within existing engineering 
programs, new CPS-speci˜c classes for CPS engineering majors and 
minors, and an overall curricula for an undergraduate CPS engineer
-ing degree program.
 K-12 EDUCATION PROGRAMS
Strong foundations in science, technology, engineering, and math
-ematics (STEM) topics, coupled with exposure to CPS concepts and appli
-cations, can (1) introduce students to possible careers in CPS, (2) provide 
students with the foundations they will need to succeed in CPS or other 
STEM undergraduate programs, and (3) make it easier to ˜t a full CPS 
3 National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2013, 
Strategic R&D Opportunities for 21st 
Century Cyber-Physical Systems: Connecting Computer and Information Systems with the Physical 
World
, Gaithersburg, Md., January, http://www.nist.gov/el/upload/12-Cyber-Physical-
Systems020113_˜nal.pdf.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 39curriculum into a 4-year course of study by giving students a head start. 
Both core STEM courses, such as calculus and physics, and courses on 
topics such as programming and robotics can all be extended with CPS 
content. Moreover, applications such as robotics provide timely and very 
attractive opportunities to motivate STEM education generally and intro
-duce CPS content speci˜cally. For example, the UC Davis Center for Inte
-grated Computing and STEM Education (C-STEM) has developed a cap
-stone course, ﬁPrinciples and Design of Cyber-Physical Systems,ﬂ
4 based 
on use of a robotics kit, that is intended to spark interest in computing 
and CPS speci˜cally. An introductory course on CPS could also be offered 
as a capstone of a high school career technical education course of study.
Without a robust STEM education in K-12, would-be CPS students 
are at a considerable disadvantage. Furthermore, given the challenges 
in incorporating the extensive knowledge required for CPS into a 4-year 
undergraduate degree, there are considerable advantages to introducing 
foundational material at the K-12 level. Calculus and physics are already 
standardized and emphasized, especially for students interested in STEM 
careers. By contrast, programming, robotics, and other CPS-related topics 
are not as well de˜ned or institutionalized. Several efforts, most recently 
and broadly the ﬁCS for Allﬂ initiative, are aimed at introducing com
-puter science and computational thinking into K-12 education across the 
country and may provide opportunities to introduce CPS concepts and 
foundations. 
VOCATIONAL AND COMMUNITY COLLEGES
Community colleges ful˜ll multiple roles in providing educational 
opportunities for students. For some, it is a pathway to a 4-year institu
-tion and a bachelor™s degree. As such, students participating in engineer
-ing programs at these institutions should be made aware of CPS and the 
appropriate courses that will better prepare them to undertake this ˜eld 
of study in a 4-year program. Furthermore, these programs must be suf
-˜ciently rigorous to ensure success once entering a bachelor™s program. 
For others, community colleges offer vocational training for construc
-tion, auto repair, and other similar jobs. An increasing number of voca
-tions will require an understanding of CPS fundamentals for installation 
and maintenance of the advanced systems that rely on CPS. These jobs, 
which depend on vocational education, include auto repair, HVAC instal
-lation and maintenance, and medical care. Vocational and community 
college education will need to evolve to develop new skills and incorpo
-4 
UC Davis Center for Integrated Computing and STEM Education, ﬁC-STEM Math-ICT 
Pathway,ﬂ http://c-stem.ucdavis.edu/curriculum/ict-pathway/, accessed November 1, 2016.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
rate new knowledge to support these changing professionsŠas well as 
new ˜elds such as design, installation, and maintenance of solar energy 
systems, wind turbine systems, and broadband communications systems. 
An example is the Washtenaw Community College,
5 which started an 
Advanced Transportation Center that is working to develop curricula, 
create opportunities for vocational training, and strengthen the commu
-nity college and university interactions around connected cars and other 
advanced transportation systems.
People also use community colleges for the refreshment of knowledge 
and for retraining in technologies that have continued to evolve. Com
-munity colleges could therefore provide mid-career professionals who 
have already completed a degree in a related discipline (e.g., computer 
science, electrical engineering, or mechanical engineering) with a means 
to bolster their skills and capabilities in CPS knowledge. A set of the edu
-cation modules could be fashioned into continuing education courses. In 
the event that a licensing regime for engineers is in place for these related 
engineering domains, it is likely that the courses so fashioned could be 
used to satisfy state requirements for continuing education. 
UNDERGRADUATE COURSES, 
CONCENTRATIONS, AND PROGRAMS
This section considers various ways to incorporate CPS into under
-graduate education. It starts by discussing ways to add CPS content to 
introductory courses for engineering and computer science undergradu
-ates and approaches for creating survey courses that provide a more 
in-depth introduction to CPS. It then turns to ways to add a CPS spe
-cialization to existing engineering programs and options for creating an 
undergraduate program in CPS. Finally, it discusses the need for ˚exibil
-ity in course work, the importance of hands-on work for learning about 
CPS, and the need to create new courses to teach CPS.
Current engineering curricula already have extensive content with 
limited room for new classes, so the proposed curricula replaces existing 
courses with new ones designed for CPS. In the case of new concentra
-tions in CPS, the suggested courses would replace those offered as part 
of existing concentrations. For example, instead of taking classes for a 
concentration in control, software engineering, or networking, a student 
would take new classes designed for a CPS concentration. In the case of 
a CPS degree, the example curricula include new classes that would sub
-stitute for those in the curricula from which they are derived. 
5 Washtenaw Community College, ﬁAdvanced Transportation Center,ﬂ http://sites.
wccnet.edu/atc/, accessed November 1, 2016.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 41Introductory Engineering and Computer Science Courses
As noted in Chapter 1, an increasing number of what was once sim
-ply physical or simply cyber systems now integrate components of each. 
For example, mechanical and aerospace engineers will inevitably need to 
incorporate their physical designs with system controls and automation. 
As a result, engineers will need a basic understanding of integrating the 
physical and cyber technologies and the complexities of building and 
maintaining CPS. 
Most, if not all, engineering programs provide freshman engineering 
students with an opportunity to take introductory engineering courses. 
The majority of these are domain speci˜cŠeach engineering department 
or school develops and teaches the course. The courses provide students 
with an overview of the ˜eld while also teaching basic engineering skills 
and problem solving. Given the wide deployment of CPS and the impact 
it has on the more traditional disciplines, the committee suggests that 
these courses should include discussion of the complexities of CPS and 
introduce some of the key CPS concepts. 
The committee recognizes that these courses cover a wide set of 
material already; however, CPS can be woven through some of this mate
-rial. For example, many of these courses include a hands-on project or 
a semester-long project. CPS concepts could be incorporated into these 
assignments by providing real-world tasks. Aerospace engineering stu
-dents could work on drone control; civil engineering students could 
examine implications of smart cities; and mechanical engineers could 
explore robotics. Introducing students to the challenges of integration 
establishes that one does not develop systems in a vacuum and instead 
must consider outside impacts, including human factors, real-world con
-straints, and the limits of software and physics. 
RECOMMENDATION 3.3:
 Universities should consider add-ing cyber-physical systems content to freshman-level introductory 
courses for students in all areas of engineering and computer science.
 New Survey Courses in CPS
Given the wide breadth of knowledge required for CPS, the structure 
of survey courses could take several approaches. One approach would 
be a class based on modules chosen from the multidisciplinary areas of 
CPS. Such a course could include modules on sensor networks, embed
-ded computing, signal processing, control theory, and real-time systems. 
A two-course sequence might add multiple modules from security and 
privacy, model-based design, formal methods, hybrid systems, and data 
science and machine learning. In the module approach, it is emphasized 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
that each module should not be completely independent of others, and 
class principles and concepts must stress the interactions across the vari
-ous modules. Another approach might stress the safety critical aspects 
of CPS and include topics such as fault tolerance, model-based design, 
concurrency and distributed algorithms, models of computation, formal 
methods of speci˜cation and veri˜cation, real-time systems, and hybrid 
systems (which brings in control theory). A third approach might focus on 
modeling, design, and analysisŠall from a multidisciplinary approachŠ
with an explicit focus on the interdependencies between the cyber and the 
physical worlds. Topics might include continuous and discrete dynamics, 
hybrid systems, concurrent models of computation, embedded systems, 
multi-tasking and real-time scheduling, temporal logic, model check
-ing, and quantitative analysisŠall emphasizing integration with physical 
systems.
Regardless of the approach, survey courses should stress the com
-plexities of integrating physical with cyber aspects of systems and at 
least touch on the foundations and system characteristics outlined in 
Chapter 2. Box 3.1 provides some examples of high-level undergraduate 
survey courses; any such listing of courses and programs represents only 
a sampling of an always-evolving set of courses and programs being 
developed and offered in the United States and worldwide. Although the 
topics are listed in Box 3.1, it is important to note that all of the classes 
include hands-on projects or laboratory work that not only emphasize 
course topics but also the integration of the cyber and physical worlds.
Traditional Engineering Programs with CPS Specialization 
Traditional undergraduate engineering programs (e.g. aerospace, 
civil, mechanical, and chemical engineering, to name a few) will also 
bene˜t from the incorporation of CPS principles into their course offer
-ings. Some ˜elds, such as aerospace and mechanical engineering, have 
incorporated CPS principles for some time, but primarily from a physical 
world point of view. Hence, the challenge will be to increase knowledge 
of cyber elements and their interactions with physical elements and (1) 
ensure that the necessary changes to include CPS principles in the cur
-ricula meet requirements set by the Accreditation Board for Engineering 
and Technology (ABET) and (2) adequately prepare students to pass the 
National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying Funda
-mentals of Engineering (FE) exam. 
The degree to which CPS principles are currently incorporated into 
domain-speci˜c curricula varies considerably depending on the disci-pline. Undergraduate civil and mechanical engineering curricula require 
students to take similar math, natural science, and basic engineering and 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 43BOX 3.1 Examples of Survey CoursesCIS 541/441: Embedded Software for Life-Critical Applications
Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
This survey course is taught within the computer and information sciences department and has an emphasis on real-time issues. Current prerequisites are 

systems. The course also includes a series of projects that implement safety-
critical embedded systems, such as a pacemaker or infusion pump. 
 Topics
Introduction to Cyber Physical Systems CPS applications Characteristics and challengesRequirements, Modeling, and Analysis
 Model-based development
Ł Requirements capture and modeling
Ł State machines, timed automataŁ Properties and model checkingŁ User mental modelsŁ Architecture description languagesŁ Code generation and synthesis
Implementation Paradigms and Techniques
Ł Real-time operating systems
Ł Programming paradigms and languages
Ł Compositional and feedback-based real-time scheduling
Ł Feedback control in computer systemsŁ Virtual machines, hypervisors, separation kernels
Ł Components, plug-and-play of embedded systems
Ł Mixed criticality systemsŁ Distributed real-time systems concepts: Ordering, global time, clock 
synchronizationŁ Security and privacy
Ł Testing coverage and generation
Ł Model-based testing
Ł Closed-loop testing
Ł 
Ł Human-computer interactions
Ł 
Ł Hazard analysis, assurance casescontinuedA 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
LecturesŁ Introduction to cyber-physical systems
Ł Introduction to real-time embedded systems
Ł Real-time operating systems, virtual machines, hypervisor
Ł Real-time scheduling: EDF, RM, servers, priority inversion
Ł Multiprocessor real-time scheduling
Ł Real-time programming languages and paradigms
Ł 
synchronizationŁ Feedback in computer systemsŁ Medical cyber-physical systems
Ł Pacemaker challenge problem 
Ł Assurance casesŁ Medical device quality issuesŠFDA perspective
Ł Formal modeling and model checking
Ł 
Ł 
Ł Code generation/synthesis from state machines
Ł Testing, testing coverage, test generation
Ł Real-time testing, model-based testing, closed-loop testing
Ł 
Ł 
Ł Human-computer interaction: User interface
Ł User mental modelsŁ Project presentations: Pacemaker modeling and implementation, assur
-ance case, and demoEECS 149/249A: Introduction to Embedded Systems
Edward A. Lee and Sanjit A. Sehsia, University of California, Berkeley
This survey course is taught within the electrical engineering and computer 
science school. Prerequisites include Designing Information Devices and Systems 
or Signals and Systems, Computer Architecture, and Discrete Mathematics. This 
course includes a series of hands-on laboratory work that culminates into a team 
project, which must relate directly to distinct topics covered in the lectures. (See 

 Topics
Models of Computations
Ł Finite state machinesŁ ThreadŁ Ordinary differential equations
Ł Hybrid systemsBOX 3.1 ContinuedA 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 45Ł Discrete eventsŁ 
Basic Analysis, Control, and Systems Simulation
Ł BisimulationsŁ Reachability analysis
Ł Controller synthesis
Ł Approximating continuous-time systems
Interfacing with the Physical World
Ł Sensor/actuator modeling and calibration
Ł Concurrency in dealing with multiple real-time streams
Ł Handling numerical imprecision in software
Mapping to Embedded PlatformsŁ Real-time operating systems
Ł Execution time analysisŁ Scheduling Ł ConcurrencyDistributed Embedded SystemsŁ Protocol designŁ Predictable networking Ł SecurityLecturesŁ Cyber-physical systems overview
Ł Sensors and actuatorsŁ Model-based design and continuous dynamics
Ł Memory architecturesŁ Input and outputŁ Modeling modal behavior and discrete dynamics
Ł Extended and time automataŁ Composition of state machines
Ł Hierarchical state machines
Ł 
Ł Comparing state machines
Ł Reachability analysis
Ł Using temporal logic in CPS autogradersŁ MultitaskingŁ Operating systems, microkernals, and scheduling
Ł Scheduling anomalies
Ł Execution time analysisŁ 
Ł Security for embedded systemsŁ Network-embedded systems
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
BOX 3.2 Model for 4-year Undergraduate Degree in 
Mechanical Engineering with CPS EmphasisMath and Natural Sciences (9 courses) Calculus I
Calculus II
Vector Calculus
Differential Equations

Probability and Statistics
Physics I (Mechanics and Dynamics)
Physics II (Electricity and Magnetism)

Traditional Mechanical Engineering Courses (13 courses)
 
Mechanics I: Statics
Mechanics II: Dynamics
Solid Mechanics Fluid MechanicsThermodynamicsSystem DynamicsEngineering Material Science


Heat Transfer
Design, Materials and ManufacturingEngineering Economy
science courses during the ˜rst 2 years. The third year primarily focuses 
on introducing students to the concentration areas in their respective 
disciplines. As an example, within civil engineering these concentra
-tion areas include structural, geotechnical, transportation, environmen
-tal, hydrology/hydraulics, and construction engineering. Examples of 
mechanical engineering concentration areas include robotics and controls, 
thermal-˚uid systems, manufacturing, and solid mechanics. In the fourth 
year, most students develop a specialization by focusing on one of these 
concentration areas through their technical electives. A capstone design 
course is also often part of the fourth-year curriculum.
Two example curricula are presented in Boxes 3.2 and 3.3Šone for 
mechanical engineering and the second from civil engineering. These two 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 47CPS-Related Courses in Current ME Curricula (5 courses)
Introduction to ComputingCircuits and ElectronicsComputational Methods in Engineering

Capstone Design (with CPS-focused project)Technical Electives that Could Focus on CPS (5 courses)
Proposed new CPS-centric electives:Principles of CPS
Network-embedded systems programming
Signals and SystemsControl of Dynamic SystemsModel-Based Systems Engineering
Examples of CPS-related electives in current ME curricula: Modeling and Control of Motion Control
Microprocessor Control of Manufacturing Systems
RoboticsBio-Inspired DesignDesign Across Disciplines
Biomedical Instrumentation
MechatronicsSensor NetworksSocial Science, Economics, Humanities (8 courses)
 examples, based on existing curricula from several universities, show that 
the mechanical engineering curriculum has, to some degree, more existing 
CPS-focused core classes and technical electives than the civil engineering 
curriculum. However, these existing courses may require redesign in an 
effort to better introduce undergraduates to the cyber aspects of CPS and 
their interactions with the physical, as de˜ned in Chapter 2. 
New CPS-centric courses have been proposed in both curricula. Such 
courses are meant as examples only, and many more domain-speci˜c 
courses with a CPS emphasis can be de˜ned. Given the ˚exibility in 
today™s ABET accreditation process, and because it is anticipated that 
these courses will primarily be part of the technical elective alternatives, 
problems meeting ABET accreditation requirements or adequately pre
-A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
BOX 3.3 Model for 4-Year, Undergraduate Degree in 
Civil Engineering with CPS EmphasisMath and Natural Sciences (10 courses) Calculus I 
Calculus II
Vector Calculus
Differential Equations

Probability and Statistics
Physics I (Mechanics and Dynamics)
Physics II (Electricity and Magnetism)

Science Elective (Biology or Earth Science)Traditional Civil Engineering Courses (13 courses)

Mechanics I: Statics
Mechanics II: Dynamics
Solid MechanicsFluid MechanicsThermodynamicsEnvironmental Engineering
Civil Engineering Materials
Required electives (4 classes from Structural Engineering, Construction 

-technical Engineering, Transportation Engineering)
Engineering Economy
paring a student to pass the FE exam should be minimal. In fact, some of 
the ﬁnewﬂ course topics (e.g., signals and systems, sensor networks, and 
structural health monitoring) already exist as electives in a few under
-graduate engineering curricula. This ˚exibility will also allow accommo
-dation of changes in the CPS curriculum as the ˜eld evolves.
Undergraduate Bachelor Programs in Cyber-Physical Systems
The committee provides an example of what a bachelor™s degree in 
CPS might look like in Boxes 3.4, 3.5, and 3.6. Designing a CPS degree is 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 49CPS-Related Courses in Current CE Curricula (3 courses)
Computing for EngineersCivil Engineering Systems (needs to be developed with CPS focus)
 Capstone Design (with CPS-focused project) Technical Electives (6 courses)
Current CE curricula have few undergraduate elective courses that focus on 
CPS concepts. If redesigned, some current elective courses could incorporate CPS principles, examples include the following: 

Transportation Planning and Design
Infrastructure Rehabilitation
Subsurface CharacterizationEnvironmental Systems Design
Building Information Modeling
Conceptual Structural Design

Structural System Testing and Model Correlation
Proposed new CPS-centric electives:Principles of CPS: Sustainable Infrastructure
Principles of CPS: Urban Planning
Signals and SystemsSensor Networks for Civil Engineering Systems
Model-Based Systems Engineering
Structural Health MonitoringSocial Science, Economics, Humanities (8 courses)

this report.quite complexŠeven without considering resource constraintsŠowing to 
many confounding factors. Although such a curriculum would be based 
on the foundations and system characteristics outlined in Chapter 2, it is 
extremely dif˜cult to produce a single ideal curriculum for the following 
chief reasons:

It would require too many existing courses to cover CPS in suf
-˜cient depth. Hence, without careful program design, either the physical 
or the cyber aspects will end up with insuf˜cient emphasis. 

One™s own specialty affects one™s view of an ideal curriculum. For 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
BOX 3.4 One Model for 4-Year, 40-Course Undergraduate Degree in CPS
Math and Natural Science (10 courses)Calculus I and II
 Differential Equations

Probability and Statistics
Physics I (Mechanics and Dynamics)
Physics II (Electrical Circuits)
Chemistry or BiologyDiscrete MathCPS Core (12 courses)
Computer ProgrammingData Structures and Algorithms
Programming Physical Systems
Software EngineeringModel-Based System Design 
Heterogeneous Models of Computation
Formal Methods and Synthesis Resource-Aware Real-Time Computing
Control Systems OptimizationDigital Signal Processing example, to a control theory expert, a single course on control would not 
cover the topic to a depth they feel is necessary. A basic control course 
might be desired in addition to an embedded systems control course. 
The committee stresses that the examples provided were devel
-oped with an understanding of these complexities and only serve as 
examplesŠnot as the canonical curriculum. Caveats and important notes 
are provided in the next section.
Box 3.4 presents one possible example of an undergraduate CPS 
degree program curriculum. The example produced assumes a limit of 
40 undergraduate courses so that the degree can be granted in 4 years. To 
support the physical foundations of CPS, a set of mathematics and natural 
science courses are necessary. Ten such classes are presented in Box 3.4. 
Flexibility should also exist to replace classes with electives if students 
place out of any earlier coursework. Box 3.4 also presents an example of 
12 courses that could serve as the core of this new major. A particular uni
-A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 51versity may choose to structure this material differently, but the content 
found in these courses is important.
Depending on the college or university, computer science and engi
-neering may be located within the natural sciences, in engineering schools, 
or in schools of computing. CPS programs have already grown organi
-cally within both computer science and electrical engineering programs. 
The resulting CPS curricula will tend to look somewhat different depend
-ing on whether the program comes from a computer science perspective 
(see, for example, Box 3.5)
6 or from an electric and computer engineering 
perspective (see, for example, Box 3.6). Either of these curricula would 
provide tightly coupled physical and cyber instruction, but with different 
6 
A CPS program based on a computer science program might not formally be housed in 
an engineering school if the computer science department was located in another college. 
However, signi˜cant interactions with engineering departments would be needed to provide 
a full degree that covers the physical side of CPS.
Senior Capstone Design, 2 semesters (counts as 2 courses)
Senior capstone would include the following:Industry participationInterdisciplinary teams that pull from other domains, including business 
and management programs CPS Electives (2 courses)Possible topics: Inference under uncertainty, security, privacy, wireless sen
-sor networks, computer architecture, operating systems, databases, data science, 
cloud computing, communication networks, network science, network control, resil
-
-tion, robotics, stochastic systems, adaptive systems
 Societal Impact Electives (3 courses)
Show students the sense of empowerment their CPS skill set providesEthicsPossible topics: Modern avionics, automotive systems, robotics, smart 

unmanned aerial vehicles
  Social Science and Humanities (8 courses)
Free Electives (3 courses)A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
BOX 3.5 Model For 4-Year, 40-Course Undergraduate Degree 
in CPS, Electrical Engineering ProgramMath and Natural Science1,2 (11 courses)
Calculus I and II 
 Differential Equations

Probability and Statistics
Physics I (Mechanics and Dynamics)
Physics II (Electricity and Magnetism)
Chemistry or Biology
Natural Sciences Elective (Statistical Physics, Biochemistry, Systems 
Biology)Introduction to CPS (1 course)
Freshman laboratory course emphasizing hands-on, multidisciplinary 
teamwork with a CPS systemComputing Foundations (5 courses)
 Programming Physical Systems
Heterogeneous Models of Computation
(Distributed) Algorithms
Formal Methods and SynthesisResource-Aware Real-Time Computing
CPS Core (7 courses) Digital Signal Processing Networks emphasis. Most universities allow for the cross-listing of courses that are 
applicable to electrical and computer engineering and computer science 
degrees, which tends to blur such distinctions and provides students 
with the ˚exibility to acquire the desired balance of perspectives as they 
study CPS.
Caveats and Notes on Curriculum
Flexibility in Course Work
In today™s engineering schools, the need for ˚exibility in curricula 
is stressed for students. More and more universities are increasing the 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 53Stochastic Systems (Estimation, Detection, Inference, Adaptation)
Model-Based System Design 

-sor Network, Medical Devices) 
Control SystemsOptimizationCPS Electives (choice of 3 courses)
Possible topics: Security, privacy, data science, cloud computing, networks, 

intelligence, optimization, adaptive systems
 Senior Capstone Design (2 semesters; counts as 2 courses)
Senior capstone would include the following:Industry participationInterdisciplinary teams that pull from other domains, including business 
and management programs Societal Impact Electives (2 courses)
Show students the sense of empowerment their CPS skill set providesPossible topics: Modern avionics, automotive systems, robotics, smart 

unmanned aerial vehicles
 Social Science and Humanities (7 courses) 
Free Electives (2 courses) Broader exposure across continuous and discrete mathematics.
opportunities for electives and lowering the number of prescriptive 
courses. Increased ˚exibility in engineering curriculum provides more 
opportunities for students to explore CPS through survey courses, engi
-neering electives, and minors or certi˜cates, while avoiding the accredita
-tion issue discussed in earlier sections. 
Accordingly, the committee™s example curricula provide for ˚exibility. 
For example, the curriculum example depicts two CPS technical electives, 
three social impact electives, eight humanities, and three unrestricted elec
-tives. Flexibility also exists in how the Introduction to CPS and capstone 
projects are taught.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
BOX 3.6 Model For 4-Year, 40-Course Undergraduate 
Degree in CPS, Computer Science ProgramMath and Natural Science (11 courses)
Calculus I 
Calculus II
Differential Equations

Probabilities and Statistics
Discrete Math (Mathematical Foundations of CS)Physics I (Mechanics and Dynamics)
Physics II (Electricity and Magnetism)
Biology or Chemistry
Introduction to CPS (1 course)
Freshman laboratory course emphasizing hands-on, multidisciplinary 
teamwork with a CPS systemCPS Engineering Foundations (6 courses)
Select six from the following list:

-gramming classes)Šdeal with uncertainties, risk management, reliability, depend
-ability and securityNetworked embedded systemsŠincluding wireless network, sensor 
networks, real-time, and control inputs, distributed systems, and communication 
networksModel-Based DevelopmentŠmodeling, logic, formal methods and synthe
-sis, but all geared toward CPS
Digital Signal ProcessingStochastic Systems (Estimation, Detection, Inference, Adaptation)
Value of Laboratory and Hands-On Work
Project-based learning is becoming increasingly present in university 
engineering courses. CPS is particularly suited for hands-on learning 
activities and laboratory work, and project-based learning seems espe
-cially well suited to conveying the complexities of integrating cyber and 
physical issues. Reliance on theoretical training and waiting for a capstone 
design project at the end of an undergraduate education may fail to tie 
all of the concepts together adequately, so the on-going, practical applica
-tion of theoretical learning to real problems is key. It is common practice 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 55Human-in-the-loop for CPS
OptimizationCircuitsCS/CPS (9 courses)
Data Structures and Algorithms 
Computer Architecture(Real-Time) Operating Systems
Algorithms and ComplexitySelect three from the following list:
 Š Databases (CS) Š Networks and Security Š Computer Networks Š Computer Security Š Software Engineering (CS)
 Š Robotics Š 
 Š 
 Š Safety, Security, Privacy for High-Assurance CPS Applications
 Senior Capstone Design (2 semesters; counts as 2 courses)
Senior capstone would include:Industry participationInterdisciplinary teams that pull from other domains, including business 
and management programs Societal Impact Electives (2 courses)Technology and Society
Ethics in Engineering and Science
 Social Science and Humanities (7 courses) 
Free Electives (2 courses)for course syllabuses to now include classical homework, exams, and 
projects. Class projects aim at addressing a speci˜c realistic problems by 
bringing together multiple concepts introduced in a course. In pioneering 
examples of project-based courses, instructors get engaged with students, 
mainly in the laboratory, promoting the creativity, teamwork, and effec
-tive accomplishment of ˜nal products. The students select real problems 
and work in teams toward building complete prototypical solutions for 
such problems. Students build hardware, compose new hardware from 
existing of hardware components, and learn to integrate the hardware 
with effective software to generate solutions to real problems. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
In addition to class projects, students also typically complete capstone 
projects, wrapping up their studies into large projects requiring concept 
integration and teamwork among students with expertise in multiple 

areas. There are also examples where projects are linked across multiple 

courses. 
RECOMMENDATION 3.4:
 Engineering schools, by-and-large, have 

already redesigned their curricula to emphasize project-based learn
-ing. Because this is especially important for cyber-physical systems 

(CPS) education, these project-based courses should be extended to 

support CPS principles and foundations.
CPS-oriented project classes are particularly challenging to teach 
today because of the extremely rapidly changing landscape of available 
hardware and software. The traditional approach of de˜ning a project 

mission that gets reused year after year does not work in this scenario. 

Teaching such project courses requires budgets for purchasing new hard
-ware and software with regularity and requires considerable technical 

support and expertise to keep up with the possibilities. Such courses may 

only be only sustainable with signi˜cant institutional support in the form 

of course managers and laboratory technicians.
Need for New Courses
Simply collecting current courses into a new CPS program is not 
likely to be suf˜cient. Students will not truly be exposed to nor under
-stand the intricacy of the interactions of the physical and cyber issues if 
this approach is taken. To give a simple illustration, most standard com
-puter science courses do not cover real-time programming even though 

this topic is essential for building CPS, which interact with the physical 

world. 
As another example, standard courses on control typically ignore the 
computational model in which the controller will be implemented. Those 

courses that do cover computational implementations of control systems, 

typically called digital control systems, generally have unrealistic models 

of computation. In other words, they assume either in˜nite computational 

resources or antiquated computational models. Moreover, typical intro
-ductory courses in control systems do not teach students about how to 

de˜ne the formal requirements needed to include control in the design 

˚ows used in modern CPS applications.
FINDING 3.2:
 Because CPS engineering centers on the interaction of 

physical and cyber aspects of systems, it will often not be suf˜cient 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 57to create CPS curricula by simply combining material from existing 
courses. New courses will need to be designed.
Because this is such an important point, it is illustrated by the follow
-ing set of examples for how traditional courses could be modi˜ed to cover 
topics needed for CPS:
 
Control theory. 
Control theory classes in electrical engineering 
emphasize topics such as stability, performance, optimization, and design 
of linear and nonlinear feedback systems. Hybrid control, an important 
topic for CPS, has received growing attention in these courses. Additional 
topics needed for CPS are the connection of control theory with networks 
and real-time and distributed systems, humans-in-the-loop, security, and 
software. Control examples can be supplemented with those from CPS 
that include physical, cyber, and networking elements. Knowledge of 
how to implement the control policies in software and address real time 
performance and security are needed. A redesign for a CPS course would 
provide enough basics and add the needed additional topics while reduc
-ing the emphasis on some traditional topics such as proofs of stability.

Software design and programming classes. 
The examples used in tra
-ditional classes typically use nonphysical world applications that do not 
suf˜ciently consider the uncertainty, real time, and security challenges of 
the physical world. For CPS, it is important that students learn to program 
with sensors and actuators. For example, it is important to understand the 
properties of sensors and not have the properties hidden behind a high-
level application program interface. For example, software that improp
-erly handled transient signals from the lander touchdown sensor likely 
caused a Mars lander to prematurely ﬁthinkﬂ it had contacted the surface, 
causing it to shut down the retrorockets at quite a distance from the sur
-face, resulting in mission failure.
7 Students must learn to program in a 
robust and secure fashion, including how to implement feedback control
-lers and use signal processing techniques of varying levels of sophistica
-tion. Applying real-time principles to system design and implementation 
to meet deadlines is essential. CPS software that interacts with users also 
needs special attention when human control can put humans or major 
systems at risk.

Probability and stochastic processes. 
The basic principles of probabil
-ity, uncertainty, and risk should be applied to CPS-type physical world 
systems, noisy sensor and signal properties, and overall risk assessment 
7 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Special Review Board, 2000, 
Report on the Loss of the Mars 
Polar Lander and Deep Space 2 Missions
, Report JPL D-18709, http://space˚ight.nasa.gov/
spacenews/releases/2000/mpl/mpl_report_1.pdf, p. 26.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
BOX 3.7 Model for a 1-Year M.Sci. CPS Degree
CPS Core 
Introduction to Cyber-Physical Systems
 Š An introduction to all the core classes and how they relate to CPSArchitectures for CPS Š Sensors, actuators, networks, distributed computationEmbedded and Real-Time Systems
 Š Emphasis on computing reliably and timely with noisy sensor data over 
wired and wireless networks
Formal Methods Š 
Formal models of computation including discrete and analog computation

Signal Processing Š Digital signal processing on hardware and software
 Š Emphasis on distributed signal processing over networks.Feedback Control Š Modeling of physical and computational processes

 Š Implementation on hardwareInference under Uncertainty Š 
Basics of modeling uncertainty, statistical inference, detection and 
estimationElective Classes (3 courses)Computer and Network Security  Š 
To cover attacks exploiting physical properties of computation (e.g., 
time, temperature, radiation)Hybrid Systems 
continuous componentsNetworked Control Systems  Š Control over wired and wireless networks
 Š Impact of delays, packet collisions, and protocols on performance
Computer ArchitectureSystems Engineering Sensor NetworksMedical Embedded Systems
Robotics
Modeling from Data
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PATHS TO CPS KNOWLEDGE
 59and management for systems composed of hardware and software oper
-ating in nondeterministic environments. Knowledge on how to use and 
program with concepts of probability and uncertainty for decision-mak
-ing is required as well. Classes that show students how to apply key prin
-ciples to CPS domains such as smart grids, jet engine control, or medical 
systems are of increasing importance.
GRADUATE DEGREE PROGRAMS
A handful of masters of science degrees focused on embedded sys
-tems or CPS exist. Despite the existing programs, the committee felt that 
providing a model curriculum would be helpful, especially given the 
focus on electrical engineering or computer science that many of the exist-ing programs have. Another possibility is to add a CPS concentration to a 
robotics graduate program. 
Box 3.7 presents a model for a M.Sc. degree that could be obtained 
in 1 year, although the typical student will take between 1 and 2 years to 
˜nish all the requirements while conducting some research. The classes 
are divided into required core classes and electives. For departments in 
a semester system, students would take eight classes. Students wishing 
to ˜nish the M.Sc. degree in 1 year would take four classes in the fall 
semester and four classes in the spring semester or three classes in the 
fall quarter, three classes in the winter quarter, and three classes in the 
spring quarter. The M.Sc. degree would also require a project illustrating 
the challenges of designing CPS that work reliably in the real world.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60
4Developing and Institutionalizing 
CPS Curricula
A number of things can be done to build and foster cyber-physical 
systems (CPS) programs that support current and future workforce needs. 
One is early exposure to CPS concepts and applications in K-12 and intro
-ductory college courses. Another is to build the needed teaching faculty, 
which is challenging because the traditional academic pipeline at many 
universities has few mechanisms in place that support extensive fac-ulty commitment to an interdisciplinary ˜eld. Additionally, the resources 
needed to teach CPS courses, including textbooks, testbeds, and labora
-tory space, may be limited. This chapter discusses steps that academic 
institutions, industry (Box 4.1), and the National Science Foundation can 
take to strengthen undergraduate CPS education. 
DRAWING STUDENTS TO CPS
Students are likely to be initially attracted to CPS through exposure 
to CPS-related technical areas such as robotics, autonomous vehicles, 
and the Internet of Things (IoT) or exposure to applications that address 
national and global problems in areas such as sustainability, environmen
-tal issues, and health. Beyond that, students may need some link to be 
drawn between these topics and the discipline of CPS.
As discussed in Chapter 3, a strong K-12 science, technology, engi
-neering, and mathematics (STEM) foundation and exposure to CPS con
-cepts and applications can help attract students and prepare them for 
undergraduate study in CPS. Notably, several of the K-12 STEM programs 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEVELOPING AND INSTITUTIONALIZING CPS CURRICULA 61introduce students to CPS concepts, and many are based on robotics.
1 By using concrete CPS examples, these programs are an effective way to 
introduce the concepts of CPS and highlight their correlations with ele
-ments of their STEM education. 
At the undergraduate level, the concepts of CPS can be reinforced by 
again making the link between CPS and related technology areas. As rec
-ommended in Chapter 1, this introduction to CPS can be part of freshman 
ﬁintroduction to engineeringﬂ programs. Faculty need not shy away from 
topics that pique student interest even as they stress the CPS foundations 
that underpin such areas. 
Students, particularly those at universities, are acutely aware of job 
opportunities and salaries associated with various engineering disci-plines. Therefore, promoting job needs and compensation for CPS gradu
-ates to high-school seniors and undergraduate and graduate students will 
also promote the ˜eld. Invited lecturers and from industry can help make 
introductory (and other CPS) courses current and compelling and also 
expose students to opportunities in industry.
1 
Examples include such as the FIRST Lego League (http://www.˜rstlegoleague.org/), 
which brings STEM robotics to younger children starting in the 4th grade, First Robotics 
(see http://www.us˜rst.org/roboticsprograms/frc), the University of California, San Diego, 
COSMOS program (http://www.jacobsschool.ucsd.edu/cosmos/index.shtml), or RoboCup 
Junior (http://rcj.robocup.org/), accessed November 1, 2016.
BOX 4.1 The Role of Industry in Evolving CPS Programs and CurriculaAlthough much of the work to develop cyber-physical systems (CPS) pro
-grams and curricula will take place in academia, industry can also play an impor-tant part. Potential roles for industry include the following:
 Encouraging industry experts to participate as guest lecturers and adjunct 
and guest faculty to support the development of CPS programs;
 Providing ongoing feedback on the design of CPS courses and curricula 
and on the preparation of students who work in industry as interns or new hires; 
and

A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
FINDING 4.1: Although there are many STEM courses and programs 
at the high school and undergraduate level that introduce the stu
-dents to some CPS elements such programs often do not provide a 
broad introduction to CPS foundations and principles and tend to be 
focused either on overly simplistic applications or on too discipline-
centric content.
RECOMMENDATION 4.1: 
Those developing K-12 science, technol
-ogy, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs and educat
-ing and training STEM teachers should consider opportunities to 
enrich these programs with cyber-physical systems (CPS) concepts 
and applications in order to lay intellectual foundations for future 
work and expose students to CPS career opportunities. 
FINDING 4.2: 
Incoming college students appear to be unfamiliar 
with the term CPS, CPS concepts, and job opportunities in CPS. They 
are, however, drawn to courses and programs in more widely visible, 
CPS-related topics such as robotics, the IoT, health care, smart cities, 
and the Industrial Internet. 
RECOMMENDATION 4.2: 
Those developing cyber-physical systems 
engineering courses and programs should consider leveraging the 
visibility of and student interest in areas such as robotics, the Inter
-net of Things, health care, smart cities, and the Industrial Internet in 
descriptions of careers, courses, and programs and when selecting 
applications used in courses and projects. 
RECRUITING, RETAINING, AND DEVELOPING 
THE NEEDED FACULTY
CPS exists not only across disciplines, but also at the intersection of 
various disciplines. Faculty teaching CPS foundational, specialized, or 
project-based courses will need to have an understanding of the multi
-disciplinary aspects of the CPS spectrum. CPS faculty will not only need 
depth in a particular aspect of CPS, but will also need the capability to 
relate their expertise to the other aspects of a complete CPS system and its 
respective domain-speci˜c needs. The steps for recruiting, retaining, and 
developing the needed CPS faculty are brie˚y discussed below.
Recruiting
More new CPS-speci˜c faculty will be produced as more research 
is pursued in the ˜eld. In the long term, the ideal faculty recruit will (1) 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEVELOPING AND INSTITUTIONALIZING CPS CURRICULA 63have graduated with a CPS degree or specialization and (2) have a record 
of conducting CPS-speci˜c research. Another source of faculty would be 
those with industrial experience in CPS technologies. It is furthermore 
expected that the calls for faculty positions will explicitly mention CPS 
education and research. In fact, even now there are already several uni
-versities that include CPS in their call for new faculty. 
Currently and in the near-future before CPS education is well estab
-lished, CPS faculty recruitment will require departments to look for fac
-ulty who will have both intense depth but also breadth. Recruiters will 
look for charismatic faculty with a high-level of initiative who will play 
an important role in drawing students to CPS education. Recruitment 
also requires the opening of teaching slots, which will inevitably lead to 
competition for these slots from more traditional research areas. 
It must be acknowledged that the teaching capital for current students 
is already limited, and universities may be reluctant to add additional 
constraints by taking on CPS as a new discipline within existing pro
-grams. As a result, new hires tend to be limited to individuals who can 
support a university™s current core curriculum. Therefore, developing a 
speci˜c CPS degree program will create clear opportunities for hiring 
individuals with a teaching and research background focused speci˜cally 
on CPS. 
Retaining 
The current academic system, in particular tenure and promotion 
decisions, builds strongly upon the depth in the faculty™s own ˜eld and 
through publications that are often discipline limited. Because CPS faculty 
will have a broader pro˜le of research, they may publish in a variety of 
venues, and the current promotion criteria may limit the development 
of CPS-centric faculty. However, there are a number of well-recognized 
conferences in CPS (e.g., CPS Week), as well as textbooks and a new Asso
-ciation of Computing Machinery journal 
Transactions on Cyber-Physical 
Systems
. Such events and publication venues create a growing academic 
community around CPS. Young CPS faculty with a multidisciplinary 
pro˜le can then establish themselves as CPS researchers and still meet 
the academic evaluation criteria. Interestingly, given the novelty of the 
area, young faculty could more easily become leaders in the CPS ˜eld, as 
they do not need to ˜nd a place in other more mature ˜elds with a large 
number of well-established and well-recognized leaders. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
Developing
Faculty members who have a proven record in their own ˜eld and 
then venture into this more interdisciplinary ˜eld once they achieve ten
-ure do much of the existing CPS education and research. In the future, the 
committee envisions the development of new entry-level faculty as CPS 
educators. Given the already broad scope of this study, the committee did 
not explore the development of Ph.D. programs in CPS in any depth. For 
example, it did not consider the extent to which much of the training nec
-essary for Ph.D. students might be covered by the educational content in 
master™s-level programs. Nevertheless, over time, provided that demand 
for faculty and research funding opportunities are both sustained, it is 
reasonable to anticipate that institutions will start establishing Ph.D. pro
-grams in CPS. Moreover, if CPS follows the pattern of other engineering 
disciplines, Ph.D.-level engineers will ˜ll important technical leadership 
roles in industry and more Ph.D.™s will take jobs in industry than will 
pursue academic careers, contributing further to demand for Ph.D. pro
-grams in CPS.
While the new specialized CPS faculty is emerging, the use of teach
-ing modules may serve to alleviate some of the time and resource con
-straint placed on educators. The committee envisions that faculty experts 
in multiple CPS disciplines could then design and co-teach new courses or 
build course modules so that the students can be jointly taught the com
-bined material. Such co-teaching opportunities will lead to the develop
-ment of the co-teaching faculty as increasingly pro˜cient CPS educators. 
Professional organizations such as the American Society of Engineering 
Educators can help promote the development of innovative teaching in 
CPS and develop conference tracks to promote the exchange of informa
-tion about best practices in CPS education.
Industry experts can contribute to the development of CPS programs 
in such roles as guest lecturers and adjunct and visiting faculty. An oppor
-tunity for cross-discipline teaching arises where experts in one ˜eld part
-ner with experts in other ˜elds to teach a modular course.
Universities, industry, and government laboratories also must iden
-tify and reward effective CPS program mentors. For example, project-
based courses where students solve well-de˜ned problems involving real 
physical systems that need to be integrated with safe and secure programs 
will be of special signi˜cance. Students will be challenged to devise and 
develop solutions that actually work, and the CPS-focused research expe
-rience of undergraduates, as well as industry and government laboratory 
summer intern programs, will further promote the CPS discipline with 
undergraduates. Such programs will not be successful without dedicated 
mentors who can motivate students to explore CPS engineering and excite 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEVELOPING AND INSTITUTIONALIZING CPS CURRICULA 65these students about their career possibilities if they choose to pursue a 
CPS education.
FINDING 4.3: 
Because CPS is a new ˜eld that draws on multiple 
disciplines, not all institutions can be expected to have enough faculty 
with the requisite knowledge to teach all of the courses needed for a 
CPS degree program.
 RECOMMENDATION 4.3:
 The National Science Foundation should 
support the development of cyber-physical systems faculty through 
the use of teaching grants and fellowships.
CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT AND RESOURCES 
Chapter 3 lays out several options for education programs at the 
undergraduate levelŠfrom survey courses to full degree programs. Com
-mon features of all of these options is that new or redesigned courses will 
be needed in order to teach the complexities of CPS and that opportunities 
for hands-on work, which is key to re-enforcing key concepts and integra
-tion, is essential. 
In order for universities to support new education programs, they 
will need the appropriate resources, including new textbooks and test- 
beds and laboratory space. A limited number of textbooks, curricular 
materials, and laboratory facilities exist to support CPS. 
Few textbooks exist that provide a complete overview of CPS; these 
textbooks are essential to teaching well-designed survey courses. The 
committee was encouraged by the release of several textbooks during its 
work. Edward Lee and Sanjit Seshia compiled a new textbook, 
Introduc
-tion to Embedded Systems: A Cyber-Physical Systems Approach
, when devel
-oping their survey course at University of California, Berkeley, because 
one simply did not exist that met their needs.
2 Rajeev Alur also released 
another text, 
Principles of Cyber-Physical Systems
, in 2015.
3 Traditional course textbooks for standard engineering courses, such 
as controls or signal processing, may not fully incorporate the effects of 
the physical system on cyber technology, and vice versa. Just as courses 
will need to be signi˜cantly redesigned, so will textbooks. Both may 
sometimes be accomplished by supplementing existing materials with 
CPS material, exercises, and laboratory projects. 
Furthermore, CPS are often very complex and students need a full 
2 E.A. Lee. and S.A. Seshia, 2015, Introduction to Embedded Systems: A Cyber-Physical Systems 
Approach
, Second Edition, http://LeeSeshia.org.
3 R. Alur, 2015, 
Principles of Cyber-Physical Systems
, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
understanding of how the physical environment impacts these systems. 
Realistic models can provide some of this knowledge, but hands-on 
engagement through project-based learning is integral to developing an 
understanding of CPS complexities, and participation in complex interdis
-ciplinary projects will help develop needed systems-level thinking. Pro
-viding students with these opportunities depends on having the appro
-priate facilities.
Design laboratories where students can work on integrative CPS proj
-ects with multi-disciplinary teams are one option. Another is to provide 
students with access to testbeds that allow for the co-design of physical 
and computational components to demonstrate the bene˜ts of integrat
-ing simulation and experimentation. It is also important for students 
to be exposed to testbeds because they are a key element of industrial 
practice as part of the development process. A classic example of indus
-trial testbeds is hardware-in-the-loop, where one combines simulation 
and physical devices, where possible, to reduce cost and complexity and 
increase ˚exibility with physical components where simulation does not 
provide suf˜cient ˜delity. Testbeds are expensive to create and maintain, 
and many universities do not have, or will not allocate, resources to cre
-ate such testbeds. Partnerships among institutions and with industry 
can help share the costs and leverage existing resources, and ensure that 
testbeds re˚ect the current state of art and practice.
FINDING 4.4: 
If they are to teach new CPS courses and build CPS 
programs, universities will need to allocate time and resources to 
develop CPS course materials and to provide the necessary laboratory 
space and equipment (including both virtual and physical testbeds). 
FINDING 4.5: 
Testbeds are needed to provide students with suf˜
-ciently realistic applications and problems. These can be both virtual 
and physical and can be remotely accessed and shared among mul
-tiple institutions and developed and operated in cooperation with 
industry.
RECOMMENDATION 4.4: 
The National Science Foundation, profes
-sional societies, and universities should support the development and 
evolution of cyber-physical systems textbooks, class modules (includ
-ing laboratory modules), and testbeds. These parties should partner 
with industry in developing and maintaining realistic testbeds. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEVELOPING AND INSTITUTIONALIZING CPS CURRICULA 67FOSTERING DEVELOPMENT OF THE CPS 
DISCIPLINE AND CPS EDUCATION
As discussed above, more can be done to raise awareness about career 
opportunities in CPS among prospective students. In industry, although 
there is growing awareness of the need for CPS skills, the full set of skills 
required to effectively engineer CPS is not universally appreciated.
Sustained support for research allows students to focus their graduate 
research on CPS, which in turn produces the next generation of entry-
level faculty that can build and teach the discipline. Research also gen
-erates papers for conferences and journals and creates innovative ideas 
and startup spinoffs. All of these byproducts of research funding help 
to de˜ne CPS as an accepted discipline and raise awareness at all levels 
within the technical community. CPS will also become more visible as 
formal specializations and degree programs emerge and as CPS-trained 
engineers make signi˜cant contributions to industry.
Those within the ˜eld can assist by reaching out to industry, prepar
-ing materials, and participating in workshops and seminars to broaden 
understanding of what CPS is (and is not), the complicated nature of CPS, 
and what can be gained by hiring people more formally educated in the 
˜eld of CPS. Such education can be passive (e.g., availability of material 
on websites) or active through workshops and seminars.
At universities, some of the push for CPS education will naturally 
occur from the bottom-upŠthat is, faculty making the effort to incorpo
-rate CPS material into the curriculum and develop CPS courses. However, 
as with any emerging interdisciplinary area, if these initiatives are to take 
root, the encouragement and support of university administrators will 
be essential. Many university administrations already promote teach
-ing and research closely aligned with CPS, such as curricula emphasiz
-ing engineering applications with direct societal impact and engineering 
programs oriented toward interdepartmental teamwork and complex, 
real-world systems. University administrations can additionally support 
emerging or planned CPS education by providing the necessary person
-nel, laboratory space, and initiation grants.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71
ABiographies of 
 Committee Members and Staff
JOHN A. STANKOVIC, 
Co-Chair, is the BP America Professor in the Com
-puter Science Department at the University of Virginia. Dr. Stankovic 
served as chair of the department for 8 years. He is a fellow of both the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the Associa
-tion for Computing Machinery (ACM). He has been awarded an honor
-ary doctorate from the University of York. He won the IEEE Real-Time 
Systems Technical Committee™s Award for Outstanding Technical Contri
-butions and Leadership. Dr. Stankovic also won the IEEE Technical Com
-mittee on Distributed Processing™s Distinguished Achievement Award 
(inaugural winner). He has seven best paper awards, including one for 
the ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys) 
2006. He also has two best paper runner up awards, including one for the 
ACM/IEEE Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks 
(IPSN) 2013. He has also been a ˜nalist for four other best paper awards. 
Dr. Stankovic has an h-index of 107 and more than 41,000 citations. In 
2015, he was awarded the University of Virginia Distinguished Scientist 
Award, and in 2010, the School of Engineering™s Distinguished Faculty 
Award. Dr. Stankovic also received a distinguished faculty award from 
the University of Massachusetts. He has given more than 35 keynote 
talks at conferences and many distinguished lectures at major universi
-ties. Currently, he serves on the Computer Science Telecommunications 
Board of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 
Dr. Stankovic was the editor-in-chief for the 
IEEE Transactions on Distrib
-uted and Parallel Systems
 and was founder and co-editor-in-chief for the 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
Real-Time Systems Journal
. His research interests are in real-time systems, 
wireless sensor networks, wireless health, cyber-physical systems (CPS), 
and the Internet of Things. Dr. Stankovic received his Ph.D. from Brown 
University.
JAMES STURGES, 
Co-Chair
, is an independent consultant specializing 
in program management and systems engineering for very large, com
-plex aerospace and defense systems. He retired in 2009 from Lockheed 
Martin Corporation, where he had been director, engineering processes, 
and director, mission assurance. Prior to that, Mr. Sturges was vice presi
-dent, engineering and total quality, at Loral Air Traf˜c Control/Lockheed 
Martin Air Traf˜c Management, and C3I Strategic Business Area director 
for Loral Tactical Defense Systems, Arizona. He is an associate fellow and 
past member of the Standards Executive Council and chair of the Systems 
Engineering Technical Committee of the American Institute of Aeronau
-tics and Astronautics, and was twice chair of the Corporate Advisory 
Board for the International Council on Systems Engineering. Early in his 
career, Mr. Sturges was a naval aviator, instrument instructor and check 
pilot, and antisubmarine warfare of˜cer for the U.S. Navy. He has a B.A. 
from the University of North Carolina and an M.S. and aeronautical engi
-neer degree from the Naval Postgraduate School at Monterey.
ALEXANDRE BAYEN is the
 Liao-Cho Professor of Engineering
 at the 
University of California, Berkeley. He is a professor of electrical engineer
-ing and computer science and civil and environmental engineering and 
director of the Institute of Transportation Studies. He is also a faculty 
scientist in mechanical engineering at the Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory.
 He was a visiting researcher at NASA Ames Research Center 
from 2000 to 2003. Between January 2004 and December 2004, he worked 
as the research director of the Autonomous Navigation Laboratory at the 
Laboratoire de Recherches Balistiques et Aerodynamiques (Ministere de 
la Defense, Vernon, France), where he holds the rank of major. Dr. Bayen 
has authored two books and more than 150 articles in peer-reviewed 
journals and conferences. He is the recipient of the Ballhaus Award from 
Stanford University (2004) and the CAREER award from the National 
Science Foundation (2009), and he is a NASA Top 10 Innovator on Water 
Sustainability (2010). His projects Mobile Century and Mobile Millennium 
received the 2008 Best of ITS Award for Best Innovative Practice at the 
ITS World Congress and a TRANNY Award from the California Trans
-portation Foundation (2009). Mobile Millennium has been featured more 
than 200 times in the media, including TV and radio (CBS, NBC, ABC, 
CNET, NPR, KGO, the BBC) as well as in the popular press (
Wall Street 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 73Journal
, Washington Post
, LA Times
). Dr. Bayen is the recipient of the Presi
-dential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE) from 
the White House (2010) and the recipient of the Okawa Research Grant 
Award, the Ruberti Prize from IEEE, and the Huber Prize from ASCE. He 
received an engineering degree in applied mathematics from the Ecole 
Polytechnique, France; an M.S. degree in aeronautics and astronautics 
from Stanford University; and a Ph.D. in aeronautics and astronautics 
from Stanford University.
CHARLES R. FARRAR is the Engineering Institute leader at Los Alamos 
National Laboratory (LANL) and a laboratory fellow. This institute is a 
research and education collaboration between LANL and the Univer
-sity of California, San Diego (UCSD) Jacobs School of Engineering with 
a research focus on multi-disciplinary projects that integrate advanced 
predictive modeling, novel sensing systems, and new approaches to infor
-mation technology. He has 33 years™ experience at LANL. Dr. Farrar™s 
research interests focus on developing integrated hardware and soft
-ware solutions for monitoring the health of structures. The results of this 
research have been documented in more than 400 publications as well 
as numerous keynote lectures at international conferences. Additional 
professional activities include an associate editor position for 
Earthquake 
Engineering and Structural Dynamics
 and the development of a short course 
entitled ﬁStructural Health Monitoring: A Statistical Pattern Recognition 
Approach,ﬂ which has been offered more than 30 times at conferences 
and to industry and government agencies in Asia, Australia, Europe, and 
the United States. Dr. Farrar is also an adjunct professor in the Structural 
Engineering Department at UCSD where he teaches a graduate course 
on structural health monitoring. In 2007, he was elected a fellow of the 
American Society of Mechanical Engineers. He received a Ph.D. in civil 
engineering from the University of New Mexico in 1988. 
MARYE ANNE FOX is the former chancellor of UCSD. She has received 
honorary degrees from 12 institutions in the United States and abroad, and 
in October 2010, President Barack Obama awarded Dr. Fox the National 
Medal of Science, the highest honor bestowed by the U.S. government 
on scientists, engineers, and inventors. Previously, she was chancellor at 
North Carolina State University, and she spent 22 years at the University 
of Texas where she advanced to vice president for research and held 
the Waggoner Regents Chair in Chemistry. Dr. Fox is a member of the 
National Academy of Sciences. She earned a bachelor™s degree in science 
from Notre Dame College, a master™s degree in science from Cleveland 
State University, and a Ph.D. in Chemistry from Dartmouth College.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
SANTIAGO GRIJALVA
 is an associate professor of electrical and computer 
engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He joined the faculty 
in 2009. He is the director of the Advanced Computational Electricity Sys
-tems Laboratory, where he conducts research on real-time power system 
control, informatics, and economics, and renewable energy integration in 
power. In 2012, Dr. Grijalva was appointed as the Strategic Energy Insti
-tute associate director for electricity systems, responsible for coordinating 
large efforts on electricity research and policy at Georgia Tech. He was a 
post-doctoral fellow in power and energy systems at the University of 
Illinois from 2003 to 2004. From 1995 to 1997, he was with the Ecuador
-ian National Center for Energy Control as engineer and manager of the 
Real-Time EMS Software Department. From 2002 to 2009, he was with 
PowerWorld Corporation as a senior software architect and developer of 
innovative real-time and optimization applications used today by utilities, 
control centers, and universities in more than 60 countries. Dr. Grijalva 
is a leading researcher on ultra-reliable architectures for critical energy 
infrastructures. He has pioneered work on decentralized and autono
-mous power system control, renewable energy integration in power, and 
uni˜ed network models and applications. He is currently the principal 
investigator of various future electricity grid research projects for the 
Department of Energy, the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy, 
the Electric Power Research Institute, and the Power Systems Engineer
-ing Research Center, as well as other government organizations, research 
consortia, and industrial sponsors. Dr. Grijalva received the electrical 
engineer degree from Escuela Politécnica Nacional (EPN)-Ecuador in 
1994, the M.S. certi˜cate in information systems from Universidad de las 
Fuerzas Armadas (ESPE)-Ecuador in 1997, and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in 
electrical engineering from the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 
in 1999 and 2002, respectively.
HIMANSHU KHURANA is the senior manager for the Integrated Security 
Technologies section of the Knowledge Systems Laboratory at Honeywell 
Automation and Control Systems. The Integrated Security Technolo
-gies section focuses on research, development, and technology transi
-tion in cybersecurity, computer vision, surveillance, and biometrics. Dr. 
Khurana™s research interests lie in the area of distributed system security, 
especially as applied to large-scale distributed systems and critical infra
-structures, and he has published 50 articles in this area. Prior to joining 
Honeywell, he was with the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 
and served as the co-principal investigator for the Trustworthy Cyber 
Infrastructure for Power Center (now the TCIPG). He has been involved 
with several smart grid initiatives, including the North American Syn
-chrophasor Initiative, the National Institute of Standards and Technol
-A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 75ogy Cyber Security Working Group, DNP3 Technical Committee, and in 
developing relevant cyber security standards. He obtained his M.S. and 
Ph.D. from the University of Maryland, College Park.
PANGANAMALA R. KUMAR, professor of electrical and computer engi
-neering at Texas A&M University, obtained his B. Tech. degree in electri
-cal engineering (electronics) from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) 
Madras in 1973, and the M.S. and D.Sc. degrees in systems science and 
mathematics from Washington University, St. Louis, in 1975 and 1977, 
respectively. From 1977-1984, Dr. Kumar was a faculty member in the 
Department of Mathematics at the University of Maryland, Baltimore 
County. From 1985-2011 he was a faculty member in the Department of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Coordinated Science Labo
-ratory at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. Currently, he is at 
Texas A&M University, where he is a university distinguished professor 
and holds the College of Engineering chair in computer engineering. Dr. 
Kumar has worked on problems in game theory, adaptive control, sto
-chastic systems, simulated annealing, neural networks, machine learning, 
queueing networks, manufacturing systems, scheduling, wafer fabrica
-tion plants, and information theory. His current research is focused on 
stochastic systems, energy systems, wireless networks, secure network
-ing, automated transportation, and CPS. Dr. Kumar is a member of the 
U.S. National Academy of Engineering (NAE) and the World Academy 
of Sciences. He was awarded an honorary doctorate by ETH in Zurich. 
He received the IEEE Field Award for Control Systems, the American 
Automatic Control Council (AACC) Donald P. Eckman Award, the Fred 
W. Ellersick Prize of the IEEE Communications Society, the Outstand
-ing Contribution Award of the ACM Special Interest Group on Mobil
-ity of Systems, Users, Data and Computing (SIGMOBILE), the Infocom 
Achievement Award, and SIGMOBILE Test-of-Time Paper Award. He 
is a fellow of IEEE and an ACM fellow. He was a guest chair professor 
and leader of the Guest Chair Professor Group on Wireless Communica
-tion and Networking at Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. He is a D. J. 
Gandhi Distinguished Visiting Professor at IIT Bombay. He is an honorary 
professor at IIT Hyderabad. He was awarded the Distinguished Alumnus 
Award from IIT Madras, the Alumni Achievement Award from Washing
-ton University in St. Louis, and the Daniel C. Drucker Eminent Faculty 
Award from the College of Engineering at the University of Illinois.
INSUP LEE is the Cecilia Fitler Moore Professor of Computer and Infor
-mation Science and director of PRECISE Center, which he founded 
in 2008, at the University of Pennsylvania. He also holds a secondary 
appointment in the Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering. 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
Dr. Lee received a B.S. degree with honors in mathematics from the Uni
-versity of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, in 1977, and a Ph.D. degree in 
computer science from the University of Wisconsin, Madison, in 1983. His 
research interests include CPS, real-time systems, embedded and hybrid 
systems, formal methods and tools, high-con˜dence medical device sys
-tems, run-time veri˜cation, software certi˜cation, and trust management. 
The theme of his research activities has been to assure and improve the 
correctness, safety, and timeliness of life-critical embedded systems. Dr. 
Lee and his student received the best paper award at the IEEE Real-Time 
Systems Symposium (RTSS) 2003 on compositional schedulability analy
-sis. His papers also received the best paper award in IEEE RTSS 2012, 
the best student paper at the IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology 
and Applications Symposium 2012, and the co-best paper at the Eighth 
Annual Collaboration, Electronic Messaging, Anti-Abuse, and Spam 
Conference (CEAS) 2011. Recently, he has been working in medical CPS 
and security of CPS. He has served on many program committees and 
chaired several international conferences and workshops, including IEEE 
RTSS, IEEE RTCSA (International Conference on Embedded and Real-
Time Computing Systems and Applications), IEEE ISORC (International 
Symposium on Real-Time Computing), CONCUR (International Confer
-ence on Concurrency Theory), ACM EMSOFT (International Conference 
on Embedded Software), ACM/IEEE ICCPS (International Conference 
on Cyber-Physical Systems), and HCMDSS/MD PnP (High Con˜dence 
Medical Devices, Software, and Systems and Medical Device Plug-and-
Play Interoperability). Dr. Lee has also served on various steering and 
advisory committees of technical societies, including CPS Week, Embed
-ded Systems Week, ACM Special Interest Group on Embedded Systems, 
IEEE Technical Committee on Real-Time Systems (TC-RTS), RV (Runtime 
Veri˜cation), and ATVA (Automated Technology for Veri˜cation and 
Analysis). He has served on the editorial boards on the several scienti˜c 
journals, including 
IEEE Transactions on Computers
, 
Formal Methods in Sys
-tem Design
, and 
Real-Time Systems Journal
. He is a founding co-editor-in-
chief of 
KIISE Journal of Computing Science and Engineering
 since 2007. He 
was chair of IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Real-Time 
Systems (2003-2004) and an IEEE Computer Science Distinguished Visitor 
Speaker (2004-2006). Dr. Lee was a member of Technical Advisory Group 
of President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology Network
-ing and Information Technology (2006-2007). He received an appreciation 
plague from Ministry of Science, IT and Future Planning, South Korea, 
for speaking at the Universal Linkage for Top Research Advisor (ULTRA) 
Program Forum in 2013. He is an IEEE fellow and received an IEEE TC-
RTS Outstanding Technical Achievement and Leadership Award in 2008.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 77WILLIAM MILAM is a technical expert at the Ford Research and Inno
-vation Center, Ford Motor Company. His research addresses modeling 
and implementation of advanced technology automotive engines for 
improved fuel economy and emissions, and improvements in systems 
engineering processes for the design of automotive embedded systems. 
He is a senior member of the IEEE and a member of SAE International 
(formerly the Society of Automotive Engineers). Mr. Milam serves as a 
member of the SAE Electronic Design Automation Standards Committee 
and the SAE Architecture Analysis and Design Language Standards Com
-mittee and chairs the SAE Model Based Embedded Systems Engineering 
Task Force.
SANJOY K. MITTER received his Ph.D. degree from the Imperial College 
of Science and Technology in 1965. He taught at Case Western Reserve 
University from 1965 to 1969. He joined the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT) in 1969 where he has been a professor of electrical 
engineering since 1973. Dr. Mitter was the director of the MIT Laboratory 
for Information and Decision Systems from 1981 to 1999. He has also 
been a professor of mathematics at the Scuola Normale, Pisa, Italy, from 
1986 to 1996. He has held visiting positions at Imperial College, London; 
University of Groningen, Holland; INRIA, France; Tata Institute of Fun
-damental Research, India and ETH, Zürich, Switzerland; and several 
American universities. In 2012, Dr. Mitter was the Ulam Scholar at LANL 
and the John von Neumann Visiting Professor in Mathematics at the 
Technical University of Munich, Germany. He was awarded the AACC 
Richard E. Bellman Control Heritage Award in 2007. He was the McKay 
Professor at the University of California, Berkeley, in 2000 and held the 
Russell-Severance-Springer Chair in fall 2003. He is a fellow of IEEE and 
a member of the NAE. Dr. Mitter is the winner of the 2000 IEEE Control 
Systems award. He was elected a foreign member of Istituto Veneto di 
Scienze, ed Arti, in 2003. His current research interests are communication 
and control in a networked environment, the relationship of statistical and 
quantum physics to information theory and control, and autonomy and 
adaptiveness for integrative organization.
JOSÉ M.F. MOURA is the Philip and Marsha Dowd University Professor 
of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University 
(CMU), and, by courtesy, a professor of biomedical engineering. He is a 
member of the NAE, a fellow of the U.S. National Academy of Inventors, 
a corresponding member of the Portugal Academy of Science, an IEEE 
fellow, and a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement 
of Science (AAAS). Dr. Moura has been a visiting professor at New York 
University (2013-2014), a visiting professor at MIT (2006-2007, 1999-2000, 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
and 1984-1986), a visiting scholar at the University of Southern Califor
-nia (Summers of 1979-1981), and was on the faculty of Instituto Superior 
Técnico (IST) (Portugal). His research interests are in data science and sta
-tistical signal and image processing. Two of his patents (co-inventor Alec 
Kavcic) are found in more than 3 billion hard drives of over 60 percent 
of all computers sold since 2003 and were the subject of a $750 million 
settlement in 2016 between CMU and Marvell. Current research projects 
include data analytics for unstructured big data, distributed inference in 
networks, SPIRAL (an intelligent compiler), nondestructive health-mon
-itoring systems, bioimaging, signal processing on Graphs, and image/
video processing. Dr. Moura™s work has been sponsored by Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency, National Institutes of Health, Of˜ce 
of Naval Research, Army Research Of˜ce, Air Force Of˜ce of Scienti˜c 
Research, and National Science Foundation (NSF) grants and several 
industrial grants. Dr. Moura received the IEEE Signal Processing Society 
Award for outstanding technical contributions and leadership in signal 
processing and the IEEE Signal Processing Society Technical Achievement 
Award for fundamental contributions to statistical signal processing. He 
is vice president for technical activities and serves on the board of direc
-tors of the IEEE, served as IEEE Division IX director (2012-2013), and was 
the president of the IEEE Signal Processing Society (2008-2009). He was 
editor-in-chief of 
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing
, acting editor-in-
chief for 
IEEE Signal Processing Letters
, and was on the editorial board of 
ACM
 Transactions on Sensor Networks
 and 
IEEE Proceedings
. He served on 
several IEEE boards, including the Education Activities Board (2010) and 
the IEEE Technical Activities Board (TAB) (2008-2009). He holds D.Sc. and 
M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from MIT and an electrical science 
degree from IST (Portugal).
GEORGE J. PAPPAS is the Joseph Moore Professor and Chair of the 
Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering at the University of 
Pennsylvania. He also holds a secondary appointment in the Departments 
of Computer and Information Sciences, and Mechanical Engineering and 
Applied Mechanics. He is member of the GRASP Laboratory and the 
PRECISE Center. Dr. Pappas has previously served as deputy dean for 
research in the School of Engineering and Applied Science. His research 
focuses on control theory and, in particular, hybrid systems; embedded 
systems; hierarchical and distributed control systems, with applications 
to unmanned aerial vehicles; distributed robotics; green buildings; and 
biomolecular networks. He is a fellow of IEEE and has received various 
awards, such as the Antonio Ruberti Young Researcher Prize, the George 
S. Axelby Award, and the NSF PECASE. Dr. Pappas received his Ph.D. 
from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1998.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 79PAULO TABUADA is a professor of electrical engineering and vice chair 
for graduate affairs at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). 
Between January 2002 and July 2003, he was a postdoctoral researcher at 
the University of Pennsylvania. After spending 3 years at the University 
of Notre Dame as an assistant professor, he joined the Electrical Engineer
-ing Department at UCLA, where he established and directs the Cyber-
Physical Systems Laboratory. Dr. Tabuada™s research interests include 
modeling, analysis, design, control, and security of CPS. He received his 
ﬁLicenciaturaﬂ degree in aerospace engineering from IST (Portugal) in 
1998 and his Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering in 2002 
from the Institute for Systems and Robotics, a private research institute 
associated with IST. Dr. Tabuada™s contributions to CPS have been recog
-nized by multiple awards, including the NSF CAREER award in 2005, the 
AACC Donald P. Eckman Award in 2009, and the IEEE Control Systems 
Society George S. Axelby Outstanding Paper Award in 2011. In 2009, he 
co-chaired the International Conference Hybrid Systems: Computation 
and Control (HSCC™09), and in 2012, he was program co-chair for the 
3rd International Federation of Automatic Control Workshop on Distrib
-uted Estimation and Control in Networked Systems (NecSys™12). He also 
served on the editorial board of 
IEEE Embedded Systems Letters
 and 
IEEE 
Transactions on Automatic Control
. His latest book, 
Veri˜cation and Control 
of Hybrid Systems: A Symbolic Approach
, was published in 2009.
MANUELA M. VELOSO is the Herbert A. Simon Professor in the Com
-puter Science Department, School of Computer Science, at CMU and 
the department head of the Machine Learning Department. She holds 
courtesy appointments in the Robotics Institute, the Electrical and Com
-puter Engineering Department, and Mechanical Engineering Department. 
Dr. Veloso researches in arti˜cial intelligence and robotics. She founded 
and directs the CORAL research group for the study of multiagent sys
-tems where agents collaborate, observe, reason, act, and learn. Dr. Veloso 
is a fellow of IEEE, AAAS, and the Association for the Advancement of 
Arti˜cial Intelligence (AAAI). She was president of AAAI and president 
of the RoboCup Federation. She received the 2009 ACM/SIGART Autono
-mous Agents Research Award for her contributions to agents in uncertain 
and dynamic environments, including distributed robot localization and 
world modeling, strategy selection in multiagent systems in the pres
-ence of adversaries, and robot learning from demonstration. Dr. Veloso 
and her students have contributed a variety of autonomous robots, for 
robot soccer, education, and service robots. More recently, she introduced 
symbiotic robot autonomy, in which robots are autonomous but aware of 
their perceptual, cognitive, and actuation limitations and can proactively 
ask for help from humans, other robots, and the web. For the past 3 years, 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
following robust localization, task planning, and symbiotic autonomy, 
her collaborative service robots, CoBots, have navigated for more than 
1,000 km in the multi˚oor buildings at CMU. Dr. Veloso holds a Ph.D. in 
computer science from CMU and B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical and 
computer engineering from IST (Portugal).
Staff
JON EISENBERG is director of the Computer Science and Telecommu
-nications Board (CSTB) of the National Academies. He has also been 
study director for a diverse body of work, including a series of studies 
exploring Internet and broadband policy and networking and communi
-cations technologies. In 1995-1997 he was a AAAS Science, Engineering, 
and Diplomacy fellow at the U.S. Agency for International Development, 
where he worked on technology transfer and information and telecom
-munications policy issues. Dr. Eisenberg received his Ph.D. in physics 
from the University of Washington and B.S. in physics with honors from 
the University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI is a program of˜cer for the CSTB. She for
-merly served as a program associate with the Frontiers of Engineering 
program at the NAE. Prior to her work at the National Academies, she 
served as a senior project assistant in education technology at the National 
School Boards Association. Ms. Bacon Talati has a B.S. in science, technol
-ogy, and culture from the Georgia Institute of Technology and an M.P.P. 
from George Mason University, with a focus in science and technology 
policy.
SHENAE BRADLEY is an admistrative assistant at the CSTB. She cur
-rently provides support for the Committee on Sustaining Growth in Com
-puting Performance, the Committee on Wireless Technology Prospects 
and Policy Options, and the Computational Thinking for Everyone: A 
Workshop Series Planning Committee, to name a few. Prior to this, she 
served as an administrative assistant for the Ironworker Management 
Progressive Action Cooperative Trust and managed a number of Apart
-ment Rental Communities for Edgewood Management Corporation in the 
Maryland/DC/ Delaware metropolitan areas.
CHRISTOPHER JONES was an associate program of˜cer for the CSTB. 
He joined the National Academies in 2016 as a Mirzayan Science and 
Technology Policy Fellow for the Board on Science, Technology, and Eco
-nomic Policy. Prior to this, he was a start-up founder working in the con
-nected car and energy ef˜ciency domain, a White House fellow working 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 81on material science and water issues, and a Fulbright grantee assessing 
heavy metal contaminant removal technologies for drinking water. Dr. 
Jones received his Ph.D. and M.A. degrees from Rice University and B.S. 
from the Florida State University, all in chemistry.
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82
BBriefers to the Study Committee
COMMITTEE MEETINGŠJANUARY 13, 2014
David Corman, National Science Foundation
WORKSHOPŠAPRIL 30, 2014
Alex Bayen, University of California, Berkeley
Dick Bulterman, FXPAL
David Corman, National Science Foundation
Ryan Izard, Clemson University
Dan Johnson, Honeywell
Himanshu Khurana, Honeywell International
Jean-Charles Lede, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Kevin Massey, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
John Mills, SimuQuest
Sanjai Rayadurgam, University of Minnesota
Joe Salvo, GE Research
Alberto Sangiovanna-Vincentelli, University of California, Berkeley
Lucio Soibelman, University of Southern California
Craig Stephens, Ford Research and Advanced Engineering
Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University
Paulo Tabuada, University of California, Los Angeles
Jon Williams, John Deere
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 83COMMITTEE MEETINGŠJUNE 26, 2014
Daniel Dvorak, Jet Propulsion Laboratory
WORKSHOPŠOCTOBER 2-3, 2014
Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Douglas Adams, Vanderbilt University
Steve Anton, Tennessee Technological University
Harry Cheng, University of California, Davis
Andr
é DeHon, University of Pennsylvania
Magnus Egerstedt, Georgia Institute of Technology
Norman Fortenberry, American Society for Engineering Education
Christopher Gill, Washington University
Scott Hareland, Medtronic
Jonathan How, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Clas Jacobson, United Technologies Corporation
Philip Koopman, Carnegie Mellon University
Edward Lee, University of California, Berkeley
Jerry Lynch, University of Michigan
Dimitri Mavris, Georgia Institute of Technology
Shankar Sastry, University of California, Berkeley
Henning Schulzrinne, Columbia University
COMMITTEE MEETINGŠMARCH 12-13, 2015
Ryan Kastner, University of California, San Diego
Yoky Matsuoka, Twitter
Astro Teller, Google, Inc.
Feng Zhao, Microsoft Research Asia
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84
CWorkshop Agendas
APRIL 30, 2014 
 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
 WASHINGTON, D.C.
The goal for this workshop is to gain an understanding of the need 
for cyber physical systems
 workers, the impact of CPS on various
 sectors, 
core
 skills and knowledge, and educational barriers. Questions include:

What are CPS, and how does it relate to engineering, computer 
science, and other related disciplines? 

What role do CPS play in sustaining innovation and supporting 
U.S. competitiveness and economic growth? 

What sorts of jobs require CPS knowledge and skills? (e.g., engi
-neering design, test and evaluation, operations) 

Where does one ˜nd this talent today? How much of the needed 
knowledge and skills are covered in undergraduate degree programs or 
graduate education? How much on-the-job training is required? 

What are the core knowledge areas, capabilities, and skills that 
individuals working in CPS-intensive ˜elds need? How do they map onto 
traditional undergraduate degree programs and courses in engineering 
and computer science? What areas are covered in graduate programs and 
courses? 

Where are there gaps in courses, textbooks and other course mate
-rials, teaching tools, curricula, and degree programs? 

What are the barriers in the educational pipeline to developing 
needed CPS knowledge, skills, and capabilities?
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 858:30 a.m.
 Introduction and Welcome
 Jack Stankovic, University of Virginia, Co-Chair
 Jim Sturges, Lockheed Martin (retired), Co-Chair
8:45
 The Importance of Cyber Physical Systems
 Moderator: Jack Stankovic
 Panelists:
 David Corman, National Science Foundation 
    
Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University [remotely]
    
Joe Salvo, GE Research

What are CPS, and how does it relate to engineering, 
computer science, and other related disciplines?

What are some of the key applications of CPS? How do 
CPS help advance economically or societally important 
capabilities?

What sectors will depend most on CPS-enabled 
capabilities? 

What role do CPS play in sustaining innovation and 
supporting U.S. competitiveness and economic growth?
10:00 
 Break
10:15
 Current and Anticipated Workforce Needs
 Moderator: Bill Milam
 Panelists:
 Dick Bulterman, FXPAL 
    
Lucio Soibelman, University of Southern California
     
Craig Stephens, Ford Research and Advanced 
Engineering 
    
Jon Williams, John Deere

What sorts of jobs require CPS knowledge and 
skills? (e.g., engineering design, test and evaluation, 
operations)

Where does one ˜nd this talent today? How much 
of the needed knowledge and skills are covered in 
undergraduate degree 

programs or graduate education? How much on-the-job 
training is required?

What are expectations for the future size of the CPS 
workforce, in total or as a share of total positions? 

How important is it to have a workforce of suf˜cient 
capacity and capability?
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
12:00 p.m.
 Lunch
1:00
  Knowledge , Capabilities, and Skills Needed in a CPS 
Workforce
 Moderator: Insup Lee
 Panelists:
 Dan Johnson, Honeywell [remotely]
     
Kevin Massey, Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency
    
John Mills, SimuQuest
    
Sanjai Rayadurgam, University of Minnesota 
     
Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, University of 
California, Berkeley
   
Each sector deploying cyber-physical systems has tended 
to work independently of others in developing the nec
-essary science, engineering, workplace skills, and regula
-tory approachŠre˚ecting in part the historically modest 
ﬁcyber contentﬂ of most systems and organic efforts to solve 
the problems at hand. Today, there is growing interest in 
seeking advances with common application in science and 
engineering (including scienti˜c and engineering principles, 
algorithms, models, and theories); tools (including program
-ming languages and tools for reasoning about the proper
-ties of CPS); and building blocks (innovative hardware and 
software components, infrastructure, and platforms).

What knowledge and skills are common across sectors? 
What are sector-speci˜c?

What are the core knowledge areas, capabilities, and 
skills that individuals working in CPS-intensive ˜elds 
need? How do they map onto traditional undergraduate 
degree programs and courses in engineering and 
computer science? 

What areas are covered in graduate programs and 
courses?

Where are there gaps between what is taught and what 
employers need?

How do employees lacking needed knowledge or 
skills acquire them? How do employers provide 
these education and training opportunities to their 
employers?
2:30 
 Break
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 872:45
 Challenges and Opportunities in CPS Education
  Moderator: Sanjoy Mitter
 Panelists:
 Alex Bayen, University of California, Berkeley
    
Ryan Izard, Clemson University 
    
George Pappas, University of Pennsylvania 
  
To make progress in the CPS education pipeline, it will be 
important to understand the nature of current barriers and 
to develop strategies to overcome them. One challenge is 
the multidisciplinary character of educational foundations 
for CPS literacy. Looking across computer science, elec
-trical engineering, and other engineering disciplines will 
be critical. Moreover, the audience for education in CPS 
is not found only in a traditional academic context where 
disciplines and knowledge are relatively settled. The chal
-lenges also include re-educating today™s faculty, devising 
new preparation paths for university computer science and 
engineering students, upgrading K-12 teachers and the K-12 pipeline, as well as the existing workforce. New modali
-ties for lab-centric, team-taught, and online education are 
emerging, which merit investigation as potential tools for 
accelerating progress toward a more CPS-capable workforce 
and society.

Where are there gaps in courses, textbooks and other 
course materials, teaching tools, curricula, and degree 
programs?

What initiatives are underway to address perceived 
gaps? How can we assess their impact?

What are some of the obstacles that need to be 
overcome? Can courses and programs be realigned as 
needed? Do we have the 

faculty needed to teach CPS material?

Does our K-12 educational system provide the 
necessary foundation for later CPS education and work?

What are the barriers in the educational pipeline 
to developing needed CPS knowledge, skills, and 
capabilities?

What are some current programs/projects that are 
being developed to address these challenges?
 4:00
 Break
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
4:15
 Summary and Discussion
 Moderator: Jim Sturges
 Panelists:
 Chuck Farrar, Los Alamos Laboratories
    
Himanshu Khurana, Honeywell International
     
Paulo Tabuada, University of California, Los 
Angeles
5:30 
 Adjourn
OCTOBER 2-3, 2014 
 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
 WASHINGTON, D.C.
The ˜rst workshop focused on identifying CPS educational require
-ments. This workshop is focused on identifying solutions. Questions 
examined include:

Would there be a CPS engineer? Would there be a major in CPS? If 
it™s run out of an ECE department, what would it look like? If it was run 
out of a CS department, what would it look like? Should it not be run out 
of a single department? Should it be run out of more complicated, coor
-dinated multidisciplinary departments?

Should it just be the four-year electives, so it™s kind of a concentra
-tion rather than a whole major?

What happens in an aerospace department or a mechanical or civil 
engineering or chemical?

What should we be doing in community colleges, if anything, or 
high schools or K-12?
October 2, 2014 
9:00 a.m.
 Introduction and Welcome
 Jack Stankovic, University of Virginia, Co-Chair
 Jim Sturges, Lockheed Martin (retired), Co-Chair
9:30
 Current and Anticipated Workforce Needs
 Presenter:
 Scott Hareland, Medtronics
10:00 
 Break
10:00
 Innovative Trends in Engineering Education
  
Presenter:
  
Norman Fortenberry, American Society for 
Engineering Education
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 8911:00
  Incorporating CPS Knowledge into Existing
 Engineering 
Curricula
 Moderator: George Pappas
 ŠCivil Engineering
 Presenter:
  
Douglas Adams, Chair, Civil and Environmental 
Engineering, Vanderbilt University
 ŠAerospace 
 Presenter:
  
Jonathan How, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology
12:00 p.m.
 Lunch Breakout Sessions
 1.
  
Envisioning an undergraduate degree program in CPS: 
What knowledge and course work would make up a 
CPS degree program? How much of this course work is 
new versus existing courses? What course work might 
be displaced by CPS-centric courses?
 2.
  
Discipline-centric CPS knowledge: How will CPS be 
incorporated into existing disciplines, such as civil or 
aerospace engineering?
 3.
  
Engineering- and CS-wide core knowledge: What core 
knowledge in CPS should be a part of all engineering 
and computer science curriculum? What course work 
might be displaced by CPS-centric course work?
2:00 
 Teaching Courses for CPS
  Presenter:
 André DeHon, University of Pennsylvania

How will courses taught for CPS differ from course 
taught to a more general audience (i.e. classic control 
course verse control course for CPS)?
2:15
  Including CPS Core Knowledge into General 
Engineering Education
 Presenter:
  
Shankar Sastry, University of California, Berkeley 
[remotely]
3:15
 CPS Outside/Beyond 4-year Degree Programs
 Moderator: Bill Milam 
 ŠIntroducing CPS in High School
 Presenter:
 Harry Cheng, University of California, Davis
 ŠOnline Education/MOOCS 
 Presenter:
 Magnus Egerstedt, Georgia Tech 
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 A 21
ST
 CENTURY CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS EDUCATION
4:30
  Critical Knowledge: Lessons from Teaching a
 Course and 
Writing a Textbook
 Presenter:
  
Edward Lee, University of California Berkeley 
[remotely]
5:30
 Reception
October 3, 2014 
8:30 a.m.
 Teaching for CPS
 (continued)
 Moderator: Manuela Veloso
 Panelists:
  
Trek Abdelzaher, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign 
    
Henning Schulzrinne, Columbia University 

How will courses taught for CPS differ from course 
taught to a more general audience (i.e., classic control 
course verse control course for CPS)? 
9:15
 Building Current and Future Faculty
 Moderator: Paulo Tabuada
 Panelists:
 Jerry Lynch, University of Michigan 
    
Philip Koopman, Carnegie Mellon University 
    
Christopher Gill, Washington University 

How do we create the teaching and research capacity 
needed to support CPS education?

What are barriers to hiring faculty for CPS?

What other resources are needed to support CPS 
education?
10:15
 Break
10:30
 Breakout Group Report Back
11:00
 Industry Exposure, Research Projects, and
  Moderator: Chuck Farrar
  Project-Based Learning
 Panelists:
 Dimitri Mavris, Georgia Institute of Technology
    
Clas Jacobson, United Technologies Corporation 
    
Steve Anton, Tennessee Technological University
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 91
How do we measure and document the value of 
extracurricular activities?

How to best incorporate project-based learning 
curriculum into degree programs?

What is the role of industry-academic partnerships, 
co-ops, and internships?
12:30 p.m.
 Wrap Up Discussion
 Jack Stankovic, University of Virginia, Co-Chair
 Jim Sturges, Lockheed Martin (retired), Co-Chair
A 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems EducationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.