DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/24649Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are Weand Where Do We Go from Here?198 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-45402-5 | DOI 10.17226/24649Committee on Information Technology, Automation, and the U.S. Workforce;Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineering andPhysical Sciences; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and MedicineInformation Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Information Technology, Automation, and
  the U.S. Workforce
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
A Report of
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
  
500 Fifth Street, NW  
Washington, DC 20001
This activity was supported by National Science Foundation Grant No. 1449410. 
Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this pub
-lication do not necessarily re˚ect the views of any organization or agency that 
provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-45402-5
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-45402-6
Digital Object Identi˜er:
 10.17226/24649
Additional copies of this workshop summary are available for sale from the 
National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; 

(800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313; http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2017 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Suggested citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 
2017. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We 
Go from Here?
 Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi:10.17226/24649.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences
 was established in 1863 by an Act of Con
-gress, signed by President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution 
to advise the nation on issues related to science and  technology. Members are 
elected by their peers for outstanding contributions to research. Dr. Marcia 

McNutt is president.The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964 under the char-ter of the National Academy of Sciences to bring the practices of engineering 
to advising the nation. Members are elected by their peers for extraordinary 

contributions to engineering. Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president.
The National Academy of Medicine
 (formerly the Institute of Medicine) was 
estab lished in 1970 under the charter of the National Academy of 
 Sciences to 
advise the nation on medical and health issues. Members are elected by their 
peers for distinguished contributions to medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau 

is president.The three Academies work together as the 
National Academies of Sciences, 
 Engineering, and Medicine to provide independent, objective analysis and 
advice to the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and 

inform public policy decisions. The National Academies also encourage education 
and research, recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and increase 
public understanding in  matters of science, engineering, and medicine. 
Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medi
-cine at www.national-academies.org
. Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Reports
 document the evidence-based consensus of an authoring committee of ex-

on information gathered by the committee and committee deliberations. Reports 
are peer reviewed and are approved by the National Academies of 
 Sciences, Engi-neering, and Medicine.Proceedings chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop, sym
-posium, or other convening event. The statements and opinions contained in 
proceedings are those of the participants and have not been endorsed by other 

participants, the planning committee, or the National Academies of 
 Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.For information about other products and activities of the National Academies, 
please visit nationalacademies.org/whatwedo.Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, 
AUTOMATION, AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Co-Chair
TOM M. MITCHELL, NAE,
1 Carnegie Mellon University, 
Co-Chair
DARON ACEMOGLU, NAS,
2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
STEPHEN R. BARLEY, University of California, Santa Barbara
BARRETT S. CALDWELL, Purdue University

MELISSA CEFKIN, Nissan Research Center

HENRIK I. CHRISTENSEN, Georgia Institute of Technology

JOHN C. HALTIWANGER, University of Maryland, College Park

ERIC HORVITZ, NAE, Microsoft Research

RUTH M. MILKMAN, City University of New York

EDUARDO SALAS, Rice University

NICOLE SMITH, Georgetown University

CLAIRE J. TOMLIN, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
EMILY GRUMBLING, Program Of˜cer, Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board (CSTB)
MARGARET HILTON, Senior Program Of˜cer, Division of Behavioral 
and Social Sciences and Education
JON EISENBERG, Director, CSTB
SHENAE BRADLEY, Administrative Assistant, CSTB

RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager, CSTB

KATIRIA ORTIZ, Research Associate, CSTB
1  NAE, National Academy of Engineering.
2  NAS, National Academy of Sciences.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
FARNAM JAHANIAN, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Chair
LUIZ ANDRE BARROSO, Google, Inc. 
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, NAE, Columbia University

ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC
EDWARD FRANK, Cloud Parity, Inc.
LAURA HAAS, NAE, IBM Corporation

MARK HOROWITZ, NAE, Stanford University

ERIC HORVITZ, NAE, Microsoft Research

VIJAY KUMAR, NAE, University of Pennsylvania

BETH MYNATT, Georgia Institute of Technology

CRAIG PARTRIDGE, Raytheon BBN Technologies

DANIELA RUS, NAE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

FRED B. SCHNEIDER, NAE, Cornell University

MARGO SELTZER, Harvard University

JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia

MOSHE VARDI, NAS/NAE, Rice University

KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Administrative Assistant

JANEL DEAR, Senior Program Assistant

EMILY GRUMBLING, Program Of˜cer

RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager

KATIRIA ORTIZ, Research Associate 
For more information on CSTB, see its website at 
 http://www.cstb.org, write to CSTB at National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering and Medicine, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001, 
call (202) 334-2605, or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. The purpose of this 
independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will 

assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible 

and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, 

evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments 

and draft manuscript remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the 

deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals for their 

review of this report:
Henry Aaron, NAM,
1 Brookings Institution, 
David Autor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

Wallace Hopp, NAE,
2 University of Michigan,
Maja Mataric, University of Southern California,

Mary Beth Maxwell, Human Rights Campaign, 

Jonas Prising, Manpower Group,

Mustafa Suleyman, Google DeepMind,

Moshe Vardi, NAS
3/NAE, Rice University, and
Judy Wajcman, London School of Economics. 
1  National Academy of Medicine.
2 National Academy of Engineering
 .3  National Academy of Sciences.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many con
-structive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse 
the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of 

the report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by 

Elsa M. Garmire, NAE, Dartmouth College, and David C. Mowery, Uni
-versity of California, Berkeley, who were responsible for making certain 

that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accor
-dance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were 

carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this report 

rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
Preface
The Committee on Information Technology, Automation, and the U.S. 
Workforce was convened by the National Academies of Sciences, Engi
-neering, and Medicine
1 to examine current and possible future impacts of 
emerging information and communication technologies on the workforce. 
The charge to the committee was framed broadly: assess many dimen
-sions of the evolving relationship between technology and work and set 

forth a research agenda (see Box P.1).
The 13-member committee ˜rst met in Washington, D.C., in June 
2015 to discuss trends in technology and the workforce in the context of 

the disciplinary expertise spanned by the committee within the ˜elds of 

economics, computer science, and social science.
The committee subsequently conducted an information-gathering 
workshop October 22-23, 2016, in Washington, D.C., with speakers from 

the private sector, academia, and the government. Panel discussions were 

organized around the following themes: Current and Emerging Tech
-
nological Capabilities; Information Technology and Automation in the 

Workplace; New Modalities of Work; Education, Workforce Development, 

and Equal Opportunity; and Data Sources and Needs.
2 The workshop 
was open to the public and included robust discussion from the audience.
Be˜tting the subject matter of the committee, much of the work was 
1  Effective July 1, 2015, the institution is called the National Academies of Sciences, En
-gineering, and Medicine. References in this report to the National Research Council (NRC) 
are used in a historical context to refer to activities before July 1.
2  See Appendix B for the workshop agenda and panelist biographies.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE
BOX P.1
 The Project Statement of Task
 A National Research Council study will consider the possible impacts of 
automation and other applications of information technology on the U.S. work
-force. An ad hoc committee will consider current knowledge and open questions 

about the drivers of increased automation; the types and scale of jobs that might 

be affected; the societal implications of these changes; the timeframe for impact; 

and implications for education, training, and workforce development. Through 

testimony, discussions convened by the committee, a literature review, and com
-
mittee deliberations, the committee will examine currently available sources of 

information, consider how different disciplines could contribute knowledge, explore 

where additional data would help, and frame research questions aimed at better 



agenda and describe types and sources of data and analysis that would enhance 

understanding of the workforce impacts of IT and automation and inform future 

policy making.done by members in geographically dispersed locations, coordinated elec
-tronically via a variety of digital media. The committee held numerous 

teleconferences to discuss this study, including current knowledge, new 

ideas, and research challenges. These discussions, individual committee 

member expertise, input and perspectives from workshop participants, 

and a review of current literature directly informed this report. We note 

that the scope and implications of the topics addressed are broad and 

deep. While we identify many trends, challenges, and open questions, 

this activity did not aim to make concrete policy recommendations (this 

was outside of the committee™s charge), but rather to surface the key 

areas for attention and propose ways of improving society™s understand
-ing of them. We also note that the topics addressed have global range, 

signi˜cance, and interconnection; while international issues are raised 

occasionally, in keeping with its charge, the committee™s focus was on the 

United States.
The resulting report is an exploration of the current state, trends, 
and possible futures of technology and work. It considers the issue from 

economic, organizational, individual worker, and societal levels, along 

with the capabilities of certain technologies that are likely to drive signi˜
-cant change. We identify key issues and questions for policy makers and 

suggest new research pathways and new data-collection efforts that we 

believe will lead to improved capabilities for detecting and anticipating 

future impacts of information technology on the workforce, as well as 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 xiprovide an informed basis for debates on which public policies will best 
adapt to them.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge the National Science Foundation for sponsoring this 
activity and thank Kevin Crowston for his enthusiasm for this project. We 

also thank the members of the study committee and staff for their contri
-butions and commitment; their expertise and hard work made this report 

possible. In particular, Emily Grumbling went well beyond the call of 

duty in supporting and coordinating the work of the committee members 

and co-chairs. In addition, we thank all of the workshop speakers and par
-ticipants for providing illuminating perspectives. Their insights helped 

the committee to identify key challenges, opportunities, and pathways 

for understanding the societal implications of emerging technologies and 

changing models and opportunities for work.
Erik Brynjolfsson and Tom M. Mitchell, 
Co-Chairs
Committee on Information Technology, 
  Automation, and the U.S. Workforce
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents
SUMMARY
 11 INTRODUCTION
 15
 Background and Impetus for This Study, 15
 Framing the Issues, 18
 Organization of This Report, 20
 2 THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 21
 The Digitization of Everything, 22
 Advancing Technological Capabilities, 34
 Future Technology Trends, 49
 Summary, 52
3  
EFFECTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ON 
 54
 PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 Introduction, 54
 Technology and Productivity, 55
 Technology and Employment, 59
 Inequality and Distribution of Income and Wealth, 68
 Summary, 78
xiii
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv CONTENTS4  
CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS 
 80
 ORGANIZATION
 Introduction, 80
 The On-Demand Economy, 81
 Organization and Distribution of Work Tasks, 83
 Contingent Labor, 84
 Dynamism and Flexibility of the U.S. Workforce, 87
 Changing Worker Demographics and Job Satisfaction, 92
 Organizations and Institutions, 94
 The Role of Work in Our Lives, 102
 Education and Job Training, 107
 Summary, 114
5 DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 115
 Introduction, 115
 Data from Federal Statistical Agencies, 116
 Web-Based and Private-Sector Data, 125
 Qualitative Methods, 130
 Evaluating Job Susceptibility to Automation, 132
 Summary, 135
6 FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 137
 General Findings, 137
 Research Pathways, 142
7 CONCLUSION
 158
APPENDIXES
A Statement of Task
 163
B Workshop Agenda and Panelist Biographies
 164
C Biographical Sketches of Committee Members and Staff
 174
D Acronyms and Abbreviations
 183
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary
Recent years have yielded signi˜cant advances in computing and 
communication technologies, with profound impacts on society. Technol
-ogy is transforming the way we work, play, and interact with others. From 
these technological capabilities, new industries, organizational forms, and 

business models are emerging.
Technological advances can create enormous economic and other ben
-e˜ts, but can also lead to signi˜cant changes for workers.
 IT and automa
-tion can change the way work is conducted, by augmenting or replacing 

workers in speci˜c tasks. This can 
shift the demand for some types of 
human labor, eliminating some jobs and creating new ones.
Advances in ˜elds such as arti˜cial intelligence and robotics are mak
-ing it increasingly possible for machines to perform not only physical but 

also cognitive tasks currently performed by humans. These 
developments 
have led to widespread interest in the future of work.
This report explores the interactions between technological, economic, 
and societal trends and identi˜es possible near-term developments for 

work. It emphasizes the need to understand and track these trends and 

develop strategies 
to inform, prepare for, and respond to changes in the 

labor market. It offers evaluations of what is known, notes open questions 

to be addressed, and identi˜es promising research pathways moving 

forward.
1Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
THE CHANGING TECHNOLOGY LANDSCAPE
Information technologies have already transformed society, and more 
changes are inevitable. Computing power and network speed have grown 
dramatically. Access to the Internet has grown in the United States and 

worldwide. Organizations are increasingly moving their core business 

processes
Šsuch as accounting, sales, and material resource planningŠ

online. Videoconferencing is increasingly used throughout organizations 

to enable the geographical distribution of project work via meetings that 

integrate computer presentations, face-to-face exchanges, and data shar
-ing. Peer-to-peer networks have emerged to connect resource holders 

with resource seekers, leading to companies such as eBay, Uber, and 

Airbnb, and new online reputation systems facilitate feedback reporting 

for both providers and customers. Related IT tools have also been steadily 

augmenting traditional tools for education and training, leading to the 

emergence of the phenomenon of massive open online courses (MOOCs) 

and other educational innovations.
At the same time, computers have become increasingly competent 
at both physical and cognitive tasks that have previously been done 

primarily by humans, such as speech recognition, identifying faces and 

other objects in images, interpreting text, analyzing medical data, driv
-ing cars, and many other tasks. Much of this progress is due to advances 

in arti˜cial intelligence (AI)Šsoftware-based systems that aim to mimic 

aspects of human intelligence. Over the past decade, a number of highly 

visible AI systems have emerged in a range of ˜elds, from mobile devices 

to cars with autopilot functions. AI has defeated human champions at 

games such as chess and Go, and AI systems have been developed that 

are capable of answering a growing range of factual questions and serving 

as intelligent software agents. Automated software-based agents, such as 

chatbots that answer simple queries and hold conversations with humans 

and bots that conduct activities like automated ˜nancial trading, are also 

emerging.
Recent advances in AI have been driven largely by advances in 
machine learningŠalgorithms that improve through experience, often 

by identifying patterns from historical data that may be extrapolated to 

future purposes. For example, such techniques have been used to pre
-dict patient responses to medical treatment based on historical medical 

records and to process human (or ﬁ
natural
ﬂ) language in useful ways. 
A particular set of algorithms, called deep neural networks, have been 

a driver of recent advances in areas such as computer vision, speech 

recognition, and text analysis. The increasing generation of online data 

is expected to further fuel the development of these machine learning 

systems. Advances in robotics have led to increased factory automation 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3and to initial demonstrations of autonomous vehicles on land, sea, and 
air. Technologies for service and companion robots are in their infancy.
Humans are still more effective than computers at many tasks, 
especially those that require creative reasoning, nonroutine dexterity, 

and interpersonal empathy. New models of human engagement have 

focused on how best to combine the strengths of humans and computers 

to complete a given task, referred to variously as complementary com
-puting, mixed-initiative interaction, or collective intelligence. The ˜eld 

of human-centered automation focuses on enhancing situational aware
-ness of human operators, developing common operating pictures across 

multiple users, and building predictive models of human behavior in 

different contexts.
On balance, the rapid pace of technological advances is likely to 
continue in frontier areas, where investments in research and develop
-ment are increasing. Computer performance continues to improve via 

advances in hardware parallelism, hardware specialization, and enhanced 

programming languages. Beyond speedup, a broad range of progress 

has been seen in important technologies such as the mobile Internet, the 

Internet of Things, cloud computing and storage, AI, robotics, virtual and 

augmented reality, and machine learning. Research continues in more 

speculative potential breakthrough areas like bionics. Signi˜cant progress 

in any one of these technologies would likely have profound effects on 

the workforce.
Opportunities for digitizing and automating tasks are far from 
exhausted. In particular, the workforce will be increasingly affected as 

more and more cognitive tasks become fully or partly automatableŠfrom 

language processing to problem solving and pattern matchingŠand as 

advances in robotics yield enhanced physical dexterity, mobility, and 

sensory perception in machines. These trends will almost surely change 

the demand for the workers performing these tasks and the nature of the 

organizations in which they work.
Robotic automation will continue to advance, in assembly lines and 
other workplaces and in areas that have not yet been touched signi˜
-cantly by robotic technologies. Over the next decade, self-driving vehicles, 

already in limited trial or commercial use (e.g., from Google/Waymo,  

Tesla, nuTonomy, Uber, and many others), will mature and become more 

widespread, with potentially signi˜cant impacts on employment in the 

transportation sector, ultimately reducing the need for human taxi driv
-ers and long-haul truckers. Computer competence in perceptual tasks, 

including speech recognition and computer vision, will also advance, 

likely leading to superhuman competencies for listening and image pro
-cessing by computer. This could affect jobs involving pattern recogni
-tion, including those of pathologists, radiologists, and security workers. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
Automatic translation between languages by computers, already in use, 
though imperfect, will probably improve to the point of routine use of 

real-time translating telephones and earpieces. The ability of computers 

to interpret and extract information from unstructured text will continue 

to advance, with potentially signi˜cant effects on automating knowledge-

worker jobs, such as paralegal research.
EFFECTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
ON PRODUCTIVITY AND INEQUALITY
Because computerization changes the cost structures of processes, 
goods, and services, the increasing adoption of IT is transforming the 

economics of many industries and functions. Productivity growth, the 

predominant contributor to increases in standards of living, rose rap
-idly from the late 1990s to the early 2000s, in part re˚ecting advances in 

IT. However, productivity growth has slowed during the past 10 years, 

according to of˜cial data from U.S. statistical agencies. Some of this slow
-down is accounted for by less rapid improvements in the IT-producing 

and the IT-using sectors of the economy.
1 However, these statistics are 
dif˜cult to interpret, partly due to output and input price de˚ators that 

cannot fully account for changes in quality as well as the proliferation 

of free digital goods and services. There is evidence that the diffusion 

and successful adoption of IT advances is time- and resource-intensive, 

producing a lag, possibly measured in years or even decades, between 

technological advances and resulting productivity growth.
2 Emerging 
evidence suggests that this diffusion is increasingly uneven, leading to 

bigger productivity gaps between frontier ˜rms and those in the middle 

of the distribution.
3Income and wealth inequality
 has increased over the past 20 years in 
the United States, with median family income stagnating while incomes 

rose signi˜cantly for the top 1 percent
; signi˜cant disparities also exist 
among the other 99 percent, largely correlated to a rising premium of 

education.
 The share of wealth owned by the bottom 80 percent has fallen 
1  J.G. Fernald, 2015, Productivity and potential output before, during, and after the Great 
Recession, 
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014
, doi: 10.3386/w20248.
2  See, for example, P.A. David, 1990, The dynamo and the computer: An historical per
-spective on the modern productivity paradox, 
American Economic Review 
80.2:355-361; and 
E. Brynjolfsson and L.M. Hitt, 2003, Computing productivity: Firm-level evidence, 
Review 
of Economics and Statistics 
85.4:793-808.
3  D. Andrews, C. Criscuolo, and P.N. Gal, 2015, ﬁFrontier Firms, Technology Diffusion and 
Public Policy: Micro Evidence from OECD Countries, OECD Publishing, http://www.oecd.

org/eco/growth/Frontier-Firms-Technology-Diffusion-and-Public-Policy-Micro-Evidence-

from-OECD-Countries.pdf.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5from 18.7 percent in 1983 to 11.1 percent in 2010.
4 The mix of jobs in the 
economy continues to change, as many routine information-processing 
tasks are being automated in whole or in part, even as the numbers of 

low-wage service jobs and high-skill professional jobs have grown. There 

is also evidence that, since 2000, social skills have been increasingly val
-ued in the labor market.
5It has been predicted that the future effects of IT on the workforce are 
likely to be larger than those we have already seen, especially as AI-based 

and robotics systems improve.
6 However, it is not known whether new 
technologies will automate and replace workers in existing tasks more 

rapidly than 
the economy as a whole (driven by various factors, includ
-ing automation) creates
 new demands for labor. The net effect is dif˜cult 
to predict; it is easier to anticipate how new technologies will automate 

existing tasks than it is to imagine tasks that do not yet exist and how new 
technologies may stimulate greater consumer demand. Furthermore, the 

future of employment is not only a question of the availability of tasks 

to be performed, but how they are organized and compensated. In addi
-tion, digital goods have the potential to diffuse rapidly because they are 

 in˜nitely replicable via shared digital platforms. However, implementa
-tion and customization of software can take a surprisingly long time, as 
can necessary changes to complementary skills, organizations, and insti
-tutions. Future innovations could have more immediate impact
 if organi
-zations become more able to incorporate them quickly
. These are matters 
of business strategy, social organization, economic policies and programs, 

and political choices and are not simply driven by technology alone.
CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
Business organization is also in the midst of a transformation. Not 
only is the traditional employment model changing, but nontraditional 
models are increasingly facilitated by technology. For traditional ˜rms, 

despite a burst of new start-up companies in many areas, statistics suggest 
4  For this and other statistics on wealth inequality, see E.N. Wolff, 2012, 
The Asset Price 
Meltdown and the Wealth of the Middle Class
, New York University, New York; A.B. Atkinson, 
T. Piketty, and E. Saez, 2011, Top incomes in the long run of history, 
Journal of Economic Lit
-erature
 49.1:3-71; and T. Piketty, 2014, 
Capital in the Twenty-First Century
, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Mass.
5  See, for example, D.J. Deming, 2015, ﬁThe Growing Importance of Social Skills in the 
Labor Market,ﬂ National Bureau of Economic Research,
 doi: 10.3386/w21473.
6  M. Chui, J. Manyika, and M. Miremadi, 2016, ﬁWhere Machines Could Replace 
HumansŠAnd Where They Can™t (Yet),ﬂ 
McKinsey Quarterly
, http://www.mckinsey.com/
business-functions/business-technology/our-insights/Where-machines-could-replace-
humans-and-where-they-cant-yet; E. Brynjolfsson and A. McAfee, 2014, 
The Second Machine 

Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies
, WW Norton & Company.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
there are fewer new, growing companies in the United States today than 
in the past, and this category now employs a smaller share of the work
-force. Data from recent decades also show a drop in the pace of job and 

worker dynamism and reallocation
7Šespecially since 2000. At the same 
time, nontraditional types of employmentŠother than the 40-hour-per-

week job at a single company offering health and retirement bene˜tsŠ

appear to be increasing. While nontraditional work as independent con
-tractors and temporary agency employees has been growing for decades, 

IT advances now make it easier to access such employment opportunities, 
and in some cases to perform work remotely over the Internet. This has 

given rise to new companies based on technology-mediated ﬁon-demandﬂ 

or ﬁgigﬂ employment at both the low-skill (e.g., TaskRabbit) and high-skill 

(e.g., Upwork) ends of the spectrum. For now, the technology-enabled 

examples of on-demand work are a small fraction of overall employment: 

recent research suggests that less than 1 percent of the U.S. workforce cur
-rently uses online platforms for temporary or gig work.
8IT is playing a growing role in many organizations, including greater 
electronic record keeping, communications, and automation of work 

˚ows, although most organizations and markets are far from fully digital. 

Organizations are now relying increasingly on virtual teams of workers, 

teams whose members primarily interact via digital technologies across 

diverse geographies. Increased availability of digital data has facilitated 

a tripling in the use of ﬁdata-driven decision makingﬂ between 2005 and 

2010.
9 Privacy, security, and data ownership have become increasing con
-cerns as more and more information, including personal data, has been 

digitized and networked. The number of nonemployer businesses (busi
-nesses with no workers or only independent contractors) appears to be 

growing.
Data on many of these trends are elusive, re˚ecting both the rapidly 
changing nature of society and the economy and gaps in national and 

private data collection and statistical infrastructure. While improvements 

in and diffusion of IT have had profound effects on many aspects of the 

workforce, the future effects of these advances on the workforce and the 

broader economy are dif˜cult to predict. This partly re˚ects our inad
-equate understanding of the complex interactions among technologies 

themselves combined with the skills, organizations, institutions, policies, 

and human preferences in society.
7  Measured either by total job creation plus job destruction, or by total hires plus separa
-tions, or by geographic mobility of workers.
8  L.F. Katz and A.B. Krueger, 2016, ﬁThe Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrange
-ments in the United States, 1995-2015.ﬂ
9  E.
 Brynjolfsson and K. McElheren, 2016, The rapid adoption of data-driven decision 
making, 
American Economic Review
 106(5):133-139.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 7Education
 remains a key in˚uence on worker income. Wage dispari
-ties between non-college-educated workers, college-educated workers, 
and workers with graduate degrees, which grew rapidly in the 1980s and 

1990s, have leveled off but remain high in this century. There are also 

disparities in job stability and bene˜ts between these groups.
New uses of IT in teaching, including online courses,
10
 are increas
-ingly available and hold the potential to expand access to education. New 

companies are specializing in just-in-time training targeted to speci˜c 

companies and employment opportunities,
11 but the ultimate impact of 
these tools remains to be seen.
DATA AND METHODS FOR EVALUATING 
TECHNOLOGY AND WORKFORCE TRENDS
Traditionally, data such as employment numbers and salaries col
-lected by federal statistical agencies have been invaluable for understand-
ing the status of the workforce and the economy at large, and for tracking 

technology-related measures such as productivity.
12
 These surveys are 
often time- and resource-intensive to complete and must be updated 

periodically.
At the same time, the ubiquity of digital transactions is producing 
increasing amounts of born-digital data of potential use for tracking and 

understanding technology-related workforce trends. Traditional survey 

data are increasingly being augmented by or integrated with adminis
-trative data (collected in the course of routine transactions), resulting in 

new statistical products and integration of ˜rm-level information with 

information at the individual worker level. There is also great potential 

to use online data about worker pro˜les and job listings to understand 

worker skills, demand for employees, occupational skills requirements, 

and related information. New ways to integrate various data sources 

while also protecting privacy and con˜dential business information could 

reveal valuable information about the changing workforce.
10
  Examples are edX and Coursera, which are both websites that offers free online courses 
and classes from the world™s best universities.
11  An example is Udacity, a for-pro˜t education organization, which offers nanodegrees 
and credentials in areas such as web development and data analysis (among others). Udacity 
was born from a Stanford University experiment where Sebastian Thurn and Peter Norvig 

offered their ﬁIntroduction to Arti˜cial Intelligenceﬂ course for free online. See Udacity, 2016, 

ﬁAbout Us,ﬂ 
Udacity, 
https://www.udacity.com/us, accessed May 2016.
12
  Such sources include data from the Current Establishment Survey, the Quarterly Cen
-sus of Employment and Wages, the Current Population Survey, the Decennial Census, the 

American Community Survey, the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, and the Busi
-ness Employment Dynamics and Business Dynamic Statistics data.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
While quantitative information, including analytical methods using 
very large data sets, can be useful for understanding the labor market and 
other workforce trends, qualitative and microdata and methods help to 

elucidate the correct research questions and to understand causality. Such 

methods, including case studies, participant observation, ethnographic 

interviewing, life histories, and the textual analysis of data are important 

for informing macro-level research.
Finally, there is signi˜cant interest in predicting which jobs are most 
likely to be automated (and to what extent), especially due to advances 

in AI, machine learning, and robotics. Several recent studies have aimed 

to quantify probabilities of automation by comparing speci˜c technol
-ogy capabilities to the skills required for tasks associated with speci˜c 

jobs. While results suggest that automation of a large number of jobs will 

become increasingly technically feasible, component tasks are more easily 

automated than entire occupations. Research also suggests that lower-

wage jobs may be more susceptible to partial or full automation.
Moving forward, policy makers and the research community would 
be well served by data collection designed to support longitudinal track
-ing and analysis of workforce trends and the role of advances in IT.
FINDINGS
Six general ˜ndings emerge from this study.
1. Advances in IT are far from over, and some of the biggest improve
-ments in areas like AI are likely still to come. Improvements are expected 
in some areas and entirely new capabilities may emerge in others.
2. These advances in technology will result in automation of some 
jobs, augmentation of workers™ abilities to perform others, and the cre
-ation of still others. The ultimate effects of information technology are 

determined not just by technical capabilities, but also by how the tech
-nology is used and how individuals, organizations, and policy makers 

prepare for or respond to associated shifts in the economic or social 

landscape.
3. The recent increase in income inequality in the United States is due 
to multiple forces, including advances in IT and its diffusion, globaliza
-tion, and economic policy.
4. IT is enabling new work relationships, including a new form of on-
demand employment. Although current digital platforms for on-demand 

work directly involve less than 1 percent of the workforce, they display 

signi˜cant growth potential.
5. As IT continues to complement or substitute for many work tasks, 
workers will require skills that increasingly emphasize creativity, adapt
-Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 9ability, and interpersonal skills over routine information processing 
and manual tasks. The education system will need to adapt to prepare 

individuals for the changing labor market. At the same time, recent IT 

advances offer new and potentially more widely accessible ways to access 

education.
6. Policy makers and researchers would bene˜t signi˜cantly from a 
better understanding of evolving IT options and their implications for 

the workforce. In particular, (1) sustained, integrated, multidisciplinary 

research and (2) improved, ongoing tracking of workforce and technol
-ogy developments would be of great value for informing public policies, 

organizational choices, and education and training strategies.
A RESEARCH AGENDA
Federal agencies or other organizations that sponsor research or col
-lect data relevant to technology and the workforce should establish a sus
-tained, multidisciplinary research program in order to address the many 

important yet unanswered questions about how technology is changing, 

might change, or could help to shape the nature of work and the U.S. 

national economy. This will help to expand a knowledge base that will 

ultimately help a variety of stakeholders address productivity growth, 

job creation, and the transformation of work, and feed directly into the 

National Science Foundation™s new interest in research on work at the 

human-technology frontier.
13
 The program should
1.
 Target the understanding of how technology choices can affect the 
workforce to improve the design of policies and technologies that will 

bene˜t workers, the economy, and society at large;
2.
 Emphasize feedback between micro- and macro-level research 
methods and among the social sciences, economics, computer and infor
-mation sciences, and engineering; and
3.
 Establish and facilitate the use of new data sources, tools, methods, 
and infrastructure to support such research while protecting privacy, 

including increased use of data sources developed in the private sector.
Such a research program should span a range of themes, such as those 
described below.
13  National Science Foundation, 2016, ﬁ10 Big Ideas for Future NSF Investments,ﬂ https://
www.nsf.gov/about/congress/reports/nsf_big_ideas.pdf, accessed December 2016.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
Theme 1: Evaluating and Tracking Progress in IT
Research to develop new ways of evaluating and tracking progress in 
IT would help decision makers understand impacts of technology on the 
workforce and inform strategies to help prepare for imminent changes.
Such research could focus on the following objectives:

Develop, re˜ne, and test improved strategies for classifying tech
-nological capabilities in terms of the human skills and tasks they can or 
could replace.

Identify key indicators that could signal the extent of the impact of 
developments in a given technological ˜eld.

Develop new mechanisms to track and forecast technological and 
economic changes of particular relevance to the future of the workforce.

Develop indexes, analogous to the Consumer Price Index, to assess 
(1) the current state of technologies, (2) the degree of diffusion of technol
-ogies into ˜rms and organizations, and (3) the technological capabilities 

and diffusion of AI and robotics, in particular.
Theme 2: Technology Adoption and Impact Within Organizations
IT can have a signi˜cant impact on the type and nature of tasks per
-formed by workers, depending on the speci˜c content of the task. New 

research could be pursued to elucidate ways in which different industries 

use technology to organize their operations, allocate tasks, and perform 

speci˜c functions. Such work could be conducted at both the micro- and 

macro-level scales to provide a ˜rm- and industry-level window into the 

impacts of technology on employees in a given industry or at a given 

organizational level.
Theme 3: Impacts of Policy Choices
Research on impacts of public policy choices could identify policies, 
resources, and practices that would mitigate technological unemploy
-
ment, approaches to easing transitions for workers forced to change occu
-pational ˜elds due to technological change, and opportunities for actively 

guiding the future impacts of technology development and deployment 

before they occur.
Theme 4: Working with Emerging Technologies
As emerging technologies diffuse into different industries, individuals 
must learn how to interact with these technologies to successfully com
-Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 11plete tasks, which can affect the nature of decision making, teamwork, 
and organization. Some teams use technology as a means for connecting 

or convening, or in place of some aspect of human intelligence. The rise 

of data-driven decision making14 and new forms of collective intelli-gence re˚ect the ways that technology and humans can work together to 

act more intelligently than they could separately. Research is needed to 

understand technology-augmented organizations, teams, and individuals 

and the conditions under which they are most effective.
Theme 5: Societal Acceptance of Automation Technologies
The mere existence of a technology does not guarantee that it will be 
deployed. Economic costs and bene˜ts in˚uence decisions to deploy tech-
nologies, as do many other factors. In some contexts, people (either work-
ers or customers) may prefer to interact with a human over a machine 

(or vice versa). This may re˚ect the existence of important, yet largely 

invisible and unremunerated, human skills that can easily be missed in 

existing skill categories and national statistics. Consumer behaviors and 

worker preferences and bargaining power will drive markets; under
-standing the behavioral economics of automation will be important for 

understanding its adoption patterns. Additional human factors and the 

social, philosophical, and psychological dynamics of automation could 

be explored.
Theme 6: Changing Labor and Skill Demands and 
Implications for Education and Training
Changes in technology use affect the roles of workers and contrib
-ute to changing labor and skills demands. This creates challenges for 

individuals planning their career strategies and for employers, educa
-tional institutions, and policy makers. Research tracking and mapping 

the changing labor and skills demands in speci˜c industries and occu
-pational ˜elds over time, along with regional variations and associated 

policy implications, could provide insights into such trends. This research 

could evaluate the extent of IT diffusion into different occupational ˜elds. 
 Researchers could develop and test hypotheses about how these technolo
-gies change the work functions, tasks, skills requirements, and demand 

for these ˜elds.
 The economic insecurity felt by many workers under
-14
  See, for example, E. Brynjolfsson and K. McElheran, 2016, Digitization and innovation: 
The rapid adoption of data-driven decision-making, American Economic Review 106.5:133-139.Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
scores the importance of understanding the interplay of technology with 
jobs, wages, and opportunity.
15
Furthermore, the new workplace requires a workforce trained for 
expertise in areas that will drive the future economy and with the ˚exibil
-
ity to adapt to rapid change. Because education will signi˜cantly deter
-mine the success of the United States in responding to the changing work
-
place, a better understanding of effective strategies is critical. 
While the 

United States has a poor track record of predicting future workforce skills 

demands, 
some insight can be gained from how skill demands are cur
-rently changing. Additional insights might be gleaned by a partnership 

between computer scientists, labor economists, and education researchers 

to assess the kinds of technology capabilities that are likely to emerge and 

diffuse in coming years, as well as opportunities for providing retraining 

and continuing education to workers.
Research in this area should aim to assess (1) educational and training 
needs based upon an understanding of evolving skills demands driven 

by technological change; (2) ways in which technology can be best used 

to prepare, train, and retrain the future workforce; and (3) the nature of 

technologies that can automate work (substituting for labor and exist
-ing human capital), augment it (complementing labor or requiring new 

skills), or transform it entirely (creating new goods, services, processes, 

and types of skill demand). Key research topics include educational 

needs, education delivery strategies, education access and incentives, 

technologies that can replace or complement worker skills, and broader 

educational policies.
Theme 7: The On-Demand Economy and 
Emerging Ways of Organizing Work
The emergence of the on-demand economy, in particular for ride-
sharing services and crowdsourced work marketplaces, has generated 

great interest. However, there is little information about the extent of its 

impact on the economy and workforce. Research on the ability of authori
-
tative economic and labor statistics to captureŠand more comprehen
-sive and persistent strategies for measuringŠthis impact are needed. In 

addition, research on the rights, protections, and autonomies of workers 

and how on-demand jobs ˜t into workers™ lives and careers is needed to 
15  There is a strong likelihood that already disadvantaged groups will bear the brunt of the 
costs of automation. In addition, there is some evidence that a rise in disability rolls may, in 
part, re˚ect the role of automation in reducing the employment prospects for some groups. 

See D.H. Autor and M.G. Duggan, 2007, Distinguishing income from substitution effects in 

disability insurance, 
American Economic Review 
97.2:119-124.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 13inform policies in this domain. In particular, this work could target the 
potential for technology-mediated on-demand jobs to provide or augment 

employment for unemployed or low-income workers.
Technology advances have helped shift the physical and geographi
-cal boundaries of work over time, with signi˜cant impacts on worker 

experience and job availability and access. Research in this area could 

elucidate the current and potential roles of technology in shifting where 

and how work is conducted
, including changes in access to employment 
in geographically remote or isolated locations
.Theme 8: New Data Sources, Methods, and Infrastructures
All of the preceding themes would bene˜t from new data sources, 
methods, and infrastructures to enable the collection, aggregation, and 

distribution of a diverse range of data. The committee sees opportunities 

in the following areas:
 Updating and augmenting authoritative data sources
 to include survey 
questions and methods that directly probe technology-related aspects of 

employment and organizations.
 Developing new data sources and methods 
by creating new partner
-ships to provide researchers access to private-sector data, including new 

strategies for collecting and using born-digital data from multiple pub
-lic and private sources and developing appropriate machine-learning 

and data-mining approaches to analyze this data. Research could also 

be conducted on providing alternate, more frequently updatable, and 

potentially even automated methods of obtaining information typically 

generated through cost-, labor-, and time-intensive survey methods.
 Combining micro- and macro-level data and methods
, via establishment 
of research infrastructures and collaborations, to enable a comprehensive 

strategy for understanding the drivers of emerging trends and for testing 

hypotheses via both quantitative and qualitative approaches.
 Establishing new infrastructure and partnerships for aggregation, shar
-ing, and collaboration
 to enable sharing among researchers of the large 
amounts of relevant digital data discussed above. Such efforts may be 

frustrated by existing and potentially outdated government regulations 

that constrain the ability of government to share certain data sets with 

researchers. While regulations to protect privacy of individuals are well 

justi˜ed, they may not re˚ect current approaches for protecting privacy 

while making data available for analysis. In any case, there is a general 

and persisting need for research on the technical means for protecting the 

privacy of individuals™ data, far beyond the speci˜c research discussed 

in this report.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
CONCLUSION
Progress in computing and information technologies has been rapid 
in recent years, and the pace of change is expected to continue or even 
accelerate in the foreseeable future. These technologies create opportuni
-ties for new products, services, organizational processes, and business 

models, and potential for automating existing tasksŠboth cognitive and 

physicalŠand even whole occupations. At the same time, new job oppor
-tunities are expected to emerge as increasingly capable combinations 

of humans and machines attack problems that previously have been 

intractable.
Advances in IT and automation will present opportunities to boost 
America™s overall income and wealth, improve health care, shorten the 

workweek, provide more job ˚exibility, enhance educational opportuni
-ties, develop new goods and services, and increase product safety and 

reliability. These same advances could also lead to growing inequality and 

decreased job stability, increasing demands on workers to change jobs, or 

major changes in business organization. More broadly, these technologies 

have important implications, both intended and unintended, in areas 

from education and social relationships to privacy, security, and even 

democracy.
The ultimate effects of these technologies are not predetermined. 
Rather, like all tools, computing and information technologies can be used 

in different ways. The outcomes for the workforce and society at large 

depend in part on the choices we make about how to use these technolo
-gies. New data and research advances will be critical for informing these 

choices.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Introduction
BACKGROUND AND IMPETUS FOR THIS STUDY
Recent years have yielded signi˜cant advances in computing and 
communication technologies, with profound impacts on society. Tech
-nology is transforming the way we work, play, and interact with others. 
People are connected as never before; with the Internet now accessible 

through mobile devices, tools such as e-mail and video chat have become 

commonplace, and numerous social media platforms enable us to share 

and curate pieces of our identity with others. When we begin to type 

messages, computers can often complete our words. We no longer need 

to remember phone numbers, appointments, names, or directions.
From these technological capabilities, vast new industries and busi
-ness models are emerging. Personal health devices, computers that 

respond to our voices, ride-sharing services, and robot-controlled ware
-houses are becoming commonplace. Online shopping services allow us 

to ˜nd what we want, comparison shop, and purchase instantly. With the 

˚ick of a ˜nger, we can order takeout, call a cab, or open a news article 

tailored speci˜cally to our interests. Some automobiles can even park 

themselves. These new capabilities offer convenience and novelty, mak
-ing some things easier and changing how we interface with the world. 

Today™s changing technological capabilities prompt an examination of 

what it means to exist in this new, digital world. Some point to how tech
-nologies improve our quality of life. Others wonder if they change what it 

means to be human. What role should technology play? What do we want 
15
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
the future to look like, and how do we get there? Who gets to choose, and 
how does this change us as a society? Such questions are deeply entwined 

with our valuesŠour hopes and fears about what we will achieve as a 

society, for ourselves, and for our children.
Throughout the course of history, humankind has developed tech
-nologies that have transformed society and our way of life, with sig
-ni˜cant impacts on the workforce. Advances ranging from the steam 

engine to electricity to the personal computer have created ef˜ciencies, 

enhanced productivity, and improved overall standards of living. These 

changes have contributed to the displacement of workers, sometimes with 

a delayed recovery of employment numbers. They have also resulted in 

new worker skills requirements and the emergence of new types of jobs 

and leisure activities.
The impact of technology on work is of particular importance. First 
and foremost, work provides income and economic stability. Jobs enable 

parents to feed, house, and educate their children. At their best, jobs also 

employ and cultivate our skills and strengths, provide community, and 

enable us to contribute to society. Jobs can shape individuals™ identities 

and help provide a sense of meaning or purpose.
According to the World Economic Forum™s 2016 
Future of Jobs
 report, 
many industry leaders believe that we are on the cusp of a fourth indus
-trial revolution, one driven predominantly by advances in computing and 

information technologies. The technologies perceived as top trends (and 

corresponding time frames of impact) among surveyed industry leaders 

are summarized in Table 1.1.
1Computing, communication, and information technologies are widely 
seen as the general-purpose technology of the current era. In recent years, 

advances in these areas have raised signi˜cant interest and debate. With 

the establishment of the Internet and the exponential increases in comput
-ing power, networking speed, and generation of digital data over the past 

few decades, our lives and work have already changed signi˜cantly at 

many levels. Information technology has improved worker performance 

in many jobs. For example, radiologists now use computer software to ˚ag 

anomalous locations in X-rays and other medical images. Automated cyto
-
pathology has helped pathologists by enabling fast-paced screening for 

precancerous or cancerous cells. Technology has also enabled automation 

of other jobs, such as highway toll collection, and created entirely new jobs, 

such as website development. It has even given rise to entirely new modes 
1  World Economic Forum, 2016, 
The Future of Jobs: Employment Skills and Workforce Strategy 
for the Fourth Industrial Revolution
, http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Future_of_Jobs.
pdf.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION 17of work, including through the on-demand economy, in which workers are 
matched by computer to work as it becomes available.
Advances in technology have always shifted the nature of work. 
Industrialization in the 19th and 20th centuries produced major shifts, 

from farming and rural life to non-farm jobs in cities. Two major disrup
-tions include the ˜rst and second industrial revolutions, with the intro
-duction of the steam engine and broader factory automation, and the 

introduction of basic computing technologies represents a third paradigm 

shift. All were costly changes from which we have recovered. However, a 

debate has emerged as to whether the current pace of advancesŠand the 

types of technology that are emergingŠmay cause more rapid, broad, or 

deep changes than ever before.
The question of whether technological advances could lead to large-
scale worker displacement or unemployment as a result of new forms of 

automation has become increasingly visible in the media in recent years, 

driven in part by advances
 in ˜elds such as AI and robotics that are mak
-ing it increasingly possible for machines to complete nonroutine physical 

and cognitive tasks currently performed by humans.
TABLE 1.1
 Top Perceived Technological Drivers of Change (as 
reported by industry leaders polled for the 2016 Future of Jobs 

Report from the World Economic Forum)
Driver of ChangeRespondents 
Rating This as a 

Top Driver (%)
Time Frame 
 of ImpactMobile Internet and cloud technology342016-2017Advances in computing power and big data262015-2017New energy supplies and technologies
222015-2017The Internet of things142015-2017Crowdsourcing, the sharing economy, and 

peer-to-peer platforms
12Impact felt 

already
Advanced robotics and autonomous transport
92018-2020Artificial intelligence and machine learning72018-2020Advanced manufacturing and 3D printing62015-2017Advanced materials, biotechnology, and 

genomics62018-2020SOURCE World Economic Forum, 2016, 
The Future of Jobs: Employment Skills and Workforce 

Strategy for the Fourth Industrial Revolution, http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_
 Future_

of_Jobs.pdf.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
A 2015 survey conducted by the Pew Research Center found that 65 
percent of respondents (a sampling of American adults) expected that 
robots and computers would ﬁde˜nitelyﬂ or ﬁprobablyﬂ do much of the 

work currently performed by humans by the year 2065. Of this same 

group, 80 percent expressed the expectation that their own jobs will ﬁde˜
-
nitelyﬂ or ﬁprobablyﬂ still exist at that time.
2While many opinions and educated predictions have been offered, 
the ultimate limits of what can be automated and the rate at which auto
-mating technologies will displace existing work functions are not known. 

Along with the public, researchers are becoming increasingly interested in 

examining work at the human-technology frontier and the rate and extent 

to which the nature of work may change; nonetheless, there is much that 

is not known.
FRAMING THE ISSUES
Work has a central role in supporting stability and productivity in 
today™s society. The nation will bene˜t from an enhanced understand
-ing of the current state of the workforce and how it is changingŠor 

how it may changeŠwith the further development and adoption of new 

technologies.
This study aims to address these questions by examining current 
knowledge, identifying gaps in research and data, and highlighting key 

issues that will be critical to monitor and anticipate as technology con
-tinues to advance. An informed policy debate will require answers to 

factual questions, including the following, which the committee begins 

to address in this report.
1.
 Technology impact. 
What are the most current capabilities of infor
-mation and automating technologies, what changes are likely, and what 

are the mechanisms by which technology deployment and diffusion 

impact U.S. jobs, the economy, and equality in opportunity for workers? 

What is the best way to monitor and track this impact? What are the costs 

of failures of technologies upon which businesses have come to rely?
2.
 Job creation and elimination. 
What is the number and the distribution of jobs that are being eliminated as a result of automation, versus jobs that 

are being created by new affordances of technology?
3.
 Inequality and fairness. How might new technologies, and the mech-anisms for converting them into new products and new wealth, impact 
2  A. Smith, 2016, ﬁPublic Predictions for the Future of Workforce Automation,ﬂ 
Pew Re
-search Center,
 http://www.pewInternet.org/2016/03/10/public-predictions-for-the-future-
of-workforce-automation/.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION 19the fairness of work conditions, the growing skew in income and wealth 
distributions, and job opportunities across society, especially given that 

technology-intensive companies often require fewer employees?
4.
 Worker experience. 
How might the nature of jobs and work functions 
change in different occupational ˜elds, and how might this impact worker 

satisfaction, including workers™ senses of making a real contribution and 

their sense that they are being fairly compensated for their work?
5.
 Educational needs.
 What new kinds of primary, secondary, voca
-tional, university, and continuing education strategies will enable workers 

to acquire the skills needed in the changing employment environment?
6.
 Educational tools.
 How can technology, including its use to provide 
education over the Internet, improve access to and quality of education 

and workforce preparation for all?
7.
 New forms of employment. What new modes of employment are 
enabled by technology?
8.
 Business dynamism.
 How might anticipated technological advances 
impact the ability of businesses to sprout and grow?
9.
 Policy.
 How might labor standards and economic policies contrib
-ute to or mitigate the negative impacts of technology on the workforce?
A deep and current understanding of these dimensions will require 
sustained efforts to monitor and unravel how technology is advancing 

and how it is affecting employment opportunities, employers, income 

and wealth distribution, education, worker experiences, and related areas.
The discussions that follow in this report explore current technology, 
business, economic, and policy trends and their interactions; identify 

potential near-term developments; and emphasize the need to understand 

and track these trends and develop strategies for adapting to future devel
-
opments and possible disruptions to the status quo. Rather than aiming to 

predict the future, this report offers evaluations of what is known, open 

questions to be addressed, and productive pathways forward.
The committee de˜nes three key terms as follows:
 Information technology (IT)
 is ﬁthe technology involving the develop
-ment, maintenance, and use of computer systems, software, and networks 
for the processing and distribution of data.ﬂ
3 In the following discussions, the committee will use this term broadly to connote all computing hard
-ware, software, platforms, and interfaces that enable the storage, trans
-mission, processing, or analysis of data in the digital form, regardless of 
3  Meriam-Webster Dictionary, 2014, ﬁTechnology,ﬂ http://www.merriam-webster.com/
dictionary/information%20technology.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
degree of maturity. This includes computers, mobile devices, the Internet, 
telecommunication devices, robotic systems, software, and algorithms.
 Automation is de˜ned as ﬁthe technique, method, or system of oper-ating or controlling a process by highly automatic means, as by electronic 

devices, reducing human intervention to a minimum.ﬂ
4 Throughout this 
report, the committee uses this term to denote the use of IT to perform 

any physical or intellectual task or process that would otherwise be done 

manually, by or under the direct control of a human.
 Digitization 
refers to the process of moving data or operations onto 
computers and/or online.
ORGANIZATION OF THIS REPORT
The report is organized as follows:
 Chapter 2 describes the major technological trends and emerg
-ing capabilities since the turn of the 21st century as well as examples of 
how they have been applied in business and daily life, likely near-term 

advances, and their implications for different types of work.
 Chapter 3 reviews the current state of U.S. productivity growth, 
employment, and income distributions. The current and emerging role 

of technology is considered for each, building on the discussions from 

Chapter 2.
 Chapter 4 examines recent changes and emerging trends in the 
nature of work and how it is organized. It begins by exploring the on-

demand economy, contingent labor, and business dynamism, followed by 

a discussion of the worker experience, including demographics, organi
-zational structures, worker protections, the role of work in our lives, and 

the importance of education.
 Chapter 5 reviews important and emerging types and sources of 
data used by researchers and policy makers to track and analyze work
-force trends and examine the role of technology, emphasizing the utility 

and challenges of working with each.
 Chapter 6 identi˜es important, high-level ˜ndings to guide future 
thinking, proposes a set of key research themes and strategies, and high
-lights potential mechanisms through which the results of targeted, multi
-disciplinary, and sustained research can help to inform policy makers.
 Chapter 7 offers ˜nal re˚ections and conclusions.
4  Dictionary.com, 2016, ﬁAutomation,ﬂ Dictionary.com, http://www.dictionary.com/
browse/automation?s=t, accessed April 29, 2016.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2The Technological Landscape
In order to examine the ways in which IT is changing work, the com
-mittee ˜rst considers the current and emerging states of technological 
capabilities and their applications.
Changes to the technological landscape arise from two quite differ
-ent forces. The ˜rst is 
technology creation
: the combination of fundamental 
capabilities enabled by advances in foundational science and engineering 

research to yield a new functionality. The second force is 
technology
 diffu
-sion: 
the
 adoption of these technologies in new products and services and 
their emergence in new markets over time.
1,2
For example, consider the invention of tools such as the Internet, 
the mobile phone, home wireless networks, computer algorithms that 

recognize faces, or self-driving vehicles. Although technology for high-

speed Internet connectivity has been available for decades, the diffusion 

of high-speed Internet connectivity to all corners of the Earth is still under 

way, as are its impacts on the workforce. Similarly, although technology 

for detecting faces in images has been available since at least the 1990s, 

it is only over the past 5 years that this technology has been deployed 

widely in cameras that now automatically detect and adjust camera focus 

for faces. Technology for self-driving vehicles is at an even earlier stage 

today, but large research and development (R&D) investments in this area 
1  E.H. Rogers, 1995, 
Diffusion of Innovations
, 4th ed., The Free Press, New York.
2  M. Cain and R. Mittman, 2002, Diffusion of Innovation in Health Care
, California Healthcare 
Foundation, Oakland, Calif.
21
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
suggest it will mature and diffuse over the coming years, with poten
-tially major impacts on the workforce. The rate of diffusion of technol
-ogy is itself in˚uenced by many forces, including technology maturity, 
cost, demand, competitive pressures, societal acceptance and norms, 

government policies and regulations, safety requirements, resistance by 

entrenched interests, and the inventiveness of entrepreneurs in creating 

and marketing products. Given that the diffusion of technology from its 

birth to widespread adoption can take many years, one can often project 

changes to the technological landscape by anticipating the continued 

development and diffusion of technologies that already exist in research 

laboratories or in leading-edge ˜rms and products.
3 In this sense, the 
research prototypes and early products of today anticipate technologies 

that may become widespread tomorrow.
This section characterizes recent trends in technological capabilities 
and technology adoption and identi˜es possible changes to the techno
-logical landscape over the coming years, with an eye to technologies most 

relevant to the workforce.
THE DIGITIZATION OF EVERYTHING
Perhaps the most obvious ongoing technology trend is the wide
-spread use of computers, digital and online data, and the communication 

infrastructure of the Internet. 
The practice of moving services and data 

onto computers and online is generally referred to as ﬁdigitization.ﬂ 
This 

trend, already decades old, has affected nearly all aspects of our lives, 

and there are still signi˜cant opportunities for more widespread adop
-tion. Individuals routinely see the impact of this digital infrastructure, for 

example, in automated teller machines (ATMs), online retail services such 

as Amazon, personalized advertising that is informed by mining traces 

of our personal digital lives, navigation services available in cars and on 

smartphones, and free video Internet calls. Business enterprises and their 

internal operations have been revolutionized by new computer systems 

that capture, organize, optimize, and partly automate business processes. 

Health care is also changing due to incorporation of computing technolo
-gies, although more slowly than expected; despite sluggish penetration, 

computing systems are expected to have strong potential for enhancing 
3  W.J. Abernathy and J.M. Utterback, 1986, Patterns of Industrial Innovation, Product 
Design and Technological Innovation, (UK / Philadelphia: Open University Press: Milton 
Keynes), 257-264.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 23the ef˜ciency and quality of health-care delivery.
4 See Box 2.1 for a deeper 
look at the use of computing technologies in health care.
Dissemination of news and opinions worldwide has also been trans
-formed, with today™s IT and communications infrastructure superseding 
much of the 20th-century system of print newspapers and hard-copy 

mail. Online publications, e-mail, text messages, Twitter, and websites 

are targeted to many specialized interests, resulting in nearly instan
-
taneous dissemination of news and opinions and a world where more 

people than ever before have a platform for their opinions (see Box 2.2). 

However, access to the necessary resources, such as high-speed Internet, 

is not equal among all populations. For example, a 2015 issue brief from 

the President™s Council of Economic Advisers highlights this ﬁdigital 

divide,ﬂ noting that 2013 rates of household Internet access correlate with 

education level of the head of household and that members of underrep
-resented minority groups have lower access rates. Geography also plays 

a signi˜cant role in determining access.
5Education has also been impacted by digitization, with increasing 
access to online courses, including video lectures; experts who can answer 

speci˜c questions through online discussion boards such as Quora.com; 

and early technologies for customizing courses to individual students 

based on the digital trace of their performance to dateŠnot to mention 

the trove of digital knowledge to be explored by learners.
This digitization of nearly every aspect of our lives has important 
impacts on the workforce. It has changed the nature of individual jobs, 

decreasing the need for some, empowering others, and creating yet oth
-ers. It has created opportunities to work more productively at home using 

video conferencing and online business processes and has led to greater 

expectations that workers will be available evenings and weekends. It has 

changed how we ˜nd jobs, as many job seekers now use online sites, such 

as Monster.com or Indeed.com, to ˜nd jobs. Freelancers now use online 

services such as Upwork.com or HourlyNerd.com to locate short-term 

jobs.
Today, most jobs involve some interaction with IT systems, driving a 
general need for the workforce at large to be informed about or trained on 

these systemsŠand to possess general ˚uency with IT. This also means 
4  B. Chaudhry, J. Wang, S. Wu, M. Maglione, W. Mojica, E. Roth, S.C. Morton, and P.G. 
Shekelle, 2006, Systematic review: Impact of health information technology on quality, ef
-˜ciency, and costs of medical care, Annals Internal Medicine 144:742-752; D. Blumenthal 
and J.P. Glaser, 2007, Information technology comes to medicine, New England Journal of 

Medicine 356:2527-2534.
5  The White House, 2015, ﬁMapping the Digital Divide,ﬂ Council of Economic Advis
-ers Issue Brief, July, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/wh_digital_divide_

issue_brief.pdf. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
BOX 2.1 Digitization of Health CareInstitutional, regulatory, and ethical considerations are often important fac
-tors in the diffusion of technologies. This is especially important in the health-care 
 industry. While technologists recognized the potentially transformative impact of 


have taken a long time to materialize. Progress in leveraging computing infra
-
structure for improving health care has been slower than expected, due to costs, 

complexities with implementations in a large complex organization, and human 

factors challenges around human-machine collaboration.
1 A 2009 study found 
that, while many hospitals leveraged several aspects of computing technologies 



fraction of U.S. hospitals, with greater penetrations in larger teaching hospitals in 

urban settings. Larger numbers of hospitals had implemented computerized pro
-
vider-order entry systems.
2




with the delivery of new kinds of clinical decision support for health-care workers. 

Decision-support opportunities include methods that leverage captured data to 




3 and that guide alerting and therapy, and that can help to mini
-mize large numbers of preventable errors
4 by employing promising computational 
methods designed to complement human decision-making.
5 The opportunities for 


deployments, including the successful implementation of electronic records sys
-


to dramatic improvements in the quality of clinical care.
6Other directions in health care include harnessing advances in image anal
-ysis to assist pathologists and radiologists in interpreting histological patterns 

and radiological images, respectively. In other areas, new approaches to sensing 

and inference show promise for delivering new kinds of useful auxiliary data for 



of population-scale screening efforts for identifying illness from behavioral data
7 that people on the job can encounter and are more in˚uenced by the 
problems of IT. Because of the centrality of IT, workers and businesses 

can develop a dependency on systems working ﬁseamlesslyﬂ to get core 

work done.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 25collected from new kinds of wearable devices that collect and transmit real-time 
activity data, such as the Fitbit and Apple Watch. 
1 A. Miller, B. Moon, S. Anders, R. Walden, S. Brown, and D. Montella, 2015, Integrating 
computerized clinical decision support systems into clinical work: A meta-synthesis of qualita
-tive research, International Journal of Medical Informatics

ijmedinf.2015.09.005.2
S. Rosenbaum, and D. Blumenthal, 2009, Use of electronic health records in U.S. hospitals, 
New England Journal of Medicine

3
S. Rosenbaum, and D. Blumenthal, 2009, Use of electronic health records in U.S. hospi
-tals, New England Journal of Medicine


A multitask learning approach, 
Journal of Machine Learning Research


-

Science Translational Medicine





PLoS ONE

-sented in Data Analytic Series at Computing Community Consortium, Computing Research 

4


5
2013, Outlier detection for patient monitoring and alerting, 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics
 6
Shekelle, 2006, Systematic review: Impact of health information technology on quality, ef
-

Annals Internal Medicine 144:742-752; D. Blumenthal 

New England Journal of Medicine 356:2527-2534.
7
using signals from web search logs: Feasibility study and results, 
Journal of Oncology Practice 


Computing Power and Networking
The increasing use of digital technologies has been enabled by foun
-dational advances in computing power and networked connectivity. 
Over the last ˜ve decades there has been tremendous progress in com
-puting capacity, in line with the famous Moore™s Law, which predicts that 

available computer power will double every 18 months. While this pre
-diction has held remarkably well since 1965, the ability to increase power 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
by further miniaturizing components of electronic devices will ultimately 
hit a fundamental limit imposed by the optical limits on the resolution 

of photolithography, and ultimately by the sizes of atoms. Nonethe
-
less, there has been major progress in the use of new parallel architec
-turesŠrather than reduction in component sizeŠto grow computing 

power, enabling growth to continue to keep pace with Moore™s Law. 

For example, graphical processing units, or GPUs, have enabled a new 

family of massively parallel architectures that have gained signi˜cant 

popularity for machine-learning and big data applications, as discussed 

in the section ﬁAdvancing Technological Capabilitiesﬂ below. Given cur
-rent trends, shown in Figure 2.1, computing power and networking 

capabilities are expected to continue to advance at least over the coming 

decade.
6 Research laboratories continue to pursue new approaches, such 
as quantum computing, which have not yet been proven practical, but 

which hold the potential for signi˜cant future improvements in comput
-ing power for some tasks. 
In addition to advances in computer process
-ing hardware, access to computer networks has extended to a large por
-tion of the population. By 2015, more than 84 percent of the U.S. adult 
6  M. Galloy, 2013, ﬁGPU vs. CPU performance data,ﬂ 
MichaelGalloy.com
, http://michael
-galloy.com/2013/06/11/cpu-vs-gpu-performance.html.
BOX 2.2 A Snapshot of Internet Traffic
In March of 2016, typical use of the Internet included 7,206 tweets per second 722 Instagram photos per second 1,117 Tumblr posts per second
 2,124 Skype calls per second

 122,590 YouTube videos viewed every second 
 2,489,751 e-mails sent every second
Inter-net Live Stats
30, 2016.Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 27FIGURE 2.1
 Illustration of approximate peak computing capacity of commercial 
processor lines since 2000. Vertical axis indicates the estimated theoretical peak 
performance of each processor model indicated in giga˚ops (billions of ˚oating 
point operations) per second. SOURCE: M. Galloy, 2013, ﬁGPU vs. CPU Perfor
-mance Data,ﬂ 
MichaelGalloy.com
, http://michaelgalloy.com/2013/06/11/cpu-vs-
gpu-performance.html. Courtesy of Michael Galloy.
population had access to the Internet.
7 Internet bandwidth has grown by 
approximately 50 percent every year over the last two decades.
8 Wire
-less connectivity has become faster and more pervasive through 3G and 
4GŠor third- and fourth-generationŠwireless protocols, while wired 

network speeds have improved. By 2014, a typical Internet speed was 

100 megabits per second for end users; Google has introduced gigabit 

per second access to metropolitan areas across the United States, with 

companies such as AT&T and Comcast beginning to provide similar 

service levels. One user™s documented evolution of Internet bandwidth 

since 1983 is illustrated in Figure 2.2.
The Global Positioning System (GPS), an accurate satellite-based 
method for identifying geographic coordinates, has been an important 
7  A. Perrin and M. Duggan, 2015, ﬁAmericans™ Internet Access: 2000-2015: As Internet Use 
Nears Saturation for Some Groups, a Look at Patterns of Adoption,ﬂ Pew Research Center, 
http://www.pewInternet.org/2015/06/26/americans-Internet-access-2000-2015/.
8  J. Nielsen, 1998, ﬁNielsen™s Law of Internet Bandwidth,ﬂ Nielsen Norman Group, last 
modi˜ed 2014, https://www.nngroup.com/articles/law-of-bandwidth/. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
enabler of mobile computing applications. GPS dates to the 1970s, when it was developed for use by the U.S. military with an intentionally degraded 

version made available to consumers, a distinction known as ﬁselec
-
tive availability.ﬂ
9,10
 In 2000, this intentional degradation was turned off, 
enabling accurate consumer-level GPS positioning to approximately 10-15 

meters; its accuracy has since improved. This capability is now at the 

heart of mobile computing applications such as location-aware Internet 

search, real-time traf˜c directions, and ﬁ˜nd my friendsﬂ social network
-ing tools. Another bene˜t of GPS technology is the direct transmission 

of highly accurate timing signals to computing systems, allowing more 

effective and cost-ef˜cient synchronization of network activities and work 

processes.
9  Federal Aviation Administration, ﬁSatellite NavigationŠGPSŠPolicyŠSelective Avail
-ability,ﬂ last modi˜ed November 13, 2014, https://www.faa.gov/about/of˜ce_org/
headquarters_of˜ces/ato/service_units/techops/navservices/gnss/gps/policy/availability/.
10
  W. Reynish, 2000, ﬁThe Real Reason Selective Availability was Turned Off,ﬂ 
Aviation To
-day Magazine Online
, http://www.aviationtoday.com/av/issue/feature/The-Real-Reason-
Selective-Availability-Was-Turned-Off_12739.html#.VrOZmDYrLMU.
FIGURE 2.2
 Internet bandwidth over time. Internet connection speeds in bits 
per second, as recorded and reported by Jakob Nielson, 1983-2014. SOURCE: 
ﬁNielsen™s Law of Internet Bandwidth,ﬂ by Jakob Nielsen (April 5, 1998), last 
modi˜ed 2014, https://www.nngroup.com/articles/law-of-bandwidth/.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 29Enterprise Software
American corporations have spent billions of dollars on digitizing 
their major processes and operations, investing in a variety of large-scale 
systems, such as enterprise resource planning, supply chain management, 

customer relationship management and human resource management, 
and EHRs. These systems can cost tens or hundreds of millions of dollars 
to implement and are often deployed over a period of several years. The 

biggest costs are in process redesign, often led by consulting ˜rms. In 

addition, employee training and user documentation, manuals, and sup
-port documentation must be updated and maintained. As a result, many 

work processes have been signi˜cantly redesigned, or ﬁreengineered,ﬂ as 

some authors have called it,
11 boosting productivity and, in many cases, 
reducing labor requirements.
Few jobs have been untouched by the need to interact with IT sys
-tems, which also means that more and more of the workforce at large 

needs to be informed or trained on IT systems. In most cases, the costs 

of business process redesign and employee training, including on-the-job 

learning, vastly exceed the direct costs of IT hardware and software. These 

costs have been described as investments in organizational capital and 

human capital since they are expected to yield bene˜ts over many years. 

Thus, they add to the intangible asset base of companies and the nation, 

even if they are often unaccounted for on balance sheets.
12
Mobile and Remote Systems
The broad impact of mobile-based IT on the workforce is due to 
both hardware and software system evolutions. The history of enterprise-

capable mobile hardware technologies dates to the early 1990s, with the 

advent of systems such as the IBM Simon and the Palm Pilot. In addition 

to the computing power of the mobile device itself, its utility as a compo
-nent of an enterprise workplace environment has expanded with wireless 

network bandwidth capabilities. Such capabilities have expanded from 

12.2 kilobytes per second (Global System for Mobile Communications 

standard) for the ˜rst compatible mobile devices in 1993, through ˜ve 

orders of magnitude growth to the long-term evolution, or LTE, standard 

of 128 megabytes per second in 2013.
13
11  M.M. Hammer and J. Champy, 2006, 
Reengineering the Corporation: Manifesto for Business 
Revolution, 
HarperCollins, New York.
12
  L. Hitt, S. Yang, and E. Brynjolfsson, 2002, Intangible assets: Computers and organiza
-tional capital, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
 1:137-199.
13
  L. Tang, W.-T. Tsai, and J. Dong, 2013, ﬁEnterprise Mobile Service Architecture: Chal
-lenges and Approaches,ﬂ
 ServiceTech Magazine
, Volume 79 (December), http://www.service
 techmag.com/I79/1213-3.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
Combined with the availability of mobile hardware capabilities, enter
-prise-based mobile communications have enabled the widespread distri
-bution of data, tasks, and workers across a wide range of organizational 
settings. Since the invention of e-mail in 1980, organizational growth of 

electronic communications has enabled increased levels of distribution 

of work and information exchange.
14
 ﬁEnterprise e-mailﬂ can be seen as 
celebrating its 25th anniversary in 2016-2017, dating to the release of Lotus 

Notes in 1991 and the Microsoft Exchange Client in 1993. The number of 

e-mail accounts worldwide grew nearly 16-fold, from 25 million to 400 

million, between 1996 and 1999. By 2013, business e-mail accounts had 

exceeded 900 million; although this only represented 24 percent of e-mail 

accounts, e-mail traf˜c to business accounts represented a majority of 

e-mail traf˜c. Further, a majority of organizational communications were 

conducted via e-mail.
15
 Internet-based infrastructure in the workplace 
has led to a shift in telephony use, creating large-scale implementation 

of Internet-based voice-over Internet protocol, or VoIP, as well as digital 

voice messaging. However, there are limited data regarding the effects 

of VoIP versus older telephony systems on organizational productivity.
Another result of the shift to Internet-based IT systems has been the 
growth of videoconferencing as a productivity tool.
16
 Videoconferencing 
has enabled the geographical distribution of project work via meetings 

that may integrate computer presentations, face-to-face exchanges, and 

data sharing. The use of these forms of data and information exchange in 

organizations are affected by combinations of context, task urgency, and 

bandwidth; although studies of these aspects of organizational data shar
-ing date to the 1990s,
 the capability of high-speed Internet infrastructure 
has led to a majority of survey respondents reporting daily or weekly 

videoconferencing.
17,18
 Mobile computing, increased Internet bandwidth 
and infrastructure support, and cloud-based data storage can also sup
-
port the growing role of ˚exible ﬁhotelingﬂ or ﬁtouchdownﬂ spaces, which 
14
  Visually, 2011, ﬁThe History of EMAIL and Growth of EMAIL Accounts,ﬂ http://visual.
ly/history-growth-email.
15
  S. Radicati, 2013, 
Email Statistics Report, 2013-2017
, The Radicati Group, http://www.rad
-icati.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/Email-Statistics-Report-2013-2017-Executive-
Summary.pdf.
16
  J. Kruger, 2013, ﬁNew Research Finds Use of Videoconferencing Growing As an Enter
-prise Productivity Tool,ﬂ 
IMCCA
 (blog), http://www.imcca.org/news/new-research-˜nds-
use-of-videoconferencing-growing-as-an-enterprise-productivity-tool.
17
  B.S. Caldwell, S. Uang, and L.H. Taha, 1995, Appropriateness of communications media 
use in organizations: Situation requirements and media characteristics, 
Behaviour and Infor
-mation Technology
 14(4):199-207.
18
  J. Kruger, 2013, ﬁNew Research Finds Use of Videoconferencing Growing As an Enter
-prise Productivity Tool,ﬂ 
IMCCA
 (blog), http://www.imcca.org/news/new-research-˜nds-
use-of-videoconferencing-growing-as-an-enterprise-productivity-tool.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 31limit the number of ˜xed of˜ces necessary for a workforce of a given size. 
This reduction changes the real estate footprint associated with the size of 

an organization.
19
 These effects of enterprise software, IT infrastructure, 
and mobile computing devices substantially affect the traditional map
-pings of organization size to workplace organizational elements such as 

location, work hours, and distribution of members of work teams.
Educational Tools and Platforms
Traditional models of higher education and training have been 
steadily augmented by technology for years, from the introduction of 

overhead projectors to current video streaming and real-time remote-

meeting technologies such as Google Hangouts or Skype. IT tools such as 

Webex, BlueJeans, GotoMeeting, Piazza, and Blackboard can be used by 

college faculty to record and distribute course content, often with asyn
-chronous ˜le exchange and chat features, to remotely located students.
With the general availability of high-speed networks to people™s 
homes, universities can now stream lectures to students across the world, 

and students can communicate with instructors and each other via the 

network. This new mode of online education with many students is called 

a massive open online course (MOOC). In a typical MOOC, class video 

lectures are prerecorded and often include associated exercises that are 

carried out by students in isolation or in very small groups. Tests may 

be given over the Internet, and in many cases evaluations of tests and 

exercises are carried out through peer evaluation, which also provides 

students with a broader perspective. The ability to teach without the 

use of a physical classroom allows for enrollment of much larger classes, 

with some MOOC classes having as many as 80,000 students enrolled. 

Although student completion rates can often be as low as 10 percent, that 

means 8,000 motivated students may still complete a class. Companies 

such as Coursera and Udacity, along with many universities, are now 

experimenting with a wide range of variations on this MOOC model, 

including methods for tuning individual course delivery for students by 

automatically tracking their course progress (and with different models 

for tracking meritorious performance and issuing certi˜cation). While 

these innovative educational tools have stimulated much excitement, it is 

also important to understand exactly who is participating and bene˜tting 

from online courses. Although estimates are dif˜cult to con˜rm, many of 

the participants in Coursera and edX courses are those who already have 
19
  K. Lazar, and S. Long, 2014, ﬁDowntown Of˜ce Market Starts to See Effects of Evolving 
Workspace Needs,ﬂ Shepard Schwartz & Harris LLP, http://www.ssh-cpa.com/newsroom-
insights-chicago-of˜ce-market-hoteling.html.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
college degrees, and who may be participating for supplementary ﬁad 
hocﬂ or ﬁjust-in-timeﬂ learning activities. Studies suggest that students 

enroll in MOOCs for different reasons, with different engagement levels, 

and with varying capabilities for success. The MOOC environment is 

challenging for learners who are not already self-directed.
20
 In addition, 
access to the necessary resources, such as high-speed Internet, is not equal 

among all populations. For example, a 2015 issue brief from the Presi
-dent™s Council of Economic Advisers highlights this ﬁdigital divide,ﬂ not
-ing that 2013 rates of household Internet access correlate with education 

level of the head of household, and that members of underrepresented 

minority groups have lower access rates. Geography also plays a signi˜
-cant role in determining access.
21
At the same time, there are limits to what can be learned through 
remote online tools, such as for ˜elds relying on intensive apprentice
-ship with signi˜cant hands-on and embodied competency. The important 

informal dimensions of learning through mentorship, observation, and 

participation may require different mechanisms. In addition to creating 

opportunities for learning, this technology may also change the nature of 

work for teachers and others in education-related professions. While the 

jury is still out on the ˜nal impact of these online methods for education 

and which types of students they will most bene˜t, there is no question 

that they provide new access mechanisms to lifelong education, just-in-

time training to workers seeking to qualify for new jobs, and educational 

materials to many who would not otherwise have access to them. 
Peer-to-Peer Exchanges and Matching and Reputation Systems
Advances in IT have led to new online peer-to-peer exchange net
-works through which resource holders or distributors can easily connect 

with resource seekers: eBay and Airbnb are examples of companies that 

have capitalized on these new platforms. One requirement for success for 

any given application of these peer-to-peer resource-exchange systems is 

the development of trust between the parties, who are often unknown to 

one another in advance. Although technology for matching providers 

to seekers, and for establishing suf˜cient trust to support the transaction, 
20
  Department for Business, Innovation, and Skills, 2013, ﬁThe Maturing of the MOOC,ﬂ 
BIS Research Paper #130, https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/18491288.pdf; D. Fisher, 2012, 
ﬁWarming up to MOOC™s,ﬂ Chronicle of Higher Education, http://chronicle.com/blogs/

profhacker/warming-up-to-moocs/44022; A. Kirshner, 2012, A Pioneer in online education 

tries a MOOC, 
Chronicle of Higher Education
 59(6):21-22.
21
  The White House, 2015, ﬁMapping the Digital Divide,ﬂ Council of Economic Advis
-ers Issue Brief, July, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/wh_digital_divide_

issue_brief.pdf. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 33has led to success for companies such as those listed above, this technol
-ogy remains at an early stage.
Reputation systems, which enable providers and seekers to volun
-tarily rate one another after a transaction, are widely used to establish the 
trustworthiness of participants. However, these reputation systems rely 

on voluntary investment of time and energy to provide ratings and may 

therefore be gamed or simply skewed toward participants with strong 

views and available time to participate, providing potentially inaccurate 

or at least unrepresentative data.
When used in the evaluation of individual workers, such reputation 
systems can impact workers™ future salary potential and their ability to 

retain jobs. Similar reputation systems are also used in more traditional 

companies to obtain feedback on employees who interface with customers 

(e.g., customer calls are often greeted with the question ﬁDo you agree to 

take a brief survey after you have completed your call?ﬂ). Given that the 

use of online peer-to-peer networks has grown very visibly over the past 

10 years and that this trend is still in its early stages, it can be expected 

to continue to diffuse into new applications. Its eventual spread may be 

determined in part by improvements in the technology for establishing 

accurate reputations.
The Internet of Things
The Internet of Things is a term introduced to capture the growing 
accessibility of many diverse devices to the Internet. As Wikipedia de˜nes 

it, ﬁthe Internet of things is the network of physical objectsŠdevices, vehi-
cles, buildings and other itemsŠembedded with electronics, sensors, and 

network connectivity that enables these objects to collect and exchange 

data.ﬂ
22
 Already, many devices, from thermostats to home alarms, com
-municate via the Internet and provide phone apps to interact with them 

(e.g., to adjust temperature before the user arrives home). But many more 

devices, from transit buses to refrigerators, already make use of computer 

processors and are beginning to have Internet connectivity. In addition, 

radiofrequency identi˜cation technology provides a low-cost method to 

identify and track any physical item without use of battery power and 

has been widely used, for example, to track items during shipping. The 

signi˜cance of the Internet of Things is that it will further accelerate the 

trend toward digitization of everything, making it possible for the Inter
-net to serve as a communication tool for capturing, sharing, and acting on 

even more digital information. While the full impact of this trend is not 
22
  Wikipedia, ﬁInternet of things,ﬂ last update July 23, 2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Internet_of_things. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
yet certain, experiments are already under way in cities such as Songdo, 
South Korea, and Santander, Spain, to explore the potential for city-wide 

connectivity of devices to improve aspects of city life, from the logistics 

of ˜nding a parking space to improvement of air quality.
The Cloud
One important trend in the use of networking and computing is the 
growth of companies and services that offer disk storage and computing 

as a service over the Internet. For example, companies like Dropbox and 

Box offer the ability to store data in the cloud (i.e., on their servers via 

the Internet). Other companies such as Amazon and Google offer cloud-

computing platforms in which users can rent time on very large comput
-ing clusters, accessible over the Internet, instead of purchasing their own 

hardware to run computationally intensive jobs. Beyond providing cloud 

access to raw storage and computing power, these and other IT compa
-nies, such as Microsoft, IBM, and Salesforce, now provide entire services 

over the Internet (software as a service). For example, Salesforce offers a 

cloud-based customer relationship management service used by many 

companies.
Cloud-based solutions have the advantage that the user can pay for 
only what they needŠonly as much storage or computational effort as 

they needŠwithout investing in their own computing infrastructure. 

Cloud-based services similarly provide a convenient way to outsource 

certain tasks; they can be disseminated nearly instantly across the entire 

Internet, with no need to physically transport equipment or people. In 

addition, data sharing and other forms of collaboration become easier 

via the cloud (e.g., Google Docs provides a cloud-based document editor 

in which multiple users can simultaneously edit a document and view 

changes being made by all parties in real time), augmenting workers™ 

capabilities.
ADVANCING TECHNOLOGICAL CAPABILITIES
The paradigm shift to digitization enabled by development of the 
Internet and advances in computational power, networking speed, and 

data capture and storage has been transforming society for decades. New 

and compelling uses of these technologies, enabled by enhanced connec
-tivity and computing power, continue to emerge.
Today, many concerned with the impact of technology on the work
-force have turned their attention to the progress of technologies that 

perform functions commonly thought of as ﬁhumanﬂŠand thus present 

new opportunities for automating work functions traditionally carried 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 35out by people, which could have the effect of eliminating jobs or chang
-ing the skills requirements and tasks associated with certain jobs. Many of 
these areas are still in the research and development phases. In the section 

below, the committee discusses the progress of these technologies.
Arti˜cial Intelligence
Arti˜cial intelligence, or AI, refers to principles and applications of 
computer algorithms that attempt to mimic various aspects of human 

intelligence. Although the term was coined in the 1950s, it took decades 

of research before aspects of AI research reached the point of signi˜cant 

commercial impact.
By the mid-1990s, practical, commercial AI-based systems for auto
-mating or assisting in a variety of human decision-making tasks had been 

developed and were being used in fraud detection and in the con˜gu
-ration of computer systems.
23,24
 While early AI systems were typically 
constructed manuallyŠthat is, with programmers writing computer-
 interpretable rules to de˜ne a computer-based decision processŠthere has 

been a shift toward AI systems based on machine learning 
 methodsŠthat 
is, algorithms that infer their own decision-making rules from training 

dataŠby harnessing large data sets. For example, fraud-detection strate
-gies are now developed automatically by machine learning algorithms 

that analyze millions of historical credit card transactions.
The increasing use of machine learning, along with other innovations, 
has produced signi˜cant progress in a variety of AI sub˜elds, including 

computer vision, speech recognition, robot control, automated translation 

between languages, and automated decision-making.
25
 These advances 
in AI component technologies have in turn produced a number of highly 

visible AI systems over the past decade, including the following:
 Intelligent agents such as Apple™s Siri, Google Now, Microsoft™s 
 Cortana, and Amazon™s Echo. These AI systems combine speech recogni
-tion, background knowledge about the user, mixed-initiative interaction 
with users, and a variety of speci˜c apps to perform useful tasks. These 

systems demonstrate the ability to combine spoken natural-language 

interaction with a range of intelligent services and electronic commerce.
23
  S. Zoldi, 2016, ﬁFour Analytic Breakthroughs That Are Driving Smarter Decisions,ﬂ 
Fico Blog
, May 26, http://www.˜co.com/en/blogs/analytics-optimization/four-analytic-
breakthroughs-that-are-driving-smarter-decisions/.
24
  J. McDermott, 1980, ﬁR1: An Expert in the Computer Systems Domain,ﬂ Carnegie Mel
-lon University, https://www.aaai.org/Papers/AAAI/1980/AAAI80-076.pdf.
25
  S. Russell and Peter Norvig, 2010, 
Arti˜cial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (3rd Edition)
, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
 Self-driving vehicles.
 Multiple universities and companies have now 
demonstrated self-driving vehicles. For example, in 2015 the automotive 
company Tesla released software that allows its customers to put their 

automobile into self-driving mode on public highways, and Uber has 

recently begun testing self-driving cars on the streets of Pittsburgh.
26 This demonstrates that computer perception and controlŠin particular, 

computer vision and self-steeringŠhave reached an important threshold 

of practical reliability.
 AI and robotic systems that sense and act within the physical world
. An 
example is Nest™s intelligent thermostat, which learns to customize indi
-vidual buildings to their occupants™ routines.
 AI systems capable of answering many factual questions. IBM™s 
Watson system defeated the world 
Jeopardy! champion in 2011,
27 and 
Wolfram|Alpha
28
 provides a similar broad-scope resource for answer
-ing diverse factual questions. Note that 
Jeopardy!
 requires the contestant 
to answer unforeseen questions about a very diverse set of unforeseen 

topics. Watson™s win over humans in 
Jeopardy!
 demonstrates that com
-puters can achieve human-level competence at answering diverse factual 

questions, while using huge volumes of unstructured text as underlying 

sources of knowledge.
 AI game-playing systems that defeat humans at chess, backgammon, and 
Go.
 In recent years, AI systems for game playing have defeated the top 
human players in each of these games. Most recently, in 2016, Google™s 

AlphaGo system defeated the world champion Go player in a best-of-

˜ve match by a score of four to one. These achievements demonstrate 

the capability of machine learning to automatically discover complex 

problem-solving strategies by training on millions of games in which 

the computer plays against different variants of itself (see Figure 2.3). 

However, it is important to realize this strategy-learning approach is 

applicable only to problems where near-perfect simulations are feasible. 

For example, games can be simulated perfectly, but the effect of a bicycle 

hitting a rock cannot be.
These visible AI advances illustrate the growing competence of AI tech
-nology. The committee examines related technologies in the following 
sections.
26
  Reuters, 2016, ﬁUber Debuts Self-Driving Cars in Pittsburgh,ﬂ Fortune, September 14, 
http://fortune.com/2016/09/14/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh/.
27
  D.A. Ferrucci, 2012, ﬁIntroduction to ‚This is Watson,™ﬂ 
IBM Journal of Research and De
-velopment
 56(3.4):1:1-1:15.
28
  Wolfram|Alpha is a computational knowledge engine that was developed by Wolfram 
Research. See Wolfram|Alpha, 2016, ﬁAbout Wolfram|Alpha,ﬂ Wolfram|Alpha, https://
www.wolframalpha.com/about.html, accessed May 27, 2016.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 37Machine Learning and Big Data
One of the most important drivers of AI advances over the past two 
decades has been machine learning: computer algorithms that automati
-cally improve their competence through ﬁexperience.ﬂ This experience is 
often in the form of historical data, which the machine-learning algorithm 

analyzes in order to detect patterns or regularities that can be extrapolated 

to future cases. For example, given experience in the form of a historical 

database of medical records, machine-learning algorithms are now able 

to predict which future patients are likely to respond to which treatments. 

Given experience in the form of speech signals from a speci˜c individual, 

machine-learning algorithms now automatically improve their ability 

to understand the accent of that particular individual. Given experience 

observing which movies a user watches online, machine-learning algo
-rithms now automatically improve their ability to recommend additional 

movies of interest. In many cases, including the above examples, the 

abstracted machine-learning problem is to learn some classi˜cation func
-tion from training data consisting of input-output pairs for that function. 

For example, a classi˜cation mapping each patient to a recommended 
FIGURE 2.3 Elo scoresŠa measure of competency in competitive gamesŠ
 showing the chess-playing competency of humans and machines, measured over 
time. SOURCE: Courtesy of Murray Campbell.




















Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
treatment may be generated from automated analysis of historical data 
describing a patient and their successful treatment.
A set of machine learning algorithms called deep neural networks 
has had a major impact in recent years. These are complex networks of 

threshold elements trained to ˜t the training data. These algorithms are 

able to discover useful abstract representations of complex data. Over 

recent decades, deep learning has helped to advance the state of the art in 

computer vision, speech recognition, and other areas, especially in tasks 

that involve complex perceptual or sensor data.
29
 For example, Xu et al. 
have trained a deep network to generate text captions for photographic 

images. While this and other deep network algorithms are still limited, 

their ability to train on millions of examples to generate models with bil
-lions of learned parameters has led to major improvements across many 

applications, such as robotics, information extraction from text docu
-
ments, and prediction of customer behavior. Over the coming decade, 

these and other machine learning algorithms are likely to advance further, 

and new applications of existing algorithms remain to be explored.
While algorithm development is one driver of progress in machine 
learning, another major driver is the growth of online data that fuel 

machine-learning systems. Companies now capture growing volumes of 

data about their customers to learn to better serve and market to them. 

Companies have also moved an increasing fraction of their routine work 

˚ows online, thereby capturing new data that might be used to learn 

decision-making rules to partially automate these routine work ˚ows. 

New sensors are appearing in many contexts, from cameras mounted 

on streetlights to pulse-sensing watches worn by individuals. Building 

on technological advances in wireless sensor networks and the Inter
-net of Things, much of these data are now available in real time across 

the network, making it possible to generate intelligent systems that are 

embedded in critical infrastructure systems. A few such examples include 

(1) urban mobility, with companies such as Waze providing real-time 

route advice, and Lyft and Uber using the Internet to match passengers 

to drivers; (2) smart homes and accommodation systems, with companies 

like Nest providing home automation and Airbnb providing signi˜cant 

competition to the traditional hotel and short-term rental market; (3) auto
-
mated agriculture, in which weather, water, and soil data are used to 

automatically control farming practices; (4) the electric power grid, in 

which consumer behavior can be learned in real time, making it possible 

to accurately schedule heterogeneous distributed energy resources, such 

as solar and wind; and (5) assistive devices, such as robotic wheelchairs 
29
  Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, 2015, Deep learning, 
Nature Magazine 
521:436-444, 
doi:10.1038/nature14539.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 39and new reality and robotic platforms like the PR2 Robot for Research 
and Innovation,
30
 to support design and development of a wide range of 
personal assistive tasks.
Over the coming decade, the impact of machine learning, big data 
capture and analysis, and data science is likely to grow as the diversity 

and volume of online data sets continues to grow, new types of sensors 

are designed to acquire new types of data, more companies learn how to 

collect and use online data to optimize pro˜ts, and the supply shortage 

of technical experts in this area is ameliorated by the growing number of 

college students studying this subject.
At the same time, there are several constraints on the rate and types 
of progress that can be expected. For example, although the volume of 

online data will almost certainly grow, 
access to data
 will likely limit their 
potential uses. Data access will be bounded by personal privacy concerns, 

by the willingness of companies that own much of this data to share it, 

and by government regulations, such as those under the Health Insurance 

Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, which govern access to medi
-cal data. In addition, while some data are in the form of highly structured 

databases, many are in the form of unstructured video, audio, and text 

that are much less interpretable by computers, despite recent progress. 

Other technical issues must also be addressed, such as incompatibilities 

in data schema across different databases, differences in the temporal and 

spatial grain size of data, and differences in data distributions sampled 

by different databases. Growing research in machine learning and data 

science is actively addressing these issues, but many of these technical 

issues remain unsolved.
Robotics
Robotics is a ˜eld at the intersection of mechanical engineering, elec
-trical engineering, and computer science that ﬁdeals with the design, 

construction, operation, and use of robots, as well as computer systems 

for their control, sensory feedback, and information processing.ﬂ
31 In 
general, a robot is a mechanical machine that uses sensors to gather 

information about the world it operates in and a computer program to 

guide its actions. The academic discipline of robotics centers on the study, 

development, and deployment of electromechanical systems that sense 

and interact in the physical world, guided by a computer program or 
30  Willow Garage, 2008, ﬁOverview: PR2,ﬂ last modi˜ed 2015, https://www.willowgarage.
com/pages/pr2/overview.
31
  Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, ﬁRobotics,ﬂ last modi˜ed March 8, 2017, https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robotics.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
simpler electronics. The concept of robotics can be broadened to include 
embedded sensing and actuation systems, referred to broadly as ﬁcyber-

physical systems.ﬂ
Real-world application of robots dates back to 1961, when George 
Devol™s and Joseph Engelberger™s Unimate system was deployed at 

General Motors for handling of die-cast metal.32 Use of robots in the auto
-mation of physical tasks provides bene˜ts such as quality, repeatability, 

and power and can enable the removal of humans from dangerous tasks. 

In their early days, robots were used predominantly in automotive manu
-
facturing. The initial introduction of robots in the automotive industry 

helped to ensure consistent quality over time and a reduction in defects.
Since then, the ˜eld has seen tremendous technical progress. The 
early robot systems had high mechanical precision but were not pro
-grammable. They used a ˜xed sequence of actions to perform a task. By 

1974, the ˜rst microprocessor-controlled robot was introduced. Today™s 

robot utilizes different types of sensors, and some of them are directly 

programmed from human demonstration.
The International Organization for Standardization de˜nes a robot 
as an ﬁactuated mechanism programmable in two or more axes with a 

degree of autonomy, moving within its environment, to perform intended 

tasks.ﬂ
33
 The standard also distinguishes between industrial and service 
robots.
This formal de˜nition allows consistent capture of sales and inven
-tory statistics across sectors, regions, and nations. An annual report issued 

by the International Federation of Robotics34 captures the sales and inven
-tory of both industrial and service robotics in most countries and includes 

a break-down across use-cases.
The industrial robotics market today has annual sales in excess of 
$10 billion each year, or more than $30 billion including installation costs 

and sale of accessories. Annual sales of industrial robots had grown to 

230,000 robots by 2014, with close to 25 percent of sales originating in 

China. Five countries (China, the United States, Japan, Republic of Korea, 

and Germany) are responsible for 70 percent of global sales. In the United 

States, close to 32,000 robots were sold during 2014; see Figure 2.4 for 

worldwide industry trends over time.
35
As of 2014, the top use of robots remained as automotive manufac
-turing, which accounts for 42 percent of all applications, with electron
-32
  S.Y. Nof, 1999, 
Handbook of Industrial Robotics
, Volume 1, Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, N.J.,
 doi:10.1002/9780470172506.
33
  ISO Standard 8373.
34
  International Federation of Robotics, 2015, ﬁIndustrial Robot Statistics: World Robotics 
2015 Industrial Robots,ﬂ http://www.ifr.org/industrial-robots/statistics/. 
35
  Ibid.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 41FIGURE 2.4 Worldwide shipping of robots over time. SOURCE: Data from 
International Federation of Robotics, 2015. ﬁIndustrial Robot Statistics: World 
Robotics 2015 Industrial Robots,ﬂ last modi˜ed 2015, http://www.ifr.org/
industrial-robots/statistics/.
ics assembly and metal work accounting for 21 percent and 10 percent, 
respectively.
36
 Figure 2.5 illustrates the distribution of application areas 
for robotics in 2015.
The number of robots shipped in the United States had a compound 
annual growth rate of 11 percent between 2009 and 2015.
37
 Recently there 
has been a stronger move toward the use of robot technology to enable 

increased ˚exibility and customization of products. For example, auto
-mobile manufacturer Audi now has the ability to produce 10
31
 differ
-ent car model options, customizable to consumer preference for features 

such as color, wooden panels, audio systems, navigation systems, safety 

options, and more. At the same time, the lifetime of some products is get
-ting shorter. For example, cell phone models typically have a lifetime of 

12 months or less. This requires a manufacturing line to be available for 

production of multiple product types to allow for capitalization of infra
-36
  Ibid.
37
  Ibid.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
structure, again resulting in a requirement for ˚exibility and reprogram
-mability in robotic assembly.
A service robot is a robot that ﬁperforms useful tasks for humans or 
equipment, excluding industrial automation applications.ﬂ
38
 The service 
robotics market is divided into professional and consumer applications. 
The professional applications include cleaning, material handling, surveil
-
lance, rehabilitation, surgery, logistics, and construction as well as defense 

applications. The market is still small (24,207 units with sales of $3.77 bil
-lion in 2014) compared to the industrial robotics market, but it is seeing 

signi˜cant annual growth, with current growth rates on par with those 

of industrial robots. The biggest market in this segment is robots used in 

minimally invasive surgery. The service robotics market is expected to see 

major growth signi˜cantly beyond the industrial market, since it includes 

subsectors such as driverless cars, unmanned aerial vehicles (sometimes 

referred to as drones), and entertainment robots. Recent industry predic
-tions indicate that ˜rst-generation driverless cars will be available by 

2020, and by 2030 such cars are likely to be a service. More than 3 million 

unmanned aerial vehicles have already been sold, and their growth is pre
-38
  ISO Standard 8373.
FIGURE 2.5
 Robot application areas in 2015. SOURCE: Data from International 
Federation of Robotics, 2014. ﬁIndustrial Robot Statistics: World Robotics 2015 
Industrial Robots,ﬂ last modi˜ed 2014, http://www.ifr.org/industrial-robots/
statistics/.
Automotive
42%
Electronics
21%
Metal
10%
Materials/Chemical
8%
Food
4%
Others
4%
Unspecified
11%
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 43dicted to be exponential.
39
 In February 2017, engineers in Dubai reported 
a success test ˚ight of a single passenger drone air taxi, with plans to 
make it available to customers later in 2017.
40
The consumer market for robots includes household robots and enter
-tainment and leisure robots. This includes domestic service robots, auto
-mated wheelchairs, personal mobility assistance robots, and pet-exercising 

robots. Autonomous pool-cleaning, rain-gutter-cleaning, and carpet-clean
-
ing robots
41
 are sold commercially. Hospital robots that deliver supplies 
are also emerging.
42
 While approximately 4.7 million service robots were 
sold in 2014 for personal and domestic use, this accounted for sales of only 

$2.2 billion due to lower costs per unit.
In addition to the already ˜elded applications of robotics, university 
and corporate research is under way in nearly all aspects of compo
-
nent technologies. Research on computer vision, sound perception, and 

other modalities for perception; reinforcement-learning algorithms to give 

robots the ability to improve through experience; and natural-language 

interaction with robots are active areas discussed in the following sec
-tions. There is also research to explore styles of interaction between robots 

and people, such as work on building robots from more pliable materials 

to avoid accidental harm to people; research on styles of conversation 

between robots and people to produce effective communication; human 

instruction of robots; and robots™ explanation of their actions.
Computer Perception: Vision and Speech
Over the last 15 years, tremendous progress has been made in com
-puter perception, especially in the areas of computer vision and speech 

recognition.
43
 Computer vision is widely used today in a range of appli
-cations, including ˜ngerprint recognition at safety barriers, high-speed 

processing of handwritten addresses on letters by the U.S. Postal Service, 

reading of checks deposited at ATMs or via cell phone cameras, and 

recognition of individual faces in personal online photo albums. Even 

10 years ago, recognition of hundreds of different objects in images was 

impossible, whereas now systems can classify images of 1,000 different 
39
  International Federation of Robotics, 2015, ﬁIndustrial Robot Statistics.ﬂ 
40  T. Flanigan, 2017, ﬁForget Taxis; Dubai Wants to Fly You Around in Passenger Drones,ﬂ Febru
-ary 16, http://mashable.com/2017/02/16/taxi-dubai-passenger-drones/#HpoK4G4xPmqO.
41  iRobot Corporation, 2016, ﬁRoomba 98: The Power to Change the Way You Clean,ﬂ http://
www.irobot.com/For-the-Home/Vacuum-Cleaning/Roomba.aspx, accessed March 31, 2016. 
42  Aethon, Inc., 2016, ﬁTUG RobotsŠHealthcare Bene˜ts,ﬂ http://www.aethon.com/tug/
tughealthcare/, accessed March 31, 2016.
43
  X. Huang, J. Baker and R. Reddy, 2014, A historical perspective of speech recognition, 
Communications of the ACM
 57(1):94-103, doi:10.1145/2500887.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCEobjects with 62 percent average precision.
44
 In merely the interval from 
2010 to 2014, the error rate in image classi˜cation for one major test set 
of images, the ImageNet set, was reduced from 28 percent to under 8 

percent (see Figure 2.6).
45
 At the end of 2015, multiple image recognition 
systems reported reaching human level performance of approximately 4 

percent error rates on the ImageNet challenge, widely used to evaluate 

image classi˜cation.
46
 Much of this recent improvement has been driven 
44
  O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. 
Khosla, M. Bernstein, A.C. Berg, and L. Fei-Fei., 2015, ﬁImageNet Large Scale Visual Recogni
-tion Challenge,ﬂ January 30, http://arxiv.org/pdf/1409.0575v3.pdf.
45
  Ibid. 
46
  See, for example, R.C. Johnson, 2015, ﬁMicrosoft, Google Beat Humans at Image Recog
-nitionﬂ  EE Times, February 18, http://www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1325712; 

K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, 2015, Delving deep into recti˜ers: Surpassing human-

level performance on ImageNet classi˜cation, pp. 1026-1034 in Proceedings of the IEEE 

International Conference on Computer Vision, https://arxiv.org/pdf/1502.01852.pdf; and 

R. Eckel, 2015, ﬁMicrosoft Researchers™ Algorithm Sets ImageNet Challenge Milestone,ﬂ 

Microsoft Research Blog, February 10, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/

microsoft-researchers-algorithm-sets-imagenet-challenge-milestone/.
FIGURE 2.6
 Panel (a) shows the dropping error rate in automated image clas
-si˜cation, year by year, for the ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Chal
-lenge. SOURCE: O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, 
X. Huang, et al., ﬁImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge,ﬂ 
Interna
-tional Journal of Computer Vision,
 last modi˜ed January 30, 2015, http://arxiv.org/

pdf/1409.0575v3.pdf, with permission of Springer.
Performance of winning entries in the ILSVRC2010-2014 competitions in each of the three tasks. 

-
tion tasks, and a 1.9x improvement in mean average precision in object detection. There are two 

considerations in making these comparisons. (1) The object categories used in ISLVRC changed 

between years 2010 and 2011, and between 2011 and 2012. However, the large scale of the data 

(1000 object categories, 1.2 million training images) has remained the same, making it possible 





between years 2013 and 2014. 
(a)(c)(b)Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 45by applying deep network machine learning algorithms to larger training 
sets of images. Computer vision algorithms are now also capable of track
-
ing people, cars, and other objects in video streams as well as analyzing 

static images.
Much of the progress in computer vision has been independent of its 
use in robotics. Recently, vision technology has started to see applications 

in robotics, in particular for design of ﬁsmartﬂ (driverless) cars and for the 

sorting of goods by supply-chain companies such as Amazon.
Computer vision on video and live imagery is also making prog
-ress, with advances in identifying objects and recognizing intentions in 

videos,47 and for employing machine vision for perceptual tasks for robot
-ics applications in the open world, such as in autonomous and semi-

autonomous driving.
48
Similar progress has been made in the area of speech perception, which 
is now widely used in phone-based customer service systems and to input 

commands to mobile phones and other devices. Again, as recently as the 

turn of the 21st century, it was impossible to achieve speech recognition 

accuracies suf˜cient to support such applications (see Figures 2.7-2.8 for 

an illustration of historical progress in automated speech recognition). As 

in the case of computer vision, much of the recent progress in speech-to-

text systems has been due to the use of deep network machine learning 

algorithms. Microsoft reported in October 2016 they had reached a 5.9 

percent word recognition error rate, equal to humans on the switchboard 

transcription task.
49
Natural Language Processing
Natural language processing refers to computer-based analysis of nat
-ural language (language written and spoken by humans) in useful ways. 

Common applications include search engines, spam ˜lters that examine 

e-mail to determine whether it is spam, systems that automatically extract 
mentions of people, places, organizations, and events from news articles, 
47
  J. Liu, J. Luo, and M. Shah, 2009, ﬁRecognizing realistic actions from videos ‚in the 
wild,™ﬂ 
IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206744; R. 
Poppe, 2010, A survey on vision-based human action recognition, 
Image and Vision Comput
-ing
 28(6):976-990.
48
  E. Ohn-Bar and M.M. Trivedi, 2016, Are all objects equal? Deep spatio-temporal impor
-tance prediction in driving videos, 
Pattern Recognition
, in press, http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0031320316302424.
49  A. Linn, 2016, ﬁHistoric Achievement: Microsoft Researchers Reach 
 Human Parity in Con-versational Speech Recognition,ﬂ October 18, https://blogs.microsoft.com/next/2016/10/18/
historic-achievement-microsoft-researchers-reach-
 human-parity-conversational-speech-
    recognition/#sm.000vjpv5z169ewp105s11ee1nrzuq.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
FIGURE 2.8
 Recognition word error rate versus the amount of training hours, 
demonstrating the sensitivity of competency of speech recognition to increas
-ing amounts of data. SOURCE: X. Huang, J. Baker, and R. Reddy, 2014, A his
-torical perspective of speech recognition, 
Communications of the ACM
 57(1):94-103, 
doi:10.1145/2500887. © Association of Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted with 
permission.
FIGURE 2.7
 Historical progress on reducing the word error rate in speech recog
-nition systems for different kinds of speech recognition tasks. Recent competency 
for the ﬁdif˜cult switchboardﬂ task (human conversation in the wild) is marked 

with the green dot. SOURCE: X. Huang, J. Baker, and R. Reddy, 2014, A histori
-cal perspective of speech recognition, 
Communications of the ACM
 57(1):94-103, 
doi:10.1145/2500887. © 2014, Association of Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted 

with permission.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 47systems for automatic translation of text from one language to another, 
and question-answering systems that respond to questions posed in natu
-
ral language. Recent years have seen strong progress in the ability to 

extract structured factual information from unstructured text, although 

computer methods that understand the full meaning of text are far from 

realized. Here again, progress has been driven largely by machine learn
-ing applied to large text data sets. Due to intense competition in the area 

of search engines and related problems, corporate investments in research 

and development are large in this area, suggesting rapid progress in the 

future. As this technology improves, research assistants and paralegals 

may rely increasingly on support from computers.
One widely regarded example of intelligent text processing is the IBM 
Watson family of applications, whose methods were originally designed 

to participate in Jeopardy!. Watson systems operate by interpreting natural 

language questions, then performing inference on a huge collection of text 

and other types of data to identify candidate answers and rank them to 

produce a ˜nal answer. This technology has many other potential uses, 

and IBM is now applying it to medical applications using large collections 

of medical text. Given that the rate of publication of new medical results 

outpaces the ability of doctors to read journal articles, decision support 

systems such as Watson have potentially game-changing consequences 

for augmenting human capabilities in ˜elds that require knowledge-based 

decision-making.
Complementary Computing
While computers have remarkable speed and processing capabilities, 
humans still outperform computers in certain tasks and contexts. New 

models of human engagement have focused on how best to leverage the 

strengths of humans and computers for optimal completion of a given 

task. Such thinking is apparent in emerging modalities of work, includ
-ing distributed or crowdsourced labor. Methods for supporting and opti
-mizing complementary engagements of people and machines enable a 

mix of computer and machine initiatives or contributions for addressing 

tasks and solving problems. Such work includes developing context- and 

 problem-speci˜c models of machine and human competencies, 
 methods for 
recognizing the state of a solution and the efforts of machines and people, 
and means for coordinating the contributions of people and machines.
50
Recent research efforts in this area have focused on applying machine 
learning methods to enable systems to learn how to best combine the 
50
  E. Horvitz, 2007, ﬁRe˚ections on Challenges and Promises of Mixed-Initiative Interac
-tion,ﬂ 
AAAI Magazine
 28, Special Issue on Mixed-Initiative Assistants.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
intellect and physical abilities of people and machines.
51,52
 While these 
approaches are still largely deployed in research prototypes, they illustrate 
a model where systems leverage the complementary skills of people and 

machines to complete cognitive and physical tasks. This suggests that new 

types of work may arise with roles that rely on uniquely human skills.
Complementary computing and mixed-initiative solutions also extend 
to collaborations between robotic systems and people in the physical 

world. For example, efforts have been under way to develop collaborative 

robotic systems in surgery to allow robotic surgical systems to work hand 

in hand with human surgeons. Promising prototypes and research to date 

have considered technologies to recognize and understand the actions 

and intentions of human surgeons and coordinate activities between 

robotic and human surgeons.
53,54,55
Directions in research and development on complementary comput
-ing systems show how the talents of machine competencies can be joined 

with the intellect and physical prowess of people and highlight the likeli
-hood that technical advances will bring to the fore new roles and types of 

work for people in joint human-machine problem solvingŠwhere people 

bring critical, uniquely human contributions into the mix of initiatives. 

However, the types and nature of contributions and new potential roles 

for rewarding work for people remain unclear.
Human-Centered Automation
Many automated tasks require machines to interface with humans. 
For example, some online retailers have highly automated warehouses 

that use robots to bring items for a retail order from their storage shelves 
51
  E. Kamar, S. Hacker, and E. Horvitz, 2007, ﬁCombining Human and Machine Intelligence 
in Large-scale Crowdsourcing,ﬂ International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi
-agent Systems, June 4-8, 2012, Valencia, Spain; E. Horvitz and T. Paek, 2007, Complementary 
computing: Policies for transferring callers from dialog systems to human receptionists, 
User 

Modeling and User Adapted Interaction 
17(1):159-182, doi: 10.1007/s11257-006-9026-1.
52
  D. Shahaf and E. Horvitz, 2010, ﬁGeneralized Task Markets for Human and 
 Machine 
Computation,ﬂ Association for the Advancement of Arti˜cial Intelligence, http://

research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/horvitz/generalized_task_markets_Shahaf_

Horvitz_2010.pdf.
53
  C.E. Reiley, H.C. Lin, B. Varadarajan, B. Vagvolgyi, S. Khudanpur, D.D. Yuh, and G.D. 
Hager, 2008, Automatic recognition of surgical motions using statistical modeling for captur
-ing variability, 
Studies in Health Technology and Informatics
 132: 396-401.
54
  A. Shademan, R.S. Decker, J.D. Opfermann, S. Leonard, A. Krieger, and P.C.W. Kim, 
2016, Supervised autonomous robotic soft tissue surgery, 
Science Translational Medicine
 8(337):337ra64, doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad9398.
55  N. Padoy and G.D. Hager, 2011, ﬁHuman-Machine Collaborative Surgery Using 
Learned Models,ﬂ in
 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
 (ICRA)
, doi:10.1109/ICRA.2011.5980250.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 49to a human worker, who then packs and loads them onto a truck. This 
interface between machine and human workers requires, for example, that 

the rate of goods provided by the robot to the human matches the vary
-ing rate at which humans can process the workload, and that the robot 

provide a ﬁfailsoftﬂ
56
 mechanism for the human to take control in the 
event that it makes an error. In recent years, advances have been made in 

designing systems that couple humans with automation: techniques have 

been developed to enhance situational awareness and to build predictive 

models of human behavior in different contexts.
57,58
 Nevertheless, signi˜
-cant work remains to be done in the development of core scienti˜c and 

engineering principles for designing such human-in-the-loop systems.
FUTURE TECHNOLOGY TRENDS
Overall, the committee expects the rapid pace of IT advances to con
-tinue or accelerate due to (1) continuing advances in AI algorithms and 

in underlying computational hardware that allows continuing scale-up at 

reduced cost; (2) continuing growth in the diversity and volume of online 

data, which, coupled with machine-learning software, is driving many 

AI advances; and (3) increasing investments by industry in research and 

development in AI and other parts of IT. Although it is impossible to pre
-dict future capabilities perfectly, certain ongoing technology trends make 

the following workforce-relevant developments likely over the coming 

decade.
 Mobile robots
. Over the next decade, it is anticipated that self-driving 
vehicles, which have been demonstrated and are already in limited com
-mercial use (e.g., the Tesla self-driving mode), will mature and become 

more widespread, with possibly signi˜cant impacts, such as decreased 

demand for drivers, on employment in the transportation sector. Analo
-gous developments in and deployment of self-˚ying aerial vehicles is 

anticipated, if government regulations allow.
 Assembly-line automation
. Further technical progress in automat
-ing assembly lines is expected, including diffusion into lower-volume 

manufacturing as ˚exibility and reprogrammability improve. Progress 
56
  A ﬁfailsoftﬂ is a mode that a particular piece of software enters in the event of disrup
-tion that enables retention of some (though generally degraded) level of service, to avoid 
otherwise substantive failure.
57
  M.R. Endsley, 2000, ﬁTheoretical underpinnings of situation awareness: A critical re
-view,ﬂ pp. 3-28 in 
Situation Awareness Analysis and Measurement
 (M. R. Endsley and D.J. 
Garland, eds.), LEA, Mahwah.
58
  T.G. Dietterich and E.J. Horvitz, 2015, Rise of concerns about AI: Re˚ections and direc
-tions, 
Communications of the ACM 
58(10):38-40, doi:10.1145/2770869.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
in 
 robotics toward manipulation of soft and inconsistent materials could 
lead to increased automation in the manufacture of apparel, leather goods, 
and commodity furniture, which could devalue the labor endowments of 

some of the poorer countries in the world and potentially lead to some 

(minimal) reshoring of these industries. Beyond robotic automation, 3D 

printing (also known as additive manufacturing) is also likely to progress 

and impact specialized, low-volume manufacturing. Automated assem
-bly, coupled with automated transportation systems, is expected to have 

serious impacts on manufacturing (partly reshoring), but also the full sup
-
ply chain, from mine to customer. This could result in decreased demand 

for workers and the shifting of work tasks in this sector.
 Computer perception of speech, video, and other sensory data
. It is likely 
that computer competence in perceptual tasks, including speech recog
-nition, computer vision, and interpretation of nonspeech sounds, will 

advance, potentially leading to signi˜cantly improved abilities in several 

areas, such as listening and image processing. This could augment or 

replace human functions for a wide range of jobs, such as security guard 

and policing jobs. It could also lead to a generation of new products, such 

as intelligent light bulbs that ﬁseeﬂ and ﬁhearﬂ what is occurring in their 

˜eld of view and use this capability to offer assistance.
 Automatic translation between languages by computers. Automatic 
translation is already in use, although it is imperfect (e.g., Skype now 

offers an automatic translation service for its calls). This technology might 

advance over the coming decade to the point of providing widespread, 

high-reliability, real-time translating telephones.
 Text reading by computers
. The ability of computers to interpret and 
extract information from unstructured text documents (e.g., extracting 

mentions of speci˜c people, companies, and events) has advanced sig
-ni˜cantly over the past decade, but computer reading skills still fall far 

short of human competence. This gap is likely to narrow over the coming 

decade, with potentially signi˜cant impacts on automating knowledge-

worker jobs such as paralegal researchers and news reporters.
 Work ˚ow automation
. Businesses, governments, and other organiza
-tions are increasingly using computers for conducting routine business, 

leading to a great deal of online data to train systems to automate or 

semi-automate routine work ˚ows. New companies such as Claralabs 

and x.ai now offer an online meeting scheduling serviceŠa service that 

might initially be performed by remote humans, and that might become 

increasingly automated by applying machine learning to the large quanti
-
ties of scheduling training data they acquire over time. Semi-automation 

of routine work ˚ow may reduce the need for clerical staff, even if it does 

not automate these jobs fully. Systems such as those developed within 

IBM™s Watson suite have started to generate decision support in the medi
-Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 51cal ˜eld. This practice is likely to be expanded to a large number of related 
˜elds, such as intelligence gathering, equipment maintenance, and busi
-ness decision support systems.
These areas are likely to advance signi˜cantly in the coming years at 
a level that will impact the workforce.
Additional advances are also possible that, while less likely, would 
have major impacts on the workforce. For example, if advances are made 

in technology for privacy-preserving machine
 learning methods, which 

would use data while guaranteeing preservation of individual privacy, 

this would dramatically increase the variety of data mining and machine 

learning applications that reach the marketŠfor example, medical appli
-cations that are currently avoided because of privacy concerns. If it 

becomes possible for computers to learn how to accomplish tasks through 

instruction from their users, this could have a truly dramatic effect: it 

would change the number of effective computer programmers from its 

current short supply to billions of people, enabling each worker to cus
-tom instruct their system on how to best assist them. If technology for 

text analysis reaches the point of human-level reading by com
 puters, the 
impact would also be dramatic, as computers can scale to read the entire 
Web and would be better read than any person, by a factor of millions.
The committee also notes the possibility of unanticipated, disrup
-tive changes in the technology landscapeŠthat is, rapid, broad, or deep 

changes with signi˜cant impact on society. First, a major and unantici
-pated scienti˜c or engineering breakthrough could accelerate the creation 

or deployment of a new technology, with concomitant disruptions to the 

workforce, either positive or negative. Of primary concern are disrup
-tions that lead to the displacement or unsettling of workers, industries, 

or economies that are unprepared to adapt. Examples might include 

an unexpected breakthrough in AI algorithms that enable the straight
-forward automation of a type of knowledge work. History provides 

examples of disruptive inventions, such as the horseless carriage, where 

the need for physical production resulted in a slow diffusion into society. 

While today™s software innovations can be spread worldwide rapidly by 

downloading them onto mobile devices, the development, testing, and 

integration of usable software from fundamental algorithmic advances 

takes time, as does the integration of new software into businesses. The 

nature of the corresponding disruption to the workforce would be not 

only a product of the new technological capability, but also determined 

by how those in power choose to make use of it, driven largely, by market 

factors. Second, it is also possible that an existing and ubiquitous technol
-ogy could undergo a catastrophic failure or collapseŠfor example, due to 

emergence of a ˚aw, collapse of infrastructure as a result of man-made or 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
natural disaster, depletion of the physical resources required to build or 
run a given technology or product, the sudden imposition of regulatory 

controls or limitations, or the sudden and widespread loss of trust in a 

given technology. Such regressive disruptions could remove the affor
-dances of a given technology from the workplace, requiring workers and 

businesses to get by without the tools to which they are accustomed or 

necessitating that human workers perform previously automated tasks 

that they may not have been trained to carry out. Other examples include 

large-scale disruption to the power grid, depletion of critical materials 

required for building microchips or other components, or loss of con˜
-dence due to a hacking takedown or other security incident with a pivotal 

software or service.
SUMMARY
Information technology will continue to transform the way we work 
as well as other aspects of our lives. To summarize,
 The impact of IT is pervasive and has already touched nearly all 
aspects of our personal and work lives. It has already eliminated and cre
-ated jobs, but more frequently it has transformed jobs and the way they 

are performed. IT has transformed business practices as companies have 

moved routine operations online, where they can be better tracked and 

partly automated (e.g., supply chain management or customer relation
-ship management). Similarly, it has transformed our personal lives as we 

have moved our calendars, mail, photographs, and shopping online, again 

opening up the feasibility of computer support for these core aspects of 

our lives, including a signi˜cant fraction of our social lives. It is beginning 
to change the nature of education, as video courses become increasingly 

available over the Internet, and is changing the nature of freelance work, 

as peer-to-peer networking allows just-in-time matching of customers to 

resource providers.
 Much of the impact of IT has been driven by 
hardware
 advances, 
especially the spread and use of the Internet and inexpensive comput
-ing power. Networking has moved from hard-wired to wireless at that 

same time that the Internet has spread worldwide. The Internet of Things 

refers to a recent trend in which many physical devices with sensors are 

increasingly communicating via the Internet, suggesting that we are mov
-
ing toward a world in which the Internet serves as a worldwide commu
-nications network to connect a diverse array of people, institutions, and 

physical artifacts from buildings to vehicles. This underlying communica
-
tions network of computing and sensing devices provides the substrate 

for rapid deployment of new technology. The sensors used in driverless 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE TECHNOLOGICAL LANDSCAPE
 53cars were impractically expensive a decade ago, yet today they are found 
in some video game consoles. Mobile phones have hastened rapid cost 

reductions in GPS chips, high-resolution compact cameras, motion sen
-sors, and touch-sensitive and ˜ngerprint-sensing hardware.
 The impact of IT is also largely driven by new 
software
 advances, 
especially in AI and machine learning. These software advances have 

provided reliable speech-recognition systems that are now used routinely 

on smartphones, image recognition systems capable of recognizing single 

individuals in photographs, and the ˜rst commercial self-driving cars. 

Machine learning algorithms are now mining the exploding volume of 

online data to capture regularities that enable them to automate or semi-

automate many knowledge-intensive decisions, from deciding which 

credit card transactions to approve to deciding which X-ray images con
-tain evidence of tumors. As increasing volumes of data and decisions 

come online, the potential applications of this technology will grow as 

well. These software advances are enabled and ampli˜ed by the hardware 

advances discussed in the previous paragraph.
 The impact of technology on the workforce follows from both 
the 
invention
 of new technologies and the 
diffusion
 and maturation of 
existing technologies. For example, although the Internet was invented 

and deployed decades ago, its impact continues to grow as it diffuses 

geographically around the globe and as its technology matures (e.g., 

augmenting early hard-wired Internet connections with wireless Internet 

connections). In seeking to anticipate future technology trends and their 

impact on the workforce, it is helpful to consider the likely diffusion and 

maturation of technologies that already exist in nascent form in research 

laboratories and forward-leaning companies (e.g., self-driving vehicles, 

which currently represent only a tiny fraction of vehicles on the road, 

are likely to diffuse and mature enough to have a signi˜cant impact on 

employment in the transportation sector).
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Effects of Information Technology on 
Productivity, Employment, and Incomes
INTRODUCTION
In the next two chapters, the committee turns its focus to the inter
-actions between technology and the economy. An overarching theme 
emerges: economic and societal changes occasioned by technological 

developments are shaped, not just by the availability of new technologies 

and their features, but also by ideologies, power structures, and human 

aspirations and agendas. Technologies are not exogenous forces that roll 

over societies like tsunamis with predetermined results. Rather, our skills, 

organizations, institutions, and values shape how we develop technolo
-gies and how we deploy them once created, along with their ˜nal impact.
11  For the impact of available skills and markets on the direction of technological changes, 
see D. Acemoglu, 1998, Why do new technologies complement skills? Directed technical 
change and wage inequality, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics
 113(4):1055-1090; D. Acemoglu 
and P. Restrepo, 2016, ﬁThe Race Between Machine and Man: Implications of Technology 

for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment,ﬂ No. w22252, National Bureau of Economic 

Research, Cambridge, Mass.; E. Brynjolfsson and A. McAfee, 2014, 
The Second Machine Age: 
Work Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies
, W.W. Norton, New York.
For the importance of complementarities in organizations, see E. Brynjolfsson and P. 
Milgrom, 2013, ﬁComplementarity in organizationsﬂ in
 The Handbook for Organization Eco
-nomics
 (R. Gibbons and J. Roberts, eds.), Princeton University Press. On how scarcity might 
spur innovation, see E. Boserup, 1981, 
Population and Technological Change: A Study of Long-

Term Trends
, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill. For the impact of workplace organiza
-
tions on technology, see E. Brynjolfsson and L. Hitt, 2000, Beyond computation: Information 

technology, organizational transformation and business performance,
 Journal of Economic 
Perspectives
 14(4):23-48, and L. Hitt, S. Yang, and E. Brynjolfsson, 2002, Intangible assets: 
54
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 55In this chapter, the committee considers the current state of (1) pro
-ductivity growth, (2) employment, and (3) income distribution. In each 
case, the role of technology is considered, recent changes are summa
-rized, and some potential future developments are considered, building 

on the discussion in Chapter 2 of current and possible future trends in 

underlying technologies. The committee is keenly aware that making 

forecasts about social phenomena is perilous. Doing so with respect to the 

fast-changing and dynamic area of technology is even more challenging. 

Nevertheless, interpreting societal and economic responses to develop
-ments in technology can at least provide a framework for thinking about 

the future.
TECHNOLOGY AND PRODUCTIVITY
In his seminal research on economic growth, Robert Solow found 
that most of the increases in human living standards have come not from 

working more hours, and not from using more capital or other resources, 

but from improved productivityŠthat is, increases in the ef˜ciency of 

production as de˜ned by the ratio of output to input. In turn, productiv
-ity growth comes from new technologies and new techniques of produc
-tion and distribution.
2 In the mid-1990s, the rate of productivity growth 
increased signi˜cantly in the United States, led by the IT-producing sec
-tors as well as IT-using sectors, a change attributed in part to improve
-ments in the nature and use of IT.
3 However, in the past 10 years, U.S. 
aggregate productivity growth has slowed, according to of˜cial statistics 

from U.S. government agencies. The slowdown preceded the 2008 Great 

Recession, suggesting that the recession is not the only explanation for 
Computers and organizational capital, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
 1:137-199. On 
the in˚uence of vested interests on blocking of technology, see J. Mokyr, 1990, 
The Levers of 
Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress
, Oxford University Press, Oxford, U.K. 
For the in˚uence on macro institutions on technology, see D. Acemoglu and J.A Robinson, 

2012,
 Why Nations Fail: Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty
, Crown Publishing Group, 
Chicago, Ill
.2  R.M. Solow, 1959, A contribution to the theory of economic growth, 
Quarterly Journal of 
Economics
 70(1):65-94, doi: 10.2307/1884513.
3  See D.W. Jorgenson, M.S. Ho, and K.J. Stiroh, 2002, Projecting productivity growth: Les
-sons from the U.S. growth resurgence, 
Economic Review
 Q3:1-13; S.D. Oliner, D.E. Sichel, and 
K.J. Stiroh, 2007, ﬁExplaining a Productive Decade,ﬂ Federal Reserve Board,
 https://www.
federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2007/200763/200763pap.pdf; E. Brynjolfsson and L. Hitt, 

1995, Computers as a factor of production: The role of differences among ˜rms, 
Economics 

of Innovation and New Technology
 3:183-199; and L. Hitt, S. Yang, and E. Brynjolfsson, 2002, 
Intangible assets: Computers and organizational capital, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activ
-ity
 1:137-199; K.J. Stiroh, 2002, ﬁReassessing the Impact of IT in the Production Function: A 
Meta-Analysis,ﬂ Federal Reserve Bank of New York, http://www.nber.org/criw/papers/

stiroh.pdf.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
this trend, and has been largely accounted for by slowdowns in the IT-
producing and IT-using sectors.
4In some ways, this slowdown in productivity growth is counter to the 
narrative of increasing advances and adoption of IT. The remainder of this 

section discusses open issues and questions as well as possible pathways 

for resolving them.
One hypothesis is that there is an increasing measurement problem in 
the of˜cial statistics on productivity. This has been a longstanding research 

challenge, recognized at least since Solow
5 and Griliches.6 Griliches noted 
that the economy has been shifting increasingly to sectors where output 

and output quality are dif˜cult to measure, such as government, health, 

and ˜nance. Unlike counting bushels of wheat or tons of steel, outputs 

for medical treatment or bank loans are less standardized.
7 Measurement 
is also very challenging in sectors with rapid technological changes, such 

as the computer and software industries themselves. Output and produc
-tivity measurement require measuring output and input price de˚ators 

that re˚ect changes in quality, which is an enormous challenge. How does 

one compare a smartphone today with a mainframe from 20 years ago, let 

alone new apps that have no predecessors? Great progress was made in 

the 1990s and 2000s on improving price de˚ators for the hardware parts 

of IT,
8 but the software side has been more challenging. Recent evidence 
suggests that adoption of cloud computing and other changes are even 

making it more dif˜cult to assess quality changes for hardware.
9A related, but more fundamental, issue is that productivity is neither 
a measure of technological progress nor welfare. Productivity is based on 

gross domestic product (GDP), which is in turn a measure of production 

or output. However, technological progress can increase welfare without 

increasing output. For instance, if Wikipedia replaces a paper encyclope
-dia or a free GPS mapping app replaces a stand-alone GPS device, then 

consumers can be better off even if output is stagnant or declining.
10
 4  J.G. Fernald, 2014, Productivity and potential output before, during, and after the Great 
Recession, 
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, 
Volume 29, doi: 10.3386/w20248. 
5  R.M. Solow, 1987, ﬁWe™d Better Watch Out,ﬂ 
New York Times
 book review, July 12, p. 36.
6  Z. Griliches, 1994, Productivity, R&D, and the data constraint, 
American Economic Review 
84(1):1-23. 
7  Ibid. 
8  See Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2000, ﬁNational Income and Wealth Division, Invest
-ment Branchﬂ and ﬁComputer Prices in the National Accounts,ﬂ April. 
9  D.M. Byrne, S.D. Oliner, and D.E. Sichel, 2015, ﬁHow Fast are Semiconductor Prices 
Falling?,ﬂ NBER Working Papers 21074, National Bureau of Economic Research, April, doi: 
10.3386/w21074.
10
  E. Brynjolfsson, A. McAfee, and M. Spence, 2014,ﬂNew World Order: Labor, Capital, 
and Ideas in the Power Law Economy,ﬂ 
Foreign Affairs
, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/
articles/united-states/2014-06-04/new-world-order; E. Brynjolfsson and J.H. Oh, 2012, ﬁThe 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 57Under this view, gains would show up in broader measures of economic 
well-being but not in GDP (and in turn not in of˜cial productivity sta
-tistics). While these measurement issues remain an active area of study, 

the most recent research suggests that at most only a small fraction of the 

productivity slowdown can be attributed to measurement problems.
11Another hypothesis is that the reported slowdown in productivity 
growth in the IT-producing and IT-using sectors is temporary. Brynjolfsson 

and Hitt found evidence that the productivity bene˜ts of large enterprise 

systems took up to 7 years to be fully realized, as signi˜cant organiza
-tional and process changes were typically required to make full use of 

accompanying software and hardware investments.
12
 The diffusion and 
adoption of technologies is time- and resource-intensive and requires 

much experimentation, with failures and variable time lags along the 

way. Building on work by Paul David, Syverson discussed the slowdown 

in productivity growth in the historical context of electri˜cation of the 

production process at the end of the 19th century.
13
 He argues that the 
impact of electri˜cation on productivity came in two distinct waves. 

The ˜rst wave arrived quickly and re˚ected the adoption of electri˜ca
-tion within the existing organization of production. The second wave, 

delayed by a few decades, re˚ected new ways of organizing production 

around this new technology. Achieving the full productivity bene˜ts and 

impacts of new technology can take decades and may require comple
-mentary ﬁco-inventionsﬂ of new business practices, infrastructure, and 

so on, which can dramatically in˚uence the size and distribution of gains 

from technology and the nature of its societal effects. Similarly, while the 

˜rst power looms allowed weavers to produce 2.5 times as much cloth 

per hour, further improvements in the following 80 years in knowledge 

and skills increased output per hour 80-fold.
14
 For IT, the value of intan
-Attention Economy: Measuring the Value of Free Digital Services on the Internet,ﬂ in 
Proceed
-ings of the International Conference on Information Systems
, December.
11  D.M. Byrne, J.G. Fernald, and M.B. Reinsdorf, 2016, Does the United States have a 
productivity slowdown or a measurement problem?, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activit
y (forthcoming); C. Syverson, 2016, ﬁChallenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the U.S. 
Productivity Slowdown,ﬂ mimeo.
12
  See E. Brynjolfsson and L.M. Hitt, 2003, Computing productivity: Firm-level evidence, 
Review of Economics and Statistics
 85.4: 93-808. See also T.F. Bresnahan, E. Brynjolfsson, and 
L. Hitt, 2002, IT, workplace organization and the demand for skilled labor: A ˜rm-level 

analysis, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics
 117(1): 339-376, doi: 10.1162/003355302753399526. 
13
  C. Syverson, 2013, ﬁWill history repeat itself? Comments on ‚Is the Information Tech
-nology Revolution Over?™ 
International Productivity Monitor
 25:20-36. See also P.A. David, 
1990, The dynamo and the computer: An historical perspective on the modern productivity 

paradox, 
American Economic Review
 80(2):355-61.
14
  J. Bessen, 2015, 
Learning By Doing: The Real Connection Between Innovation, Wages and 
Wealth
, Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
gible complements of computer hardware, including changes in business 
processes and human capital, can have a value 10 times greater than the 

direct costs of computer hardware, but they also are costly and time-

consuming to invent and implement.
15
In a related manner, there is evidence that adopting new technologies 
requires organizational changes and restructuring of business practices 

that take time.
16
 For instance, it is easy to imagine signi˜cant bene˜ts, 
eventually, from the widespread digitization of patient data, yet many 

physicians complain that the adoption process for electronic medical 

records is slow and cumbersome, with current costs exceeding current 

bene˜ts. 
This perspective may help reconcile the observation of the appar
-ently rapid changes in technology outlined in Chapter 2 with the current 

sluggish growth in productivity. Yet there are more pessimistic views 

about the prospects for productivity and economic growth. Some have 

suggested that recent (post-2000) innovations in information and other 

advanced technology simply do not have the same high payoff as inno
-vations in earlier periods. The argument is that earlier innovations were 

in the form of general purpose technologies that had wide application 

to many industries.
17
 Alternatively, some have argued that we are in a 
period of secular stagnation due to weak aggregate demand.
18
 The sug
-gestion is that persistently weak aggregate demand is acting as an overall 

drag on economic growth.
Firm-level evidence for the United States and the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development shows a widening gap between 

the most and least productive ˜rms within industries in the post-2000 

period.
19
 Such widening productivity dispersion may re˚ect increased 
15  E. Brynjolfsson and L.M. Hitt, 2000, Beyond computation: Information technology, 
organizational transformation and business performance, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 
14(4):23-48; E. Brynjolfsson and L.M. Hitt, 2003, Computing productivity: Firm-level evi
-dence, 
Review of Economics and Statistics
 85(4):793-808.
16
  L. Hitt, S. Yang, and E. Brynjolfsson, 2002, Intangible assets: Computers and organiza
-tional capital, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
 1:137-199.
17
  R. Gordon, 2016, 
The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living Since 
the Civil War
, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
18
  L. Summers, 2016, ﬁThe Age of Secular Stagnation,ﬂ 
Foreign Affairs
, https://www.for
-eignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2016-02-15/age-secular-stagnation.
19  D. Andrews, C. Crisculo, and P.N. Gal, 2016, ﬁThe global productivity slowdown, 
technology divergence, and public policy: A ˜rm level perspective,ﬂ Brookings, https://
www.brookings.edu/research/the-global-productivity-slowdown-technology-divergence/, 

and R.A. Decker, J. Haltiwanger, R.S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda, 2016, ﬁDeclining Business 

Dynamism: Implications for Productivity?,ﬂ Hutchins Center Working Papers presented at 

Brookings Conference on Slow Growth in Productivity: Causes, Consequences, and Policies, 

September 2016.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 59frictions or distortions in the economy (e.g., dampened competition) slow-ing down the diffusion process or the pace of business dynamism that 

is critical for moving resources to the more productive ˜rms. The latter 

has been shown to be an important part of the process of productivity 

growth, and is discussed further in Chapter 4. From this perspective, the 

hypothesis is that while the changes in technology outlined in Chapter 2 

are indeed occurring, they are slow to show up in economic growth due 

to slowing diffusion or business dynamism.
All of these hypotheses are active areas of research. The discussion 
of future research directions in Chapter 6 emphasizes the signi˜cance 

of exploring such critically important questions. It is useful to note that 

future productivity growth cannot be predicted simply by extrapolating 

past trends because there is little serial correlation in growth rates from 

one decade to the next. Instead, future trends will depend on the inven
-tion and deployment of new and improved technologies and on the co-

inventions by the workforce, organizations, and institutions needed to 

effectively use them.
TECHNOLOGY AND EMPLOYMENT
Employment in Recent Years
In the past few years, U.S. employment growth has been fairly robust, 
with accompanying drops in unemployment. For instance, by early 2016, 

the unemployment rate fell below 5 percent. However, much of this 

employment growth can be interpreted as a recovery from the Great 

Recession, which has been slow despite the fact that it of˜cially ended in 

2009. Furthermore, jobs lost in the recession are very different from those 

that appeared during the recovery.
20
 While many opportunities continue 
to be created in ˜elds that do not require a bachelor™s degree, the fastest-

growing occupational categories all require a bachelor™s degree or better, 

and occupations that require a bachelor™s degree are growing at twice the 

rate of those that do not.
21,22
There have also been substantial shifts in employment in various 
occupational categories. For instance, the employment rate in clerical and 
20
  A.P. Carnevale, T. Jayasundera, and A. Gulish, 2015, ﬁGood Jobs Are Back: College 
Graduates Are First in Line,ﬂ Georgetown University: Center on Education and the Work
-force, https://cew.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/Good-Jobs_Full_Final.pdf.
21
  Ibid. 
22
  A.P. Carnevale, N. Smith, and J. Strohl, 2010, ﬁHelp Wanted, Projections of Jobs and 
Education Requirements Through 2018,ﬂ Georgetown University: Center on Education and 
the Workforce, https://cew.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/HelpWanted.

ExecutiveSummary.pdf.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
sales jobs has fallen sharply, while employment in professional jobs has 
grown, as shown in Figure 3.1.
23
Despite the low unemployment rate, the overall U.S. employment rate 
(the employment-to-population ratio) remains near a 20-year low. The 

overall U.S. employment rate exhibited an upward trend through 2000, 

mostly driven by an increased participation of women in the workforce. 

It began to decline in the post-2000 period, with a sharp drop during the 

2008 Great Recession, from which it has recovered slightly. Some of this 

trend can be accounted for by the aging of the population. However, 

declines in the employment rate are especially large for young and less 

educated individuals. Employment rates of prime age (25-54 year-old) 

males are still low (84 percent in 2014, near the 50-year low of 81 percent 

in 2010, as compared to a high of 95 percent in 1967, according to the 
23  P. Restrepo, 2015, ﬁSkill Mismatch and Structural Unemployment,ﬂ Massachusetts Insti
-tute of Technology, http://pascual.scripts.mit.edu/research/01/PR_jmp.pdf.
FIGURE 3.1 U.S. employment rates for different occupational categories. SOURCE: 
P. Restrepo, 2015, ﬁSkill Mismatch and Structural Unemployment,ﬂ Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology,
 http://pascual.scripts.mit.edu/research/01/PR_jmp.pdf. 
Courtesy of Pascual Restrepo.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 61annual averages from the Bureau of Labor Statistics).
24
 This highlights 
that the overall decline cannot be accounted for simply by the aging of the U.S. population.
25,26
 While both globalization and technology are seen as 
important factors, many economists view automation as the single most 

important factor. For instance, Larry Katz, an expert on labor studies and 

editor of the 
Quarterly Journal of Economics
 has said, ﬁOver the long haul, 
clearly automation™s been much more importantŠit™s not even close.ﬂ
27
Among young and less educated workers, the declines have also been 
especially sharp for certain race/ethnicity groups (especially non-Hispanic 

blacks). In addition, almost a third of all the unemployed in 2014 were clas
-si˜ed as ﬁlong term unemployedﬂ (i.e., out of the job market for more than 

27 weeks), and many eventually become ﬁdiscouraged workers,ﬂ people 

that drop out of the market for employment entirely.
28
 Such patterns are of 
particular concern in the context of this report, since it is these most vul
-nerable groups that may be left behind by ongoing changes in technology.
Future Prospects for Technology and Employment
Predictions that new technologies will make workers largely or almost 
entirely redundant are as old as technological change itself. Although the 

story might be apocryphal, the famous Roman historian Pliny the Elder 

recounts how the Roman Emperor Tiberius killed an inventor who had 

supposedly invented unbreakable glass for fear of what this would do 

to the glassmaking trade. Queen Elizabeth I similarly refused to grant 

 William Lee a patent for his mechanical knitting machine, arguing, ﬁCon
-sider thou what the invention could do to my poor subjects.ﬂ
29
It is not only emperors and queens who have feared the implications of 
new technologies for employment. More famously, British textile 
 workers 
24
  Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, ﬁEmployment Rate: Aged 
25-54: Males for the United States,ﬂ retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/LREM25MAUSA156S, March 15, 2017.
25  S.J. Davis and J. Haltiwanger, 2014, ﬁLabor Market Fluidity and Economic Perfor
-mance,ﬂ University of Chicago and NBER, and University of Maryland and NBER, http://

faculty.chicagobooth.edu/steven.davis/pdf/LaborFluidityandEconomicPerformance26No
-
vember2014.pdf.
26
  S.A. Donovan, ﬁ2015, An Overview of the Employment-Population Ratio,ﬂ Congres
-sional Research Service, May 27, https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R44055.pdf.
27
  As quoted in Claire Cain Miller, ﬁThe Long Term Job-Killer Is Not China: It™s Automa
-tion,ﬂ 
The New York Times
, December 21, 2016, https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/21/
upshot/the-long-term-jobs-killer-is-not-china-its-automation.html.
28  K. Kosanovich and E. Theodossiou Sherman, 2015, ﬁTrends In Long-term Unemployment,ﬂ 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/key_workplace/1399/.
29
  M. Finley, 1973,
 The Ancient Economy
, University of California Press, Berkeley, Calif.; D. 
Acemoglu and J. Robinson, 2011, 
Why Nations Fail
, Crown, New York.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
in the early 19th century, known as Luddites, fearing that the new auto
-mation coming with power looms, stocking frames, and spinning frames 
were threatening to replace their expert positions with low-wage laborers, 

destroyed machines and burned the house of John Kay, the inventor of the 

ﬁ˚ying shuttle.ﬂ
 In an attempt to halt destructive acts, the British Parlia
-ment enacted a law making ﬁmachine breakingﬂ a capital offense.
30
More recently, the economist John Maynard Keynes predicted that 
the introduction of new technologies would create considerable wealth 

but would also generate widespread technological unemployment as 

machines replaced humans. In 1930, he predicted that the work week 

would fall to 15 hours and that the ﬁeconomic problemﬂ of providing 

for basic needs would be solved.
31
 Economic historian Robert Heilbro
-ner similarly predicted in 1965: ﬁAs machines continue to invade soci
-ety, duplicating greater and greater numbers of social tasks, it is human 

labor itselfŠat least, as we now think of `labor™Šthat is gradually ren
-dered redundant.ﬂ
32 Nobel Prize winner Wassily Leontief saw an analogy 
between human labor and horses of the early 20th century, and in 1952 

predicted that humans will follow horses in becoming redundant: ﬁLabor 

will become less and less important. . . . More and more workers will be 

replaced by machines. I do not see that new industries can employ every
-body who wants a job.ﬂ
33,34
However, predictions of widespread, technologically induced unem
-ployment have not come to pass, at least so far.
35
 Technological changes 
over the last 200 years (and presumably many of those that came before) 

stimulated demand, created new markets, and fueled wage growth with 

few adverse consequences for aggregate employment. To be sure, tech
-nologies did and will continue to decimate particular occupations. As 

the Luddites feared, artisans lost their jobs in spinning and then weaving 

as new technologies automated tasks they had previously performed. 
30
  K.E. Lommerud, F. Meland, and O.R. Straume, Globalisation and union opposition to 
technological change, 
Journal of International Economics
 68(1):1-23, 2006.
31
  J.M. Keynes, 1933, ﬁEconomic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren (1930),ﬂ pp. 358-373 
in 
Essays in Persuasion
, W.W. Norton & Company, New York.
32
  R.L. Heilbroner, 1965, Men and machines in perspective, 
National Affairs
, Fall, pp. 27-36.
33  W. Leontief, 1952, Machines and man, 
Scienti˜c American 87(3):150-160. For a more recent 
perspective on this questions, see E. Brynjolfsson and A. McAfee, 2015, ﬁWill Humans Go 
the Way of Horses?,ﬂ 
Foreign Affairs
 (July/August), pp. 8-14.
34
  Acemoglu and Restropo, 2016, ﬁThe Race Between Machine and Man.ﬂ
35
  We do note, however, that the length of the workweek has dropped signi˜cantly since 
the 1800s, when a workweek of longer than 70 hours was not uncommon. For more dis
-cussion of this point, see Economic History Association, ﬁHours of Work in U.S. History,ﬂ 

EH.net, https://eh.net/encyclopedia/hours-of-work-in-u-s-history/, and R.J. Gordon, 2016, 

The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The US Standard of Living Since the Civil War
, Princeton 
University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 63Similarly, the replacement of horses by automobiles eliminated the need 
for blacksmiths. But as these jobs disappeared, new ones sprang up to 

operate, manage, and service the new technologies. For instance, in the 

late 1800s, the replacement of the stagecoach by the railroad went hand in 

hand with the creation of new work for managers, engineers, machinists, 

repairmen, and conductors. Simultaneously, there was a boom in a range 

of new service occupations, from teaching to entertainment to sales.
36
Nonetheless, simultaneous automation of a broader range of tasks 
could create unemployment or perhaps reduce aggregate levels of employ
-
ment for an extended period of time. As noted in the previous section, 

over the past 20 years, the share of people workingŠthe employment-

to-population ratioŠhas declined. While there are many factors at work, 

it is possible that technological substitution for certain types of labor is 

part of the explanation. As compensation falls for tasks that can increas
-ingly be done by machines, some people may choose to work less or not 

at all, ˜nding other alternatives, including increased leisure or family 

time, applying for disability bene˜ts, or investing in education, to become 

relatively more attractive. Over the longer term, there may be a continua
-tion of the long-term decline in the share of hours worked as society as a 

whole becomes wealthier and leisure becomes relatively more attractive.
What happens depends, in part, on whether new technologies auto
-mate and replace workers in existing tasks more rapidly than they create 

new demands for labor. Which will be the case is dif˜cult to answer, 

because it is easier to see how new technologies coming down the line 

will automate existing tasks than it is to imagine tasks that do not yet 

exist and how new technologies may stimulate greater consumer demand. 

Further, the future of employment is not only a question of the avail
-ability or necessity of tasks to be performed, but how they are organized, 

compensated, and more generally valued by society. These are matters of 

business strategy, social organization, and political choices and not simply 

driven by technologies themselves.
Consider self-driving cars. In principle, driving and delivery occupa
-tions could be automated with the use of such technologies over the next 

several decades. Visions of a future with fully automated vehicles have 

captured many people™s imagination. However, there are numerous social 

and cultural as well as technological roadblocks to such an outcome. 

These include such factors as consumer trust; the fact that there will be a 

long period of mixed-use road use, with both autonomous driving and 

manual driving cars sharing the roads; and the infrastructure require
-36
  Acemoglu and Restrepo also provide evidence that there is a large contribution of new 
occupations to employment growth in the last three decades: Acemoglu and Restrepo, 2016, 
ﬁThe Race Between Machine and Man.ﬂ 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
ments needed to expand usage and performance of self-driving cars. It 
is possible that ongoing development of these technologies, including 

infrastructure, will create more jobs than are lost in the wake of self-

driving vehicles, but it is likely that the skills required for such jobs will 

be quite different from those currently possessed by today™s truckers and 

taxi drivers. The new jobs are likely to rely more heavily on analytic, cog
-nitive, and technical skills. Indeed, even in the near term, as self-driving 

technologies are being developed, the occupation of trucking
37
 is likely to 
be transformed. For example, additional IT-based capabilities for driver 

simulation training can help improve the skill sets of more drivers than 

would be possible otherwise. In the longer term, increased automation 

will reduce the need for additional drivers and ultimately reduce over
-all demand for truck drivers. ﬁPlatooning,ﬂ where a single lead vehicle 

driven by a driver is followed by a string of other self-driving vehicles, 

is already emerging as a viable technology for highway driving and can 

affect employment numbers. As transportation costs drop due to partial 

automation, it is possible that lower per-unit costs will lead to increased 

demand (e.g., for more delivery services), resulting in a partially coun
-teracting force in the opposite direction toward increased demand for 

drivers. Self-driving cars also offer a good illustration of the variable and 

mixed impact of technology on employment, as well as the long and often 
uneven march of technology development, which complicates the ability 

to make accurate long-term projections.
In addition to eliminating some jobs while creating others, tech
-nological developments can create new occupations without reducing 

employment in older occupations. New medical imaging technologies are 

a case in point. Prior to the development of computer-controlled imag
-ing modalities such as ultrasound, computed tomography scanners, and 

magnetic resonance imaging, most technicians who worked in radiology 

departments operated standard X-ray machines and ˚uoroscopes. The 

jobs associated with these technologies were not signi˜cantly altered 

by the arrival of digital imaging. Instead, new technicians™ occupations 

arose: the sonographer, the computed tomography technologist, and the 

MRI technologist as well as the technicians™ occupations who service 

such machines. Thus, in the case of medical imaging, the overall number 
37
  Truck driving remains a signi˜cant source of employment and middle-class jobs in 
the United States. In fact, according to a recent analysis by NPR, in 2014, ﬁtruck, delivery, 
and tractor driversﬂ were the most common occupational category in 29 states, see Q. 

Bui, 2015, ﬁMap: The Most Common Job in Every State,ﬂ NPR,
 http://www.npr.org/sec
-tions/money/2015/02/05/382664837/map-the-most-common-job-in-every-state. See also 

T. Reddy, 2007, ﬁFleets Eye Safety Gains to Cut Insurance Costs,ﬂ 
Transport Topics
, http://
www.ttnews.com/articles/printopt.aspx?storyid=17563, for ˜gures on truck driver hiring 

and claims of inability to ˜ll positions.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 65of occupations, and hence people employed as technicians, expanded. 
Furthermore, with the march of technology, both in terms of advances 

in imaging and with developments at the intersection of imaging and 

other areas of biomedical engineering, radiologists began to specialize in 

particular imaging modalities and in whole new radiology subdisciplines 

such as ﬁinterventional radiology,ﬂ extending the range of opportunities 

for careers within radiology and increasing the need for radiologists.
38
Nonetheless, technologies can also have an impact on how tasks are 
allocated and how job categories and tasks associated with particular 

organizational forms and structures are designed. For instance, they can 

shift the allocation of tasks across occupations such that some occupations 

contract as the work they once performed is shifted onto members of other 

occupations.
39
 An instructive example is the advent of word processing 
technologies and online databases in the context of a typical academic 

department in the university. As recently as the 1980s, administrative 

assistants answered phones, interacted with students, kept paper records 

of accounts, ˜led documents, and typed letters, memos, and manuscripts 

for faculty (who often wrote ˜rst drafts by hand). Today, administrative 

assistants continue to answer phones and interact with students, but few 

type documents for faculty. Professors now use a computer to create and 

revise their own documents. Some faculty also enter their own data on 

travel expenses and other activities directly into databases, tasks previ
-ously performed by administrative assistants. These and other changes 

removed certain tasks from administrative assistants and transferred them 

to faculty, which can be viewed as an instance of ﬁdisintermediation.ﬂ
40
 Because of the increased ef˜ciency of producing and storing documents 

and because faculty have assumed the task of producing documents, uni
-versities now employ fewer administrative assistants, and some of those 

who remain have acquired new skills and tasks, such as the maintenance 
38  S.R Barley, 1986, Technology as an occasion for structuring: Evidence From observations 
of CT scanners and the social order of radiology departments, 
Administrative Science Quar
-terly
 31:78-108; S.R Barley, 1990, The alignment of technology and structure through roles 
and networks, 
Administrative Science Quarterly 
35:61-103.
39
  J. Bessen, 2015, ﬁHow Computer Automation Affects Occupations: Technology, Jobs 
and Skills,ﬂ Law and Economics Working Paper No. 15-49,
 Boston University School of 
Law, Boston, Mass.
40
  Disintermediation refers to the elimination tasks or people in a supply chain or work 
˚ow because the tasks are now done by someone positioned earlier in the work ˚ow (R. 
Benjamin and R. Wigand, 1995, Electronic markets and virtual value chains on the informa
-tion superhighway, 
Sloan Management Review 36:62-67; A.M. Chircu and R.J. Kauffman, 1999, 

Strategies for Internet middlemen in the intermediation/disintermediation/reintermedia
-tion cycle, Electronic Markets
 9(1-2):109-117; U. Schultze and W.J. Orlikowski, 2004, A practice 

perspective on technology-mediated network relations: The use of Internet-based self-serve 

technologies, 
Information Systems Research
 5(1):87-106.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
of websites. As noted in Chapter 2, jobs involving physical labor will be 
increasingly affected by advances in robotics, although there is debate 

about the timeline.
41
The committee notes that the effects of technologies on employment 
can be shaped by interests and social dynamics beyond merely the tech
-nological dimension. For example, computer-mediated communications, 

especially those facilitated by the Web, such as e-mail, computer telecon
-ferencing, and the ability to easily and almost instantaneously transfer 

documents of all kinds across space (and hence time zones), were initially 

thought of as simply more ef˜cient ways to communicate. But because 

these technologies did not require co-location, companies began using 

such technologies to both outsource and offshore a variety of tasks and 

even jobs, ranging from clerical to engineering work. There is nothing 

about computer-mediated communication technologies that preordained 

such developments. Instead, they are the result of choices (strategic or 

otherwise) by decision makers in organizations about how the technolo
-gies would be deployed and what they would be used to achieve, along 

with market forces encouraging the adoption of cost-ef˜cient processes. 

Choices regarding the development of technologies can also be in˚uenced 

by the same interests and social dynamics. For example, it has been sug
-gested that the decision to develop technologies that automate rather than 

augment the human role in the machine tool industry was driven by the 

combined interests of the U.S. Air Force and the Massachusetts Institute 

of Technology servomechanisms laboratory.
42
Human Skills Versus Automation
Consideration of whether technology can replace human workers 
has prompted discussion about the subtle complexity of human skills. 

A recent paper
43 by economist David Autor invoked the philosopher 
Michael Polanyi: ﬁWe can know more than we can tell. . . . The skill of a 

driver cannot be replaced by a thorough schooling in the theory of the 

motorcar; the knowledge I have of my own body differs altogether from 
41
  Bill Gates predicted in 2016 that for ﬁpure labor substitution for jobs that are largely 
physical and visual manipulationŠdriving, security guard, warehouse work, waiter, maid, 
that thresholdŠI don™t think you™d get much disagreement that over the next 15 years 

the robotic equivalents in terms of cost, in terms of reliability, will become a substitute to 

those activitiesﬂ (E. Klein, 2016, ﬁBill Gates: The Energy Breakthrough That Will ‚Save 

Our Planet™ Is Less Than 15 Years Away,ﬂ 
Vox
, last updated February, http://www.vox.
com/2016/2/24/11100702/bill-gates-energy).
42
  D.F. Noble, 1984, 
Forces of Production
, Transaction Publishers Piscataway, N.J.
43
  D. Autor, 2014, ﬁPolanyi™s Paradox and the Shape of Employment Growth,ﬂ Working 
Paper 20485, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 67the knowledge of its physiology.ﬂ
44
 This phenomenon, that tacit knowl
-edge often is greater than explicit cognition, is referred to as Polanyi™s 
Paradox. Currently, computational systems are far from being able to 

use creativity, intuition, persuasion, and imaginative problem solving, 

or to coordinate and lead teams. Autor and others have argued
 that 

many highly valued and important human capabilities may never be 

 automated.
45
 As technology becomes more sophisticated and encapsu
-lated, managing human interfaces may become the dominant component 

of more and more jobs; there is already evidence that social skills are in 

increasing demand and valued in the labor market.
46
 For instance, while 
drivers for a ride-sharing service do not need to be experts on the internal 

combustion engine or smartphone to do their jobs, they do need reason
-ably good interpersonal skills to be successful in this era of online ratings. 

Educational programs, even those in vocational disciplines like business 

and engineering, may need to add interpersonal and creative skills to 

their mix of hard analytical skills.
The resistance to automating multiple dimensions of human intellect 
and of the ﬁpresenceﬂ and leadership of people suggests that there will 

likely be enduring market value for traits and factors that are uniquely 

human, as only humans will be able to perform certain types of work for 

the foreseeable future, if not forever. To what extent are these human attri
-
butes, including creativity, empathy, interpersonal skills, leadership, men
-
toring, and physical presence currently valued in the U.S. labor force, and 

how will these uniquely human capabilities be valued in the U.S. labor 

force in the future? A number of these uniquely human attributes include 

cognitive and ﬁnoncognitiveﬂ skills. On the other hand, recent improve
-ments in machine learning have enabled signi˜cant technical advances in, 
for example, the ˜eld of self-driving cars, suggesting that even Polanyi™s 

archetypal example of driving a motorcar is not immune to automation. 

The rapidly growing attendance at research conferences on arti˜cial intel
-
ligence (AI), like the annual Neural Information Processing Systems and 

Association for the Advancement of Arti˜cial Intelligence conferences, 

demonstrates that an increasing number of researchers are attempting to 

address these challenges, and most of them now focus on approaches that 

enable machines to learn how to do tasks, from recognizing and labeling 

objects to understanding speech, improving dexterity and mobility, and 

mastering increasingly complex games and puzzles.
44
  M. Polanyi and A. Sen, 2009, 
The Tacit Dimension
, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 
Ill.
45
  D.H. Autor, 2015, Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of workplace 
automation, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives
 29(3):3-30.
46
  D.J. Deming, 2015, ﬁThe Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market,ﬂ 
National Bureau of Economic Research
, doi: 10.3386/w21473.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
INEQUALITY AND DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME AND WEALTH
Income and Wealth Distribution in Recent Years
It is generally understood that, by increasing productivity, IT will 
tend to increase overall incomeŠalthough without a guarantee that these 
gains will be evenly distributed. Furthermore, while it is common to focus 

on average levels of income and income growth, the distribution of those 

gains can also have an effect on well-being. This is true not only because 

absolute levels directly affect the quality of life of particular groups, but 

also because broad perceptions of unfairness can have a negative psycho
-logical impact, and inequality can contribute to sociopolitical tensions.
Since the mid-1970s, the United States has experienced signi˜cant 
growth in inequality in both income and wealth. This is the subject of a 

large amount of literature and has been documented in great detail by 

Acemoglu, Autor, Katz, Piketty, Saez, and many others.
47
 One aspect of 
this is the growing dispersion between productivity growth and median 

worker compensation, as most of the income growth went to the top of 

the income distribution. Over the past several decades, IT and automation 

have been a signi˜cant driver of this increase in inequality, although there 

are also other forces at work.
Much popular attention has been focused on the rising share of 
income of the top 1 percent of each of these distributions. While this 

increase has been substantial, with the share of income accruing to the 

top 1 percent of households increasing from about 10 percent to over 20 

percent between 1980 and 2012, there have also been increases in earn
-ings inequality within the other 99 percent
, accounted for largely by the 
increasing skills premium associated with a 4-year college degree
. For 
example, the absolute median earnings gap between those with a high 

school and a college degree approximately doubled from 1980 to 2012, as 

the real wages of college graduates rose and those of less educated work
-ers fell through about 2000.
48
 A related phenomenon is the falling share of GDP paid to labor rela
-tive to owners of capital (illustrated in Figure 3.5).
49 
This trend affects not 
only income, but also wealth (to which an individual™s income contributes 
47
  For reviews, see, for example, D.H. Autor, L.F. Katz, and M.S. Kearney, 2008, Trends in 
US wage inequality: Revising the revisionists, 
Review of Economics and Statistics
 90.2:300-323; 
T. Piketty, 2014, 
Capital in the Twenty-First Century
, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass.;
 and T. Piketty and E. Saez, 2013, Top incomes and the Great Recession: Recent evolutions 
and policy implications, 
IMF Economic Review
 51 (3):456-478, doi: 10.1057/imfer.2013.14.
48
  D.H. Autor, 2014, Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the ‚other 
99 percent,™ 
Science
 344(6186):843-851.
49
  L. Karabarbounis and B. Neiman, 2013, The global decline of the labor share, 
Quarterly 
Journal of Economics
 128(1):61-103, doi: 10.3386/w19136.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 69over time). It suggests that trends in income are increasingly favoring 
those who have already accrued wealth. 
This decline in the labor share of 

GDP, if sustained, will affect the distribution of wealth as well as that of 

income, expanding the share of total income ˚owing to wealth holders.
50
Many factors are likely at work in this landscape of inequality; tech
-nological change, social biases, increased globalization and trade, the 

decline in labor union density and power,
51
 declines in the real minimum 
wage, changing norms regarding executive compensation, growing eco
-nomic deregulation, changes in tax rates, and growing oligopolyŠor in 

some cases, simple monopoly
52
Šare among the hypothesized causes of 
increased inequality of income and wealth over the past 40 years.
53
 How
-ever, for the purposes of this study, the committee focuses on the role of 

technology in income and wealth distributions.
As with employment, the case that technological advances have con
-tributed to wage inequality is strong. For most of the 20th century, real 

median incomesŠincomes of people at the 50th percentileŠgrew at least 

as fast as overall real GDP per person, suggesting that the bene˜ts of 

improved technological progress were widely shared. But since the late 

1970s, productivity and GDP per person have continued to grow, while 

median incomes have stagnated (illustrated in Figure 3.2), re˚ecting grow
-
ing income inequality over a period of signi˜cant technological change.
There is a debate in the research literature, and indeed, among com
-mittee members, about how much of the increase in inequality should 

be attributed to technology. There are three prominent narratives impli
-cating technological change as a force toward greater inequality over 

the last several decades. First, many new technologies have replaced 

labor-intensive, routine, and physical tasks and expanded demand for 

labor in jobs that require social skills, numeracy, abstract thinking, and 

˚exibility.
54
 This shift is often said to be responsible for higher returns to 
a college education and the widening income gap between skilled and less 
50
  For this and other statistics on wealth inequality, see E.N. Wolff, 2012, 
The Asset Price 
Meltdown and the Wealth of the Middle Class
, New York University, New York; A.B. Atkinson, 
T. Piketty, and E Saez, 2011, Top incomes in the long run of history, 
Journal of Economic Lit
-erature
 49.1:3-71; and T. Piketty, 2014, 
Capital in the Twenty-First Century
, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Mass.
51
  See, for example, B. Western and J. Rosenfeld, 2011, Unions, norms, and the rise in US 
wage inequality, 
American Sociological Review
 76(4):513-537, doi: 10.1177/0003122411414817.
52
  J. Furman and P. Orszag, 2015, ﬁA ˜rm level perspective on the role of rents in the 
rise of inequality,ﬂ White House, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/page/
˜les/20151016_˜rm_level_perspective_on_role_of_rents_in_inequality.pdf.
53
  See T. Piketty, 
Capital in the Twenty-First Century
, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass, 
p. 70.
54
  See, for example, D.J. Deming, 2015, ﬁThe Growing Importance of Social Skills in the 
Labor Market,ﬂ National Bureau of Economic Research,
 doi: 10.3386/w21473.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
FIGURE 3.2
 The decoupling of productivity from GDP per person, employment, 
and median income. SOURCE: E. Brynjolfsson, and A. McAfee, ﬁWhy the Middle 
Class is Shrinking,ﬂ 
Harvard Business Review,
 November 5, 2015, https://hbr.org/
video/4598665579001/why-the-middle-class-is-shrinking, accessed April 2016. 

Data from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
skilled workers. Second, as labor-intensive tasks are automated, the share 
of income going to capital relative to labor can increase, which may also 

help to explain the falling share of labor in overall GDP (as illustrated in 

Figure 3.5) both in the United States and abroad. Third, improvements in 

communication technologies have contributed to what has been termed 

the ﬁsuperstar phenomenonﬂ whereby the most successful performers in 

any occupation can now command a larger share of the global market. 

This in part re˚ects their improved ability to sell to not only customers in 

local markets, but also with greater ease to those in regional, national, and 

even global markets as improved communications technologies reduce 

the costs of reaching a broader audience.
55 Geography and consumer 
ignorance have become less important as barriers to entry, making it 
55  D. Coyle, 1997, ﬁRich man, poor man, superstar,ﬂ 
Independent
, http://www.independent.
co.uk/news/business/rich-man-poor-man-superstar-1271342.html; S. Rosen, The econom
-ics of superstars, 
The American Economic Review
 71(5):845-858, 1981.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 71easier for sellers with a superior product to gain a dominant market 
share.
56
 This phenomenon is also sometimes said to explain the growing 
proportion of the national income garnered by the top 1 percent of the 

wage distribution.
57
Changes in IT also seem to be playing a role in the changing demand 
for skills and the earnings inequality for the other 99 percent. Technology 

can be a complement for highly skilled workers, as well as a substitute 

for low- or medium-skill workers. This is often called the skill-biased 

technological change hypothesis.
58,59,60
 When new technologies have dif
-ferent skill requirements than older ones, they tend to favor the hiring of 

workers possessing these skills. Unless supply changes suf˜ciently, this 

will shift wages in favor of the more skilled group.
61
 In recent decades, 
the impact of IT has been uneven across the skill distribution.
62
 Since the 
1970s, males with graduate or college education have seen their wages 

grow, while those with a high school education or less have seen falling 

wages
63
 (see Figure 3.3). It has been suggested that this divergence is 
exacerbated by an increasing reliance on technology in the workplace, 

as the skills required to work with these technologies are more readily 
56
  E. Brynjolfsson, Y.J. Hu, and M.S. Rahman, Competing in the age of omnichannel retail
-ing, 
MIT Sloan Management Review
 54(4):23, 2013.
57
  See, for example, E. Brynjolfsson and A. McAfee, 2014, 
The Second Machine Age
, W.W. 
Norton & Company, New York.
58
  D. Card and J.E. DiNardo, 2002, Skill-biased change and rising wage inequality: Some 
problems and puzzles, 
Journal of Labor Economics
 20:4, doi: 10.3386/w8769.
59
  D.H. Autor, L.F. Katz, and M.S. Kearney, 2008, Trends in U.S. wage inequality: Revising 
the revisionists, 
Review of Economics and Statistics 
90(2):300-323.
60
  C. Goldin and L.F. Katz, 2007, ﬁThe Race between Education and Technology: The Evo
-lution of U.S. Educational Wage Differentials, 1890 to 2005,ﬂ National Bureau of Economics, 
doi: 10.3386/w12984.
61
  This perspective is different than the common claim that new technologies 
always
 cre
-ate inequality. In fact, many new technologies of the 19th century automated previously 

skilled occupations and expanded unskilled assembly work which paid lower wages than 

the prior forms of work. For instance, the Luddites may have been misguided in their tactics 

of smashing mechanical spinning and weaving machines, but they were right that the way 

these machines were used was bad news for them: relatively highly paid textile workers 

were gradually replaced by machines and less well paid machine tenders. In general, if 

there is a mismatch between the skills of the workforce and the skill requirements of new 

technologies, changes in the structure of pay will tend to follow.
62
  World Economic Forum, Global Agenda Council on Employment, 2014, ﬁMatching 
Skills and Labour Market Needs: Building Social Partnerships for Better Skills and Better 

Jobs,ﬂ http://www3.weforum.org/docs/GAC/2014/WEF_GAC_Employment_Matching
-SkillsLabourMarket_Report_2014.pdf.
63
  D.H. Autor, L.F. Katz, and M.S. Kearney, 2008, Trends in U.S. wage inequality: Re
-vising the revisionists, 
Review of Economics and Statistics 
90(2):300-323; D.H. Autor, 2014, 
Skills, education, and the rise of earnings inequality among the ‚other 99 percent,™ 
Science
 344(6186):843-851.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
acquired through higher education.
64
 Related to this challenge, the skills 
gap continues to widen such that more than half of employers report that 
they have had dif˜culty ˜nding quali˜ed job applicants to ˜ll certain jobs, 

which they believe to be in part due to education gaps.
65,66
In the 1980s and 1990s, these changes in technologyŠalong with 
complementary factors such as globalization, deregulation, and 

deunionizationŠhave likely contributed to the reduction in demand for 

middle-level skills, and this has been re˚ected in both the quantity of jobs 

and in wages for middle-skill workers (see Figure 3.4).
In particular, workers doing routine tasks (such as production tasks 
in manufacturing or clerical tasks) have seen their demand decline due 

to multiple factors, including changing technology. This is re˚ected in a 

decline in manufacturing employment even as output has grown to an 

all-time high. Globalization has further eroded the demand for such skills 

in advanced economies like the United States. In contrast, there have been 

expanding job opportunities in both high-skill, high-wage occupations 

like professional, technical, and managerial occupations and low-skill, 
64
  R. Valletta, 2015, ﬁHigher Education, Wages, and Polarization,ﬂ Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco, http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-
letter/2015/january/wages-education-college-labor-earnings-income/.
65
  CareerBuilder, ﬁThe Shocking Truth about the Skills Gap,ﬂ 2014, http://www.career
-buildercommunications.com/pdf/skills-gap-2014.pdf, accessed August 16, 2016.
66  A recent survey by Manpower group found this to be a global trend, with 38% of surveyed 
employers reporting a talent shortage in 2015, a 7-year high; see Manpower Group, 2015, 
2015 
Talent Shortage Survey
, http://www.manpowergroup.com/wps/wcm/connect/db23c560-

08b6-485f-9bf6-f5f38a43c76a/2015_Talent_Shortage_Survey_US-lo_res.pdf?MOD=AJPERES.
1.01.21.41.61.82.01964196819721976198019841988199219962000200420082012Some college> Bachelor's degreeBachelor's 
degreeHigh school 
graduateHigh school dropoutBAReal weekly earnings relative to 1963 (men)Real weekly earnings relative to 1963 (women) 19641968197219761980198419881992199620002004200820121.01.21.41.61.82.0FIGURE 3.3
 Changes in wage levels of full-time U.S. workers by sex and educa
-tion, 1963-2012. SOURCE: D. H. Autor, 2014, Skills, education, and the rise of earn
-ings inequality among the ﬁother 99 percent,ﬂ 
Science
 344 (6186):843-851, http://
science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/344/6186/843.full.pdf. Reprinted with per
-mission from AAAS.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 73Panel A. Smoothed changes in employment by skill percentile, 1980Œ2005Panel B. Smoothed changes in real hourly wages by skill percentile, 1980Œ2005˜0.2˜0.100.10.20.30.4020406080100Skill percentile (ranked by 1980 occupational mean wage)100 × change in employment share0.050.10.150.20.250.3020406080100Skill percentile (ranked by 1980 occupational mean wage)Change in real log hourly wageFIGURE 3.4
 In panels A and B, workers in the middle of the skill distribution 
have had lower employment growth and wages growth than workers at the top 
and bottom. SOURCE: (A) D.H. Autor and D. Dorn, 2013, The growth of low-skill 
service jobs and polarization of the US labor market, 
American Economic Review 
103(5):1553-1597. Courtesy of David Autor, David Dorn, and the American Eco
-nomic Association.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
FIGURE 3.5
 Declining labor share of income for the largest economies in the 
world, with linear trend lines. SOURCE: L. Karabarbounis and B. Neiman, 2014, 
The global decline of the labor share, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 
129(1):61-103, 
by permission of Oxford University Press.
low-wage occupations such as food service, personal care, and protective 
service occupations.
67,68
But changes in skill demand are far from the only factors at work. In 
addition, technology may be helping to drive a decline in the labor force 

participation rate and a broader shift in the labor-capital relationship, 

as advanced technology is embodied in capital equipment that replaces 

many workers.
69,70
 This shift has happened not only in the United States 
but in many nations around the world. Figure 3.5 illustrates the global 

decline of the labor share of income.
The reductions in real compensation for labor include the decline of 
67
  D. Acemoglu, 2009, Changes in unemployment and wage inequality: An alternative 
theory and some evidence, 
American Economic Review
 89(5):1259-1278.
68
  D. Acemoglu, 2001, Good jobs versus bad jobs, 
Journal of Labor Economics 
19(1):1-21.
69
  B. Neiman and L. Karabarbounis, 2013, The global decline of the labor share, 
Quarterly 
Journal of Economics
 129(1):61-103.
70  E. Brynjolfsson and A. McAfee, 2014, 
The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosper
-ity In a Time of Brilliant Technologies
, W.W. Norton & Company, New York.
˜˚˛˝˙ˆˇ˘

“‘Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 75de˜ned-bene˜t pensions and cuts in employer-provided health insur
-ance.
71
 In addition to technological change, the shift in the labor-capital 
ratio likely re˚ects increased monopoly power and rents by ˜rms in many 
industries and the growing share of residential housing in the capital 

stock.
72,73
Another factor that is important in this context is that advances in IT 
often involve signi˜cant supply-side economies of scale: the cost of mak
-ing the ˜rst copy of a new enterprise system, video game, or mobile app 

is often signi˜cant, but the cost of making an additional copy is very low. 

Thus companies whose software has more users will tend to have lower 

average costs per user. Likewise, there are often demand-side economies 

of scale as well, which are more commonly called ﬁnetwork effects.ﬂ 

Network effects occur when users get more bene˜ts from a product or 

platform when it is adopted by more users.
74,75
 For instance, the value of 
Facebook or LinkedIn is greater if other people, especially friends, family, 

or colleagues, also use the same application. Similar logic holds for many 

business-to-business platforms and, to some extent, even productivity 

software like word processors, spreadsheets, and presentation software, 

because they are compatible between users and enable ˜le sharing and 

collaboration.
Economies of scale on the supply side, the demand side, or both tend 
to a greater prevalence of ﬁwinner take allﬂ outcomes where the leading 

˜rm in a particular platform does exceptionally well. Even if the gains are 

shared across all the workers within the winning ˜rms, this still leads to 

concentration of the gains to a relatively small share of workers.
76
That said, gains have not been evenly distributed, with the top 
employees in ˜rms seeing the biggest gains on average.
77
 Founders and 
71  J.A. Cobb, 2015, Risky business: The decline of de˜ned bene˜t pensions and ˜rms™ shift-ing of risk, 
Organization Science
 26(5):1332-1350.
72  J. Furman and P. Orszag, 2015, ﬁA Firm-Level Perspective on the Role of Rents in the Rise 
of Inequality,ﬂ https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/page/˜les/20151016_
˜rm_level_perspective_on_role_of_rents_in_inequality.pdf.
73
  M. Rognlie, 2015, ﬁDeciphering the fall and rise in the net capital share,ﬂ 
Brookings Paper 
on Economic Activity
, March 19-20, http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/projects/bpea/
spring-2015/2015a_rognlie.pdf.
74
  J. Farrell and G. Saloner, 1987, Competition, compatibility and standards: The econom
-ics of horses, penguins, and lemmings, in 
Product Standardization and Competitive Strategy
 (L. 
Gabel, ed.), North Holland.
75
  G.G. Parker, M.W. Van Alstyne, and S.P. Choudar, 2016, 
Platform Revolution: How Net
-worked Markets Are Transforming the EconomyŠAnd How to Make Them Work For You
, W.W. 
Norton & Company, New York.
76
  J. Song, D.J. Price, F. Guvenen, N. Bloom, and T. von Wachter, 2015, ﬁFirming Up In
-equality,ﬂ National Bureau of Economics Research, http://www.nber.org/papers/w21199.
77
  Ibid.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
owners of the most successful IT ˜rms and entrepreneurs who have 
introduced new products, business models, and platforms are among the 

biggest winners. This is consistent with the rise of the ﬁinnovator class,ﬂ 

which suggests that neither labor nor capital owners will necessarily ben
-e˜t the most from technological advances. Instead, the rapid proliferation 

of digital technology may enable a third classŠpeople who can create 

and distribute new products, services, and business modelsŠto prosper 

immensely.
78
 In addition, there is evidence that pay for top executives, 
like CEOs, has grown fastest in industries that use IT the most inten
-sively, which is consistent with them being able to gather more detailed 

information and relay their decisions more effectively across more people 

and assets. This can amplify their power, importance, and relative pay.
79
While the gender wage gap has narrowed since the 1980s, it is impor
-tant to note that signi˜cant wage gaps by both race and gender persist 

in the United States. According to a recent analysis by the Pew Research 

Center,
80
 2015 median hourly earnings for women were just 83 percent of 
white men™s, and black workers™ only 75 percent of white men™s. Much 

but not all of these gaps have been explained by varying education and 

experience, or the fact that different groups participate at different rates 

in different industries and occupational ˜elds. Even when controlling for 

education, white men out-earned all groups except for Asian men; white 

and Asian women out-earned Hispanic and black men and women. How 

these disparities will shift in the future as a result of technological change 

is an open question; gender and occupational ˜elds are discussed further 

in Chapter 4.
Future Prospects for Income Distribution
An important variable for understanding and shaping future devel
-opments is the way education and vocational training institutions might 

ameliorate the mismatch between new technologies and existing skills. 

The early 20th century was also a period of rapid technological change 

in the U.S. economy. However, existing evidence suggests that wage 

inequality declined during this era, in part because the U.S. education sys
-tem substantially increased the availability of workers with primary and 
78
  E. Brynjolfsson, A. McAfee, and M.I. Spence, 2014, ﬁNew World Order: Labor, Capital, 
and Ideas in the Power Law Economy,ﬂ 
Foreign Affairs
, https://www.foreignaffairs.com/
articles/united-states/2014-06-04/new-world-order.
79
  E. Brynjolfsson, H. Kim and G. Saint-Jacques, 2015, CEO pay and information technol
-ogy, in 
Firms and the Distribution of Income: The Roles of Productivity and Luck
, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.
80
  E. Patten, 2016, ﬁRacial, Gender Wage Gaps Persist in US Despite Some Progress,ﬂ 
Pew Research Center. http://www. pewresearch. org/fact-tank/2016/07/01/racial-gender-

wage-gaps-persist-in-us-despite-someprogress.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 77secondary schooling. That does not mean that simply investing more in 
the same sorts of education is the best way to reduce inequality, however. 

More out-of-the-box thinking may be necessary for prescribing what the 

educational system needs to deliver. The existing evidence so far suggests 

that greater numeracy skills and ability to think abstractly might help. A 

cocktail of other skills are also likely to be affected, including cognitive, 

physical, interpersonal, networking, and problem-solving skills. But an 

emphasis on any ˜xed set of skills might be too backward-looking. As 

technology continues to evolve, the future workforce will also likely need 

to evolve. This suggests that ˚exibility will likely continue to be a valued 

skillŠone that may be particularly underprovided by the current school
-ing systemŠin particular, to enable lifelong learning and adaptability to 

a changing labor market.
This discussion suggests that for society to make the best use of new 
technologies without increasing income inequality, adjustments are neces
-
sary. Although the heaviest burden of adjustment is likely to fall on the 

skills, competencies, and ˚exibility of workers, the perspective that tech
-nology is not a force of nature and can be shaped and adapted by societal 

decisions suggests that technology can have positive societal impacts if it 

is designed with certain values in mind. Can society continue to harvest 

the bene˜ts of new technologies while at the same time modifying their 

implementation so that they create more work for those at the margins of 

society, make better use of existing workers, and yield deeper satisfaction 

for workers?
The history of numerically controlled, or programmed, machine tools 
is instructive on this point. In the early days of numerical control, the task 

of writing programs for machine tools was allocated to programmers, 

not machinists. The programs were encoded on paper tapes or punch 

cards and fed to the machine tools. Machinists simply monitored the 

tools. This led some to argue that machinists would be deskilled because 

management desired to separate cognition from execution. But with the 

rapid improvements in the microchip, computers became small enough 

to embed in the machine tools, and machinists now had access to the 

computers and the programs. They began to learn to alter and eventually 

revise the code that controlled their tools. In short, programming became 

part of the machinist™s task.81 More recent technologies like the Baxter and 
Sawyer robots from Rethink Robotics take this a step further, enabling line 

workers to ﬁprogramﬂ the machines simply by physically guiding them 

through the steps, rather than by writing computer code.
82
It bears repeating that this discussion of technology and inequality 
81
  D.F. Noble, 1984, 
Forces of Production
, Transaction Publishers.
82
  Rethinkrobotics, ﬁProducts & Software,ﬂ http://www.rethinkrobotics.com/products-
software/, accessed May 2016.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
should not be read to imply that all aspects of inequality and its recent 
increase in much of the Western world can simply be attributed to tech
-nological change: one must also consider the role played by the demise of 

unions, concessions on wages and job structures, the offshoring of work to 

places with lower wage rates, tax policy, and the increasing contribution 

played by ˜nancial investments in the accumulation of wealth. Indeed, 

increasing inequality in the United States has a political dimension, a 

phenomenon that is, of course, not new. Politically powerful individuals 

and groups have long deployed their power in order to increase their 

economic rents. This is seen today in the form of some business groups 

campaigning for special treatment of their line of business or for the con
-tinuation of tax loopholes. Nevertheless, there is a technological element 

to such rent-seeking, and to inequality as well. Some of the most spectacu
-
lar salaries on Wall Street are paid by hedge funds that deploy more and 

more sophisticated computers and algorithms to execute trades or arbi
-trage information, before their competitors, in a matter of milliseconds. 

This is just one facet of the potential use of technology in ways that do 

not necessarily advance social welfare, but create large bene˜ts for those 

who deploy and control it.
In sum, new technologies can participate in eliminating occupations, 
creating new occupations, shifting the distribution of tasks among occu
-pations, and altering the geographical division of labor.
83 The dynamics of 
employment and wage inequality are driven by forces that are not exclu
-sively or even primarily technological in nature: institutional patterns, 

legal structures, tax structures, and managerial ideologies that emphasize 

the accumulation of wealth also play a role. Most importantly, these forces 

interact with technology, and vice versa, to shape ultimate outcomes. 

Consequently, the ways that any particular technology, or a range of new 

and rapidly changing technologies, will affect employment and income 

are not predetermined, but rather a function of choices.
SUMMARY
The committee ends by again cautioning the reader against believ
-ing that all the effects of a technology on employment and inequality are 

inherent in the nature of the technology itself. How technologies affect 

work and employment hinge not only on the constraints and affordances 
83
  There are some interesting parallels to the effects of import competition. For instance, 
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) found that rising Chinese imports caused higher unem
-ployment, lower labor force participation and reduced wages in the local markets that had 
manufacturing plants with competing products (D.H. Autor, D. Dorn, and G.H. Hanson, 

2013, The China syndrome: Local labor market effects of import competition in the United 

States, 
American Economic Review
 103.6:2121-2168).
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IT, PRODUCTIVITY, EMPLOYMENT, AND INCOMES
 79of the technology, but also on complex interactions among technologies, 
organizations, skills, institutions, markets, culture, and public policies. 

Nevertheless, on the basis of previous research, the committee believes 

several generalizations are possible.
1.
 Productivity is the key driver of increased living standards. In 
turn, innovation, diffusion, or adoption of technology is the key driver of 

improvements in productivity. The most important technology of this era 

is IT. However, the existence of technology alone is not enough to enhance 

productivity. Effective use of technology typically requires a shift toward 

complementary skills pro˜les in the workforce and adaptation of busi
-ness processes, organization of work, and institutional processes. These 

changes can be costly and take decades to play out.
2.
 While productivity is still growing, it does not appear to be grow
-ing as rapidly as it did in the late 1990s and early 2000s. This may re˚ect 

a combination of factors, including mismeasurement of some of the bene
-˜ts, reduced dynamism, the inherent lags often associated with the imple
-
mentation of new technologies, or secular stagnation.
3.
 Technology has transformed employment by automating some 
tasks and creating the need for new ones, a trend that is likely to continue. 

As a result, some entire occupations may become obsolete, and new occu
-
pations will come into being. Employment will shift from one occupation 

to another, while some occupations will simply experience changes in 

their required skill sets. While the share of people working has declined 

over the past 20 years, shifts within and across occupations will likely be 

much more economically signi˜cant than changes in the overall level of 

employment.
4.
 New computerized technologies do appear to have contributed to 
increased income inequality and are likely to continue to do so as long 

as they replace skills and tasks historically associated with low-wage 

or middle-wage occupations. The jobs that remain tend to require more 

abstract, cognitive skills, or they provide personal services that are not 

currently economically valued. These differences will tend to be mainly 

re˚ected in wages and incomes, although they may also show up to some 

extent in hours worked and overall employment as well.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Changes in the Nature of Work 
and Its Organization
INTRODUCTION
Technological change affects more than productivity, employment, 
and income inequality. It also creates opportunities for changes in the 
nature of work itself. Numerous ethnographic studies have shown how a 

variety of new technologies have altered the way work is performed, the 

roles that workers play in a ˜rm™s division of labor, and the way these 

changing roles alter the structure of organizations.
1 In this chapter, the 
analysis of technology and society continues, with a focus on (1) changing 
forms of work, including occupations and contingent jobs; (2) dynamism 

and ˚exibility in the workforce; (3) demographics and job satisfaction; 

(4) the organizations and other institutions in which we work; (5) changes 

in the role of work in people™s lives; and (6) education and job training.
As the nature of the work environment continues to change, new 
trends have emerged at the individual, team, and organizational 
 levels. 
The workforce is now more demographically diverse than ever, and 
1  A. Aneesh, 2006, 
Virtual Migration: The Programming of Globalization
, Duke University 
Press, Raleigh, N.C.; M. Baba, 1999, Dangerous liaisons: Trust, distrust, and information tech
-nology in American work organization, 
Human Organization 
58(3):331-333; N. Natalia and 

E. Vaast, 2008, Innovating or doing as told? Status differences and overlapping boundaries 

in offshore collaboration, 
MIS Quarterly
 32:307-332; S.R. Barley, 1990, The alignment of tech
-nology and structure through roles and networks, 
Administrative Science Quarterly 35:61-103; 

D.E. Bailey, P.M. Leonardi, and S.R. Barley, 2012, The lure of the virtual, 
Organization Science
 23:1485-1504; S.R. Barley, 2015, Why the Internet makes buying a car less loathsome: How 

technologies change role relations, 
Academy of Management Discoveries
 1:5-35.
80
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 81older workers represent a signi˜cant subset of the working population.
2 Increased technology and the growing complexity of tasks have given 
rise to more virtual and interdisciplinary teams.
3,4 Furthermore, inter
-est in multinational organizations has grown as many companies seek 

to increase their overseas assignments.
5 If society is receptive to these 
changes and also able to adapt quickly to new technology, it can lead to 

bene˜ts for both employees and organizations. However, history suggests 

that these trends can lead to hurdles and unexpected negative conse
-quences, such as decreased job satisfaction, poor work/life balance, and 

neglect of personal and long-term career development.
6,7 A brief summary 
of the most prominent trends within today™s workforce is discussed below.
THE ON-DEMAND ECONOMY
The rapid rise of ˜rms like Uber, along with an increased recognition 
that IT permits individuals to connect and coordinate in unprecedented 

ways, have prompted great interest in the on-demand economy.
In the of˜cial aggregate statistics from U.S. statistical agencies, there is 
mixed evidence on the current role and extent of the on-demand economy. 

However, this may largely re˚ect a lack of clear measures of the relevant 

types of work.
U.S. statistical agency data, when controlled for cyclical variation, 
suggest that part-time work, multiple job holders, and short-duration 

jobs have not been rising. However, the number of companies with zero 

employees, which the U.S. Census calls ﬁnonemployers,ﬂ
8 has risen sub
-stantially over the last 10 years, from about 18.7 million in 2003 to 23 mil
-2  Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2014, ﬁLabor Force Statistics from the Current Population 
Survey: Labor Force Characteristics 2014,ﬂ last modi˜ed March 10, 2016, http://www.bls.
gov/cps/lfcharacteristics.htm#emp.
3  N.J. Cooke, E. Salas, J.A. Cannon-Bowers, and R. Stout, 2000, Measuring team knowl
-edge, 
Human Factors
 42:151-173.
4  L. Gratton and T.J. Erickson, 2007, ﬁEight Ways to Build Collaborative Teams,ﬂ 
Harvard 
Business Review, 
November, pp. 101-109.
5  R. Maurer, 2013, ﬁInternational Assignments Expected to Increase in 2013,ﬂ Society 
for Human Resource Management, https://www.shrm.org/hrdisciplines/global/articles/

pages/international-assignments-increase-2013.aspx; B. Frith, 2015, ﬁCompanies expect 

to increase international assignments,ﬂ 
HR Magazine, http://www.hrmagazine.co.uk/

article-details/companies-expect-to-increase-international-assignments.
6  J. Wajcman, 2014, 
Pressed for Time: The Acceleration of Life in Digital Capitalism
, University 
of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill.
7  P.F. Drucker, 2002, 
Managing in the Next Society
, Truman Talley Books, New York.
8  Speci˜cally, nonemployers are businesses that report revenue from business activity but 
do not have employees, and the newly self-employed may be showing up in this category. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
lion in 2013;
9 this category includes employees earning income as inde
-pendent contractors (via Internal Revenue Service 1099-MISC forms). It 
has been hypothesized that many 1099 workers consider themselves as 

employees and report themselves as such in surveys, such as the Current 

Population Survey, yielding underreporting in certain categories.
Recent independent research found that the overall share of 
 workers 
in alternative arrangements
10
 increased from 10 percent to about 16 per
-cent between 2005 and 2015. Of these, less than 0.5 percent of the work
-force (about 600,000 people) worked with online services, with Uber being 
by far the most common.
11 However, the online sector, including a range 
of on-demand services, appears to be growing very rapidly and could 

account for millions of workers within a few years.
12
The Internet-enabled on-demand economy is new, and the extent of 
its potential impact is as yet unknown. One challenge for monitoring this 

trend will be ensuring that the of˜cial statistics and other data available to 

the research and policy communities are adequate to capture the changing 

trends in the coming years.
One hypothesis is that individuals will increasingly provide their 
labor services in some form of independent contractor relationship with 

˜rms; independent contractors can now offer their services ef˜ciently to a 

much bigger customer base. Alternatively, part of the on-demand or ﬁgigﬂ 

economy may be a new version of a personal service economy where per
-sonal services like transportation and delivery of food and other services 

are accessible through widely available technology on smartphones and 

other similar devices. For workers in the personal services component of 

the gig economy, such jobs may ˜t into a worker™s career in a variety of 

ways. They can be stopgap or secondary jobs, or, in some cases, their ˚ex
-ibility permits individuals to participate in the labor market to a greater 

extent than they would otherwise. However, note that Uber, the largest 

gig economy employer to date, has invested heavily in automation tech
-nologies and is already testing self-driving vehicles that could one day 

greatly reduce or even eliminate its need for human drivers.
13
9  U.S. Census Bureau, 2015, ﬁNation Gains more than 4 Million Nonemployer Businesses 
Over the Last Decade, Census Bureau Reports,ﬂ 
U.S. Census Bureau Newsroom 
(blog),
 May 
27, http://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2015/cb15-96.html.
10
  These include independent contractors, workers at temporary help ˜rms, on-call work
-ers, and workers provided by contract ˜rms.
11  L.F. Katz and A. Krueger, 2016 forthcoming, ﬁThe Rise of Non-Standard Work Arrange
-ments and the Gig Economy?ﬂ
12
  Remarks by Jonathan Hall (Uber Chief Economist) and by Larry Katz (Professor at 
Harvard) at the On-Demand Economy Workshop and Conference, MIT Initiative on the 
Digital Economy, Cambridge, Mass., March 14, 2016. 
13
  Reuters, 2016, ﬁUber Debuts Self-Driving Cars in Pittsburgh,ﬂ 
Fortune
, http://fortune.
com/2016/09/14/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh/.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 83ORGANIZATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF WORK TASKS
Some production activities have historically taken the form of bring
-ing groups of individuals together for speci˜c projects, as in the construc
-tion and entertainment industries. The rise of IT-based work platforms 
that support new de˜nitions and distributions of work tasks in new 
ways provides another illustration of the variable potential for applica
-tion and use of technologies. Such platforms employ Internet-based com
-munications and smartphone applications to make work available, and 
then assign that work to individuals or groups based on bid, proposal, 

or contest mechanisms. Crowdsourcing, open-call, and open innovation 

platforms can be used to rede˜ne the nature of tasks themselves and 

to change how that work is organized and distributed both within and 

across organizational bounds.
Crowdsourcing platforms, for instance, work on the basis of tasks 
being decomposed into smaller units, even to the level of microtasks. 

These are then made available through open-call or auction mechanisms 

to people beyond strictly de˜ned work teams or organizational bounds, 

including, but not necessarily beyond, a given ˜rm. In addition, crowd
-sourcing mechanisms can beŠand areŠused within ˜rms to open up the 

performance of work tasks broadly to their existing employees.
14
Contest-based work solicitation systems, in contrast, operate by seek
-ing solutions to often large-scale, complex challenges, but they too reach 

out to people beyond the boundaries of traditionally assigned job roles. 

And, although contest-based systems such as Innocentive support the 

outsourcing of work, such outsourcing is not necessarily inherent to this 

technological form. Like crowdsourcing, contests can be run internally at 

a ˜rm among already salaried employees.
Even in the case of internal uses of crowdsourcing and contests, 
designing how work will be performed, managing both the processes and 

labor of production, and ensuring quality affects the work people do and 

how they do it. Managers may no longer have the same level of authority 

in managing where and how employees™ time is invested. Workers may 

˜nd that their ability to control their own performance is more tightly 

circumscribed, or the oppositeŠthey may be responsible for providing a 

particular output but be free to select how to arrive at that outcome. Col
-laborations and work relationships can be both forged and weakened by 

these mechanisms.
15
14
  M. Cefkin, O. Anya, and R. Moore, 2014, ﬁA Perfect Storm? Reimagining Work in the Era 
of the End of the Job,ﬂ pp. 3-19 in 
2014 Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference Proceedings
.15
  Ibid.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
In general, IT can lower the costs of transactions and searches, which 
leads to more market-based interactions and temporary contracting.
16 These developments suggest that the overall demand for work may not 
necessarily be threatened by technology, but rather that the shape of that 

work, and whether the tasks remain bundled into traditional ﬁjobs,ﬂ is 

subject to change.
17
 This is especially evident in the rise of contingent 
labor.
CONTINGENT LABOR
ﬁContingent workﬂ is a general term referring to nonstandard work 
arrangements, including temporary or contract work. Although contin
-gent work is not new (˜rms such as Kelly Services and Manpower, for 

example, have been in the business of providing temporary clerical and 

industrial workers for many years), it has grown and attracted renewed 

attention recently with the online, open-call work platforms described 

above.
18
Typically, contingent workers are not employees of the ˜rms or peo
-ple who pro˜t from their services (although there are some exceptions). 

Contingent workers may be independent contractors or employees of 

staf˜ng agencies that act as the worker™s employer of record for tax 

purposes.
19
 According to a recent report of the Government Account
-ability Of˜ce (GAO), approximately 7.9 percent of U.S. workers in 2010 

were agency temps or on-call workers. A broader de˜nition of contingent 

work, including part-time, self-employment, and other nontraditional 

work arrangements, would place the estimate at more than one-third of 

the 2010 workforce.
20
 Many workers prefer the ˚exibility, diverse income sources, and abil
-ity to control their work schedule and activities that are associated with 

employment via independent contracting, but this is not the universal 
16  T.W. Malone, J. Yates, and R.I. Benjamin, 1987, Electronic markets and electronic 
 hierarchies, 
Communications of the ACM
 30(6):484-497.
17
  Z. Ton, 2014, 
The Good Jobs Strategy: How the Smartest Companies Invest in Employees to 
Lower Costs and Boost Pro˜ts
, Houghton Mif˚in Harcourt.
18
  M.C. White, 2014, ﬁFor Many Americans, ‚Temp™ Work Becomes Permanent Way of 
Life,ﬂ http://www.nbcnews.com/feature/in-plain-sight/many-americans-temp-work-
becomes-permanent-way-life-n81071.
19
  Some companies provide contingent workers as part of the payroll/tax service (so 
called professional employer organizations or PEO™s) but temporary staf˜ng companies 

like Manpower have the full employer responsibility, including managing HR aspects of 

the employee.
20
  C.A. Jeszeck, 2015, ﬁLetter to The Honorable Patty Murray and the Honorable Kirsten 
Gillibrand: Contingent Workforce: Size, Characteristics, Earnings, and Bene˜ts,ﬂ Govern
-ment Accountability Of˜ce, http://www.gao.gov/assets/670/669766.pdf.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 85experience. Some contingent work is also ﬁprecarious,ﬂ which the com
-mittee de˜nes as ﬁuncertain, unpredictable, and risky from the point 
of view of the workerﬂ
21
Šfor example, due to part-time or short-term 
employment, intermittent or unpredictable work hours, poor wages, or 

insecure jobs.
 The GAO found that ﬁcoreﬂ contingent workers (primarily 
agency temps and on-call workers) in the United States were ﬁmore likely 

to be younger, Hispanic, have no high school degree, and have low family 

income.ﬂ
22
 Over the last decade, for a signi˜cant share of the workforce, 
precarious positions associated with nontraditional employment models 

have become a permanent way of life. In fact, some argue that a new 

social class has risen from this trend, ﬁthe precariat,ﬂ made up of indi
-viduals facing insecurity, poverty, and a work life with no signi˜cance.
23
 In addition to gaining attention from the popular press, the rise of pre
-carious work has led to a research stream investigating the consequences 

of temporary work. For example, in a review of studies on precarious 

employment conducted between 1984 and 2001, Quinlan, Mayhew, and 

Bohle found a negative relationship between precarious employment and 

occupational health and safety, concluding that it leads to a stressful and 

disorganized work environment.
24
Contingent work relationships come in a variety of forms, involving 
various types of employment relationships and various types of worker 

bene˜ts. Scholarship is at an early stage when it comes to analyzing the 

scope of contingent work and the implications of each type for employ
-ment structures, employment relations, and the welfare of workers. 
The 
use of IT-based platforms to access contingent work adds a new dimen
-sion to this category of employment.
For instance, there remains a vibrant business in providing temporary 
workers who ˜ll in for sick or vacationing full-time workers or who are 

assigned to jobs for short periods of time to augment a ˜rm™s full-time 

labor force when the ˜rm ˜nds itself understaffed yet unable to hire full-

time employees. This contrasts with the highly skilled contractors and 

freelancers studied by Barley and Kunda and by Osnowitz, who work for 

longer periods of more than 6 to 18 months on projects inside a ˜rm, often 
21
  A.L. Kalleberg, Precarious work, insecure workers: Employment relations in transition, 
American Sociological Review
 74(1):1-22, 2009.
22
  Jeszeck,  2015.
23  G. Standing, 2014, The Precariat: The New Dangerous Class
, Bloomsbury Academic, 
London.
24
  M. Quinlan, C. Mayhew, and P. Bohle, 2001, The global expansion of precarious employ
-ment, work disorganization, and consequences for occupational health: a review of recent 
research, 
International Journal of Health Services 
31(2):335-414.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
alongside full-time employees.
25,26
 Such contractors are typically com
-pensated more per hour than full-time employees, after accounting for 
bene˜ts. By hiring such individuals, ˜rms relieve themselves of the costs 

of paying employment taxes, providing health insurance, contributing to 

pension funds, or investing in training. A technology-enabled platform, 

Upwork, provides highly skilled workers similar to high-tech contractors, 

except that the contractors are often located outside the United States and 

are subject to different labor laws and employment systems.
Other contingent workers use technology platforms to identify short-
term and often unskilled personal service jobs for individuals who seek 

a service provider though websites or appsŠfor example, Uber drivers, 

those who perform odd jobs through TaskRabbit, or those delivering 

meals through GrubHub. These gigs may pay relatively little and are 

subject to unforeseen developments that may reduce their rate of pay. To 

make a living, gig workers require a steady stream of gigs.
Despite their diversity and the great variation in the duration of their 
projects, contingent workers often share a number of characteristics that 

place them outside the traditional system of employment relations in 

the United States, which assumes a long-term relationship with a single, 

stable employer. Many contingent workers receive no health-care bene˜ts 

from their employers, receive no employer contributions to retirement 

funds, and are responsible for their own training and development as 

well as paying employment taxes.
27
 Staf˜ng agencies may also extract a 
signi˜cant portion of revenue paid by clients for the contingent worker™s 

labor. Downtime between jobs is to be expected, although how well work
-
ers can manage or circumvent downtime depends on the type of contin
-gent worker. Some contingent workers have a great deal of control over 

when they work, while others have very little control. Certain types of 

contingent work resemble the system of contract employment used in 

manufacturing during the late 19th century.
28
Ensuring that the expansion of contingent work provides new oppor
-tunities for workers to control their work life, rather than leaving them  
25
  S.R. Barley and G. Kunda, 2004, 
Gurus, Hired Guns and Warm Bodies: Itinerant Experts in 
a Knowledge Economy
, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
26
  D. Osnowitz, 2010, 
Freelancing Expertise: Contract Professionals in the New Economy
, Cor
-nell University Press, New York.
27
  S.R. Barley and G. Kunda, 2004, 
Gurus, Hired Guns and Warm Bodies: Itinerant Experts in 
a Knowledge Economy
, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
28
  On the role of outsourcing, contracting, and the putting out system in American factory 
production see D. Nelson, 1975, 
Origins of the New Factory System in the United States: 1880-
1920
, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, Wisc.; J. Christiansen and P. Philips, 1991, 
The transition from outwork to factory production in the boot and shoe industry, 1930-1880, 

in 
Masters to Managers: Historical and Comparative Perspectives on American Employers 
(S.M. 
Jacoby, ed.), Columbia University Press, New York.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 87disadvantaged, will require changes to the organization of work and the 
institutions in which it is embedded. One example may be to stimulate 

the formation of organizations or occupational associations, similar to 

the Freelancers Union, that provide contingent workers with avenues for 

acquiring portable health insurance and retirement savings programs. 

Regulations could also be shaped to better enable contingent workers 

who have been traditionally categorized as independent contractors to 

access bene˜ts and protections through their employer, ensuring protec
-tion of their rights under U.S. employment law. There is already mounting 

political pressure to both use existing regulations and introduce new ones 

to prevent the rise of contingent work in certain areas (such as the taxicab 

market). Much of this pressure might be motivated by narrow-interest 

politics (e.g., protecting rents for certain workers or business owners), 

which is certainly no substitute for a holistic rethinking of regulations, 

given the extent of contingent work today. 
There are limited data on the nature and extent of contingent work in 
the U.S. workforce and how IT is affecting its role in the labor market. A 

clear and longitudinally valid system for characterizing contingent jobs 

could help to clarify the economic and social effects of different forms of 

contingent work and how they are changing. It is worth noting that 2005 

was the last year that the Bureau of Labor Statistics collected data on 

the contingent workforce, although plans for another survey are under 

way and an independent, standalone version of a similar survey was 

conducted through the RAND Corporation, as contracted by economists 

Alan Krueger and Larry Katz.
29 Data collection is discussed in more detail 
in Chapter 6.
DYNAMISM AND FLEXIBILITY OF THE U.S. WORKFORCE
A hallmark of the U.S. economy has long been its high business 
dynamism (its pace of business formation, expansion, contraction, and 

exit) and labor market ˚uidity (its pace of the ˚ows of workers between 

jobs and ˜rms). Dynamism and ˚uidity are inherently linked because 

much of the ˚ow of workers across jobs stems from business expansion, 

contraction, entry, and exit. However, ﬁchurningﬂ of workers (˚uidity 

in excess of that due to business dynamism) has increased as workers 

(especially young workers) engage in job hopping (frequent transitions 
29
  L.F. Katz and A.B. Krueger, 2016, ﬁThe Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrange
-ments in the United States 1995-2015,ﬂ Princeton University and NBER, https://krueger.
princeton.edu/sites/default/˜les/akrueger/˜les/katz_krueger_cws_-_march_29_20165.

pdf.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
between jobs) to develop their careers and ˜nd the best match for their 
skills and interests. 
Historically, the United States has exhibited strong indicators of dyna
-mism, such as a high pace of job and worker reallocation, job hopping, 

and geographic mobility. This dynamism has enabled the United States to 

reallocate resources from less productive to more productive businesses 

with less time and resource costs than other countries (e.g., without high 

rates or long durations of unemployment). In the last several decadesŠ

and especially since 2000Šthere has been a decline in several indicators of 

business dynamism and labor market ˚uidity. As illustrated in Figure 4.1, 

the pace of job reallocation (the sum of jobs created and destroyed) has 

declined, and the pace of worker reallocation (the sum of hires and sepa
-rations) has declined. This is linked to declines in related measures of 

labor market ˚uidity. The pace of job hopping, as measured by the frac
-tion of workers switching directly from one job to another, often called 
FIGURE 4.1
 Quarterly job and worker reallocation rates for the U.S. private non
-farm sector. NOTE: Sources Business Employment Dynamics and JOLTS (tabula
-tions by Davis and Haltiwanger (2014)). H, hires; S, separations; JC=job creation; 
JD, job destruction. All statistics are percentages of employment. Scope is em
-ployer ˜rms (˜rms with one or more paid employees) in U.S. private, non-farm 
sector. SOURCE: After S. J. Davis and J. Haltiwanger, 2014, 
Labor Market Fluidity 

and Economic Performance
, No. w20479, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Cambridge, Mass.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 89job-to-job ˚ows, has also declined.
30
 Job-to-job ˚ows have historically 
been critical for helping young workers build their human capital and 
their careers. Workers moving directly from job to job in the United States 

have largely re˚ected workers moving up the job ladder, de˜ned in terms 

of ˜rm wages or productivity. Geographic mobility has also declined, 

although the U.S. labor market is still generally more ˚exible than those 

of other developed countries and thus perhaps better positioned to adapt 

to technological change.
31,32
There are also fewer new companies in the United States. New com
-panies accounted for about 13 percent of all ˜rms in the late 1980s, but 

only 8 percent in 2007.
33
 This has direct implications for the adoption 
and diffusion of new technologies. Since the year 2000, there has been a 

similar decline in the number of high-growth start-ups and the amount 

of employment in these ˜rms, as indicated in Figure 4.2.
34
There are many open questions about this phenomenon, and it is dif
-˜cult to draw inferences about these changes. 
There is no doubt, however, 

that the decline in dynamism and start-ups are connected to the decline 

in labor market ˚uidity. Young ˜rms exhibit an especially high pace of 

job reallocation, with some ˜rms rapidly expanding while others contract 

and exit. This implies a high pace of hires and separations at such ˜rms. 

The implication is that a decline in start-ups translates into a decline in 

labor market ˚uidity. 
Moreover, dynamism and ˚exibility have arguably 

facilitated the ability of the United States to adapt to past periods of rapid 

technological change. Davis and Haltiwanger provide evidence that the 

decline in labor market ˚uidity has had an adverse effect on labor force 

participation, especially among the young and less educated. These are 

the most vulnerable groups that may be left behind by technology.
35
30  S.J. Davis and J. Haltiwanger, 2014, ﬁLabor Market Fluidity and Economic Perfor
-mance,ﬂ No. w20479, National Bureau of Economic Research. See also Figure 3-19, ﬁEco
-nomic Report of the President,ﬂ Council of the Economic Advisers, February 2015, https://
www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/docs/cea_2015_erp_complete.pdf. 
31  The Economist, 2014, ﬁAmerica™s Famously Flexible Labour Market Is Becoming Less So,ﬂ 
August 28, http://www.economist.com/news/˜nance-and-economics/21614159-americas-

famously-˚exible-labour-market-becoming-less-so-˚uid-dynamics.
32  R.J. Gordon, 2003, ﬁExploding Productivity Growth: Context, Causes, and Implications,ﬂ 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
33  R.A. Decker, J. Haltiwanger, R.S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda, 2015, ﬁWhere Has All the Skew
-ness Gone? The Decline in High-Growth (Young) Firms in the U.S,ﬂ NBER Working Paper 

No. 21776, last revised January 8, 2016, http://www.nber.org/papers/w21776. 
34
  Ibid.
35  S.J. Davis and J. Haltiwanger, 2014, ﬁLabor Market Fluidity and Economic Perfor
-mance,ﬂ University of Chicago and NBER, and University of Maryland and NBER, http://

faculty.chicagobooth.edu/steven.davis/pdf/LaborFluidityandEconomicPerformance26
 November2014.pdf.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
These ˜ndings seem inconsistent with an increase in contingent work
-ers engaged in short-duration gig jobs. As noted above, there is currently 
not much evidence that gig economy jobs are quantitatively signi˜cant in 

the overall U.S. economy.
36 However, the statistics reported in this section 
re˚ect employers with at least one paid employee (and the employers 

themselves), which excludes many gig workers who are more likely to 

be independent contractors.
Changes in the Prevalence of Start-up Companies
Underlying part of this decline is a decline in dynamism in the pace 
of start-ups and high-growth young ˜rms. 
Before 2000, this phenomenon 

was concentrated in certain sectors, such as retail trade, where there 

has been a shift in the business model toward large national chains (see 

Figure 4.3 for the fraction of employment over time attributed to jobs at 

young ˜rms in speci˜c sectors). Evidence suggests that such companies
 36
  Katz and Krueger, 2016, ﬁThe Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in the 
United States 1995-2015.ﬂ 
 FIGURE 4.2
 High-tech ˜rm employment growth, 1979-2011. NOTE: Data shown 
as Hendrick-Prescott trends. SOURCE: J. Fitzgerald, 2016, ﬁThe Number of High-
Growth, Job-Creating Young Firms Is Declining,ﬂ http://www.nber.org/digest/
feb16/w21776.html. Author™s calculations using Compusat and Longitudinal 
Business Database data.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 91are both more productive and stable than the small, single-unit establish
-ment ˜rms that have been displaced. This highlights the fact that a high 
pace of start-ups and business dynamism is not an economic objective 

in and of itself. Instead, the optimal pace of start-ups and reallocation 

should balance productivity and economic growth bene˜ts with the costs 

of this reallocation. The 
 latter can be high for certain ˜rms and individu
-als who experience the most change. 
As argued above, in retail trade this 
change in the business model has arguably had some positive effects 

where the decline in startups and dynamism is associated with improved 

productivity in this sector.
 Evidence suggests that this change has been 
facilitated by IT, which has enabled large multinational retail ˜rms to 

develop ef˜cient distribution networks and supply chains globally. Of 

potentially greater concern is the decline in high-tech start-ups and in 
FIGURE 4.3 Share of employment accounted for by young ˜rms (less than 5 years 
old) for selected industries. Tabulations from Longitudinal Business 
 Database. 
NOTE: FIRE, ˜nance, insurance, and real estate. SOURCE: Reprinted from R.A. 
Decker, J. Haltiwanger, R.S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda, 2016, Where has all the 
skewness gone? The decline in high-growth (young) ˜rms in the United States, 

European Economic Review 
86:4-23, copyright 2016, with permission from Elsevier.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
young business activity in the United States since 2000,
37
 as illustrated in 
Figure 4.3. Prior to 2000, high-growth ˜rms in high tech (those with an 
employment-weighted growth rate in the 90th percentile) had annual net 

employment growth rates more than 30 percent higher than the median 

˜rms; these ˜rms were predominantly young. Since 2000, high-growth 

˜rms declined, and the 90-50 differential dropped to less than 20 percent. 

This is the same period in which there has been a decline in the growth 

of productivity in the high-tech sectors.
38,39
These trends, especially in the high-tech sector, raise a variety of 
questions. One interpretation is that changes in IT and automation have 

favored larger organizations. Network externalities imply common adop
-tion of software and hardware platforms. Consistent with this, it may be 

that as the information and technology revolution has matured, the objec
-tive of start-ups developing new innovations has changed from internal 

high growth to being acquired by dominant ˜rms in their industry. These 

patterns do not imply that high-growth start-ups in high tech are no lon
-ger playing an important role. It is evident that there are rapid increases 

in start-ups in the sharing economy; however, the business model of such 

start-ups is to grow via partnerships rather than by increasing numbers of 

paid employees. It is also possible that high-tech companies with poten
-tial for high growth are increasingly basing their production activities 

worldwide and thus not increasing their domestic employment. Overall, 

the organizational structure and incentives of start-ups may underlie 

these changes, which are also driven by changes in IT.
CHANGING WORKER DEMOGRAPHICS 
AND JOB SATISFACTION
While considering the role of information technologies in the chang
-ing nature of work, it is important to keep concurrent social changes in 

mind. The demographics of the U.S. population are undergoing a major 

shift: it has been projected that there will be no ethnic or racial majority 

in the United States by 2050. The demographics of today™s employees are 

also changing. Women make up nearly half of the labor force today and, 
37
  High Tech is de˜ned using the approach of Daniel E. Hecker (see D.E. Hecker, 2005, 
High-technology employment: NAICS-based update, 
Monthly Labor Review
, July, pp. 57-72). 
It is based on the most STEM intensive 4-digit NAICS industries. It includes all of the sectors normally considered part of the ICT industries (in the information, service and manufactur
-ing industries).
38
  J.G. Fernald, 2015, Productivity and potential output before, during, and after the Great 
Recession, in 
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014
, Volume 29
, University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago, Ill.
39
  Decker et al., 2015, ﬁWhere Has All The Skewness Gone?ﬂ
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 93as of June 2012, 36 percent of workers were not Caucasian. The millen
-nial generation, which recently surpassed the baby boomers as the larg
-est generation,
40
 is also the most racially and ethnically diverse. As more 
millennials enter the workforce and older individuals retire, the racial and 
ethnic diversity of the workforce is expected to continue to increase.
41,42
Even as the diversity of the workforce is increasing, signi˜cant 
inequalities exist. Social, economic, racial, and political backgrounds 

are highly correlated with academic achievement, economic opportu
-
nity, income, and social mobility. For example, the wealth gap between 

racial and ethnic groups has widened since the Great Recession; the Pew 

Research Center estimated that the 2014 median net worth of white house
-
holds was 13 times that of African American households 
(up from a factor 

of 10 in 2007, and a factor of 6 from 1998-2001) and 10 times that of His
-panic households (up slightly from a factor of 8 in 2007)
.43
While an increasing number of African Americans and Hispanics 
have been attending postsecondary institutions, and representation of 

these groups at top-ranked colleges has grown slightly since the 1990s, 

signi˜cant disparities remain. Of the net new enrollments from 1995 

to 2009, the majority (more than 80 percent) of white students went to 

selective colleges, while the majority (more than 70 percent) of African 

American and Hispanic students attended open-admissions 2- and 4-year 

colleges.
44,45,46
In the long term, disparities in opportunity and achievement, and 
racial and ethnic isolation by school selectivity, will keep some workers 

at a disadvantage in meeting current and changing workforce require
-ments. In response, some organizations are increasing investments in 
40
  R. Fry, 2016, ﬁMillennials overtake Baby Boomers as America™s largest generation,ﬂ 
Pew Research Center, http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/04/25/millennials-
overtake-baby-boomers/.
41
  C. Burns, K. Barton, and S. Kerby, 2012, ﬁState of Diversity in Today™s Workforce: As 
Our Nation Becomes More Diverse So Too Does Our Workforce,ﬂ Center for American 

Progress, https://cdn.americanprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/issues/2012/07/pdf/

diversity_brief.pdf.
42
  A. Mitchell, 2013, ﬁThe Rise of the Millennial Workforce,ﬂ 
Wired
, http://www.wired.
com/insights/2013/08/the-rise-of-the-millennial-workforce/.
43
  R. Kochhar and R. Fry, 2014,ﬂWealth Inequality Has Widened Along Racial, Ethnic 
Lines Since End of Great Recession,ﬂ Pew Research Center, http://www.pewresearch.org/

fact-tank/2014/12/12/racial-wealth-gaps-great-recession/.
44
  Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce, Analysis of Current 
Population Survey, March Supplement, 1980.
45
  Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce, Projection of Labor 
Force Makeup by Race/Ethnicity, 2014.
46
  A.P. Carnevale and J. Strohl, 2013, ﬁSeparate and Unequal: How Higher Education 
Reinforces the Intergenerational Reproduction of White Racial Privilege,ﬂ Georgetown Uni
-versity Center on Education and the Workforce, Washington, D.C.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
diversity training programs, described as ﬁa distinct set of programs 
aimed at facilitating positive inter-group interactions, reducing prejudice 

and discrimination and enhancing the skills, knowledge and motivation 

of people.ﬂ
47,48
The stagnation of median wages (discussed in Chapter 3) and the 
contingent nature of parts of the current workforce may be correlated 

with the continued decline in reported employee job satisfaction. Accord
-ing to one study, job satisfaction was at 61.1 percent in 1983, and this 

number has steadily decreased over time.
49
 A recent Conference Board 
report
50 indicated that a majority of Americans (52.3 percent) are not 
satis˜ed with their job, and satisfaction across almost all job domains 

has decreased since 2011. The decreases were most pronounced in the 

areas of job security, health coverage, and sick leave policies. In spite of 

increased hiring, only 46.6 percent of employees indicated feeling satis˜ed 

with their job security (which is down from 48.5 percent before the Great 

Recession). Another potential source of decreased job satisfaction may be 

that employers are offering fewer bene˜ts.
51 Indeed, 63 percent of workers 
identi˜ed this as very important to their job satisfaction.
52
ORGANIZATIONS AND INSTITUTIONS
IT not only affects the nature of work and the labor market, but it also 
reshapes organizations by changing internal and geographical divisions 

of labor. Adoption of IT alone has not been suf˜cient to guarantee gains 

in productivity; new technologies must be accompanied by changes in the 

organizational structure of ˜rms, including human resource practices.
53,54In addition, as technologies refashion aspects of organizations, they 
47
  K. Bezrukova, K.A. Jehn, and C.S. Spell, 2012, Reviewing diversity training: Where 
we have been and where we should go, 
Academy of Management Learning and Education
 11(2):207-227.
48
  H. Alhejji, T. Garavan, R. Carbery, F. O™Brien, and D. McGuire, 2015, Diversity train
-ing programme outcomes: A systematic review, 
Human Resource Development Quarterly 
27(1):95-149.
49  L. Weber, 2014, ﬁU.S. Workers Can™t Get No (Job) Satisfaction,ﬂ 
Wall Street Journal 
blog, June 
18,
 http://blogs.wsj.com/atwork/2014/06/18/u-s-workers-cant-get-no-job-
 satisfaction/.
50
  C. Mitchell, R.L. Ray, and B. van Ark, 2014, ﬁCEO Challenge 2014,ﬂ 
The Conference 
Board, https://www.conference-board.org/retrieve˜le.cfm?˜lename=TCB_R-1537-14-RR1.

pdf&type=subsite.
51  L. Weber, 2014, ﬁU.S. Workers Can™t Get No (Job) Satisfaction,ﬂ 
Wall Street Journal 
blog, June 
18, http://blogs.wsj.com/atwork/2014/06/18/u-s-workers-cant-get-no-job-satisfaction/.
52
  Society for Human Resource Management, 2015.
53
  E. Brynjolfsson and L.M. Hitt, Beyond computation: Information technology, organiza
-tional transformation and business performance, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives
 14(4):24-48.
54
  N. Bloom, B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts, 2013, Does management 
matter? Evidence from India, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 
128(1):1-51.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 95may also occasion new organizational forms and arrangements. Because 
policies and macro-institutional frameworks are becoming increasingly 

inadequate for this bewildering array of changes, new macro-institutional 

responses may be necessary. Each of these topics is addressed in turn.
Vertical Integration, Disintegration, and Geographical Proximity
Many companies took advantage of the range of technological oppor-tunities of the late 1800s to create vertically integrated ˜rms, an organiza
-tional form that combined many stages of the production process.
55 When the transaction and communication costs of vertically integrating different 

stages of production appeared prohibitive, a ˜rm and its suppliers devel
-oped close long-term relationships, often aided by geographic proximity. 

The auto industry, surrounded by its various suppliers within the Detroit 

area, is a prime example of this structure. Over time, integrated func
-tional organizations developed a distinct system of employment relations, 

distinguished by long job tenure, internal promotion structures, and an 

acceptance of trade and industrial unions as the main vehicle for worker 

voice and protection.
56
 This system of organizing began to change sig
-ni˜cantly in the late 1970s. Although the major recession of that decade 

played a role in the system™s demise, technological change also enabled 

companies to move away from this structure. Gradual but transformative 

improvements in computer and communication technology reduced the 

need for geographic proximity with suppliers. They also enabled a ˜ner 

division of labor, parts of which could be easily outsourced. Computer
-ized communication and information technologies allowed ˜rms to off
-shore many stages of production to parts of the world where they could 

be performed more cheaply (often because labor was cheaper).
Products such as the iPod, although designed in the United States, are 
produced by combining more than 450 parts, produced in Japan, South 

Korea, and Taiwan, that are assembled in China.
57
 A global division of 
labor enabled Apple to take advantage of expertise in making speci˜c 

components distributed around the world (such as hard drives manufac
-55
  O.E. Williamson, 1975, 
Markets and Hierarchies
, Free Press, New York; A. Chandler,
 1977, 
The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business
, Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, Mass.
56
  M. Piore and C. Sabel,1984, 
The Second Industrial Divide
, Basic Books, New York; T.A. 
Kochan, H.C. Katz, and R. B. McKersie, 1986
, The Transformation of American Industrial Rela
-tions
, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, N.Y.
57  K.L. Kraemer, G. Linden, J. Dedrick, 2011, ﬁCapturing Value in Global Networks: 
Apple™s iPad and iPhone,ﬂ University of California, Irvine, http://pcic.merage.uci.edu/
papers/2011/value_ipad_iphone.pdf; H. Varian, 2007, ﬁAn iPod Has Global Value. Ask the 

(Many) Countries That Make It,ﬂ 
New York Times
, June 28, Section 3C.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
tured by Toshiba in Japan) and of the cheaper cost of assembly in China 
than in the United States. Even for products that are produced domesti
-cally, geographical proximity plays less of a role than it did in the 19th 

and 20th centuries. As a result of these changes, organizational theories 

have begun to speak of network forms of organizing as an alternative to 

markets and hierarchies.
58
Distributed and Interdisciplinary Teaming and Networks
Geographically distributed teams, whose members not only span a 
˜rm™s domestic locations but often include members or collaborators from 

other countries and continents, have increased.
59
 Historically, collabora
-tion and communication among team members has required co-presence 

in time and space. IT can enable teamwork in the absence of co-presence 

and has enabled the rise of distributed teams. On the one hand, distrib
-uted teaming enables ˜rms to take advantage of pockets of expertise 

regardless of where they exist and to have someone available to work on a 

project literally 24 hours a day. Such teams are composed of members that 

primarily, and in some cases only, interact via technological means.
60,61,62 
Such teams are generally designed to allow for optimal team composition 

without the burden of travel expenses and allow workers to work more 

ef˜ciently and hone skills by working on a larger variety of complex tasks; 

it also enables a seamless transition from one project to another. 
However, the rise of distributed teams has created numerous organi
-zational challenges, ranging from communication breakdowns and prob
-
lems in the production process to cultural misunderstandings, incongru
-ent work ethics, and the inability of team members to identify accurately 
58
  W.W. Powell, 1990, Neither market nor hierarchy: Network forms of organization, pp. 
295-335 in 
Research in Organizational Behavior
 (B.M. Staw and L.L. Cummings, eds.), JAI 
Press, Greenwich, Conn.
59
  J.P. MacDuf˜e, 2007, 12 HRM and distributed work: Managing people across distances, 
Academy of Management Annals
 1(1):549-615.
60
  W.F. Cascio, 1998, The future world of work: Implications for human resource costing 
and accounting, 
Journal of Human Resource Costing and Accounting
 3(2):9-19.
61
  Business Week
, 1997, ﬁPower gizmos to power business,ﬂ November 24, http://www.
bloomberg.com/news/articles/1997-11-23/power-gizmos-to-power-business.
62
  S.M. Fiore, E. Salas, H.M. Cuevas, and C.A. Bowers, 2003, Distributed coordination 
space: Toward a theory of distributed team process and performance, 
Theoretical Issues in 
Ergonomics Science
 4(3-4): 340-364.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 97who is on their team.63,64,65 It may be necessary for organizations to 
create effective norms to help mitigate challenges associated with virtual 
tools (e.g., reduced understanding as a consequence of being unable 

to perceive the nonverbal cues and gestures afforded via face-to-face 

communication).
Similarly, the use of interdisciplinary teams (IDTs) has also gained 
popularity, namely in the area of health, but its usage is beginning to take 

root in corporate and science, technology, engineering, and mathematics 

(STEM) ˜elds as well.
66
 IDTs are comprised of experts within a given 
˜eld that collaborate and coordinate with each other to complete complex 

tasks.
67
 According to the American Geriatrics Society, IDTs allow medi
-cal professionals to address a patient™s overall needs, which can remain 

unmet in a noncollaborative setting.
68
 Each team member brings unique 
strengths to the team as a consequence of possessing different expertise. 

Such teams are able to collectively provide more to patients.
However, as the prevalence of IDTs grows, organizations will have 
to increasingly contend with the challenges such teams face; it has been 

suggested that employees from different disciplines may differ in regard 

to training, professional values, understanding of team roles, commu
-nication skills, vocabulary, and approaches to problem solving.
69
 As a 
consequence of these differences, team members from different disci
-
plines may ultimately lack common understanding. These problems can 

negatively affect team performance. For example, teamwork failures in 

interdisciplinary health-care teams have been linked to reduced quality 

of patient care. Conversely, enhanced teamwork in such teams has been 
63
  D.E. Bailey, P.M. Leonardi, and S.R. Barley, 2012, The lure of the virtual, 
Organization 
Science 23:1485-1504; P.J. Hinds and S. Kiesler, 2002, 
Distributed Wor
k, MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Mass.; M. Mortensen and P. Hinds, 2001, Con˚ict and shared identity in geographically dis
-tributed teams, 
International Journal of Con˚ict Management
 12(3):212-238; C.D. Cramton and 
P.J. Hinds, 2005, Subgroup dynamics in internationally distributed teams: Ethnocentrism or 

cross-national learning, 
Research in Organizational Behavior 
26:231-263.
64
  C.D. Cramton, 2001, The mutual knowledge problem and its consequences in geo
-graphically dispersed teams, 
Organization Science 
12(3):346-371.
65
  P. Kanawattanachai and Y. Yoo, 2007, The impact of knowledge coordination on virtual 
team performance over time, 
MIS Quarterly
 31(4):783-808.
66
  T.A. Slocum, R. Detrich, S.M. Wilczynski, T.D. Spencer, T. Lewis, and K. Wolfe, 2014, 
The evidence-based practice of applied behavior analysis, 
The Behavior Analyst
 37(1):41-56.
67  S.A. Nancarrow, A. Booth, S. Ariss, T. Smith, P. Enderby, and A. Roots, 2013, Ten 
principles of good interdisciplinary team work, 
Human Resource Health 
11(19), doi: 

10.1186/1478-4491-11-19.
68
  C.A. Orchard, V. Curran, and S. Kabene, 2005, Creating a culture for interdisciplinary 
collaborative professional practices, 
Medical Education Online 
10(11), http://www.med-ed-
online.net/index.php/meo/article/viewFile/4387/4569.
69
  P. Hall, 2005, Interprofessional teamwork: Professional cultures as barriers, 
Journal of 
Interprofessional Care 
19(Supplement 1):188-196.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
linked to increased patient care and patient safety.
70,71
 Evidence suggests 
that team training is one method to improve effectiveness in interdisci
-plinary teams, allowing team members to work effectively despite differ
-ing in many respects.
72
 Thus, if the trend of using IDTs continues, orga
-nizations may need to increasingly invest in training to ensure effective 
team performance.
Changing Employment Relationships
In addition to the changes described above, advances in IT have also 
helped unravel the foundation of traditional employment relationships.
Beginning with Henry Ford™s car factories, during the 20th century 
many ˜rms made a concerted effort to pay relatively high wages to their 

employees as a way of creating relationships of mutual loyalty. In par
-ticular, Henry Ford was worried about high rates of absenteeism. High 

wages would reduce turnover, motivate workers to work harder, and 

create goodwill between employers and employees.
73
 Recent advances in 
the ability of ˜rms to monitor their employees effectively through com
-puter technologies and to outsource activities that can be performed more 

cheaply elsewhere may have reduced the need to pay attractive wages, 

thus reducing the cost of labor for certain types of ˜rms and, hence, reduc
-
ing the ﬁquasi-rentsﬂ that workers enjoy from the employment relation
-ship. The role of computerization in reducing wages has, of course, been 

ampli˜ed by attempts to dismantle or avoid unions
74
 and by Wall Street™s 
willingness to reward ˜rms for ˜nding ways to turn labor into a variable 
70
  E. J. Dunn, P. D. Mills, J. Neily, M. D. Crittenden, A. L. Carmack, and J. P. Bagian, 2007, 
Medical team training: Applying crew resource management in the Veterans Health Admin
-istration, 
Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient Safety
 33(6):317-325.
71
  T. Manser, 2009, Teamwork and patient safety in dynamic domains of healthcare: A 
review of the literature, 
Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica
 53(2):143-151.
72
  Ibid.
73
  C. Shapiro and J.E. Stiglitz, 1984, Equilibrium unemployment as a worker discipline 
device, American Economic Review 74(3):433-444; G.A. Akerlof, 1984, Gift exchange and 
ef˜ciency-wage theory: Four views, American Economic Review 74(2):79-83; T.F. Bewley, 

1995, A depressed labor market as explained by participants, 
American Economic Review
 85(2):250-254.
74
  T.A. Kochan, H.C. Katz, and R.B. McKersie, 1986, 
The Transformation of American In
-dustrial Relations
, Basic Books, New York; P. Osterman, T.A. Kochan, R.M. Locke, and M.J. 
Piore, 2001, 
Working in America: Blueprint for the New Labor Market
, MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Mass.; A.L. Kalleberg, B.F. Reskin, and K. Hudson, 2000, Bad jobs in America: Standard and 

nonstandard employment relations and job quality in the United States, 
American Sociological 

Review
 65(2):256-279.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 99cost, to some degree by breaching implicit, long-term agreements with 
workers.
75
Furthermore, while there is much attention to the effects of IT on 
start-ups and on large, but relatively new, technology companies, tradi
-tional companies are also in the midst of a transformation. Walmart has 

been a leader in adopting supply-chain management systems, radiofre
-quency identi˜cation tags, and other technologies that enable it to man
-age its operations more ef˜ciently, better understand customer demand, 

reduce costs, and substantially increase productivity. Many of its biggest 

successes came in the 1980s and 1990s,
76
 but it is still an important force 
in retailing and the economy more broadly. Walmart employs far more 

people than Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Google, and Microsoft combined. 

This suggests that a large part of the impact of IT on workers is occurring 

through traditional ˜rms. As noted by Zeynep Ton, there is wide varia
-tion in pay and working conditions in industries such as retail, hospitality, 

health care, and other big users of labor.
77
 Understanding how IT is being 
used as part of a business strategy in ˜rms that are providing stable jobs 

would be helpful in identifying private and public policy options for 

improving workforce conditions.
Consequences of Transformations of Traditional Organizations
The transformation of traditional organizations may have numerous 
and far-reaching social consequences. Three are highlighted.
First, if organizations are now providing less secure and shorter-term 
employment, workers may not have the ˜nancial means to withstand 

more lengthy spells of unemployment or underemployment. For 
 workers 
to ˚ourish in more ˚uid labor markets, basic skills will probably be even 

more important than they are today. New education policies may be 

needed that not only strengthen existing educational institutions (so that 

high schools become much better at providing basic skills as well as 

vocational skills) but also promote new ways of encouraging people to 

acquire general, portable skills. Although making college more affordable 
75
  S.R. Barley and G. Kunda, 2004, 
Gurus, Hired Guns and Warm Bodies: Itinerant Experts in 
a Knowledge Economy
, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
76
  For instance, a report by McKinsey Global institute estimated at that as much as a 
quarter of the productivity revival in the late 1990s could be directly or indirectly attributed 
to Walmart™s effects on the retailing sector and its supply chain. See, for example, B. Lewis, 

A. Augerau, M. Cho, B. Johnson, B. Neiman, G. Olazabal, M. Sandler, et al., 2001, ﬁUS 

Productivity Growth, 1995-2000,ﬂ McKinsey Global Institute, http://www.mckinsey.com/

global-themes/americas/us-productivity-growth-1995-2000.
77
  Z. Ton, 2014, 
The Good Jobs Strategy: How the Smartest Companies Invest in Employees to 
Lower Costs and Boost Pro˜ts
, Houghton Mif˚in Harcourt, Boston, Mass. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
to more people is a reasonable ˜rst step, it is also worth reconsidering the 
type of skills that young people require aside from purely technical skills, 

which may have a short shelf life. Simply recommending that more young 

people attend college may not be suf˜cient.
78
Second, as traditional employment relationships decrease, it is unclear 
how workers will secure the bene˜ts, security, and voice that organi
-zations provided during the mid-20th century. The result of the New 

Deal was a series of laws that tied permanent employment to having 

good health-care bene˜ts and pension funds. As long-term employment 

becomes less common, new ways of providing for health care and pen
-sions for all workers need to be considered that transcend their relation
-ships with particular employers. For example, one option would be to 

institute portable pension plans administered by membership organiza
-tions dedicated to the well-being of their members.
Unions, as already noted, played an important role in the era of 
bureaucratically organized ˜rms. They not only negotiated higher wages 

but also better working conditions, which then spread to other indus
-tries either through pattern bargaining or because ˜rms wished to avoid 

being unionized. Unions also provided workers with voice. An oft-used 

framework for thinking about workplace relations emphasizes the bal
-ance between exit, voice, and loyalty.
79
 Workers use their voice to com
-municate their knowledge and demands when they have high attach
-ment to their organization; alternatively, they may use their exit option 

when opportunities for voice are not available. This framework, although 

conceptually powerful, has become less applicable today: more workers 

choose to or are forced to exit despite their willingness to stay. To the 

degree that exit becomes more attractive than voice, organizations lose 

the communication channels that traditional unions were able to provide. 

This may imply the need for new organizational pathways for ensuring 

that workers continue to have a voice, both about their working condi
-tions as well as broader societal issues.
In industries where unionization is in signi˜cant decline, the best 
a union can do is negotiate a better deal for their remaining members, 

often at the expense of other workers. New organizational pathways for 

workers to have an effective voice in the face of increasingly ˚uid work 

conditions are becoming even more important.
78
  See D. Acemoglu and D. Autor, 2011, Skills, tasks, and technologies: Implications for 
employment and earnings, pp. 1043-1171 in 
Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4b
, Elsevier 
B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands; and P. Beaudry, D.A. Green, and B.M. Sand, 2014, ﬁThe 
Great Reversal in the Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks,ﬂ National Bureau of Economic 

Research, doi: 10.3386/w18901.
79
  A.O. Hirschman, 1970, 
Exit, Voice, and Loyalty
, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
Mass.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 101Guaranteeing a voice to workers in a more ˚exible and uncertain 
economy may require entirely new organizational forms. There are two 
alternatives of note that have been used in other countries. The ˜rst is the 

German-style work council, which is as focused on communication and 

coordination as it is on negotiation. Although these councils have ˚our
-ished in the context of traditional organizations, a more ˚exible version 

could play a role in the age of more ˚uid organizations. The second is 

the Scandinavian-style industry or occupational union, which represents 

workers across establishments, thereby enhancing resilience in the face of 

very high mobility across ˜rms. Once again, the traditional form of these 

trade unions is probably inadequate for the modern organization (because 

the industry or occupation may not be the right level of aggregation), but 

it may provide a stepping stone for a more appropriately tailored path
-way of communication for the modern age.
Third, more attention could be given to the ﬁmacro-institutionsﬂ that 
determine national or state-level frameworks and policies. The need to 

rethink these macro-institutions stems from two distinct but related con
-siderations. First, many of the organizational issues that require funda
-mental modi˜cation cannot be done in a decentralized fashion. Making 

health insurance and pension bene˜ts more portable within the economy 

is not something that individual ˜rms can achieve. Nor can local com
-munities independently provide a modern social safety net; this requires 

appropriate tax and redistribution policies from state and federal govern
-ments. 
One such policy that has been considered in the United States in 
the past (and is currently being tested and studied in the Netherlands) 

is a minimum guaranteed income for all; this has been discussed as a 

potential safety net against technological or other widespread unemploy
-ment.
80
 Even with new organizational forms for worker representation, it 
would likely be necessary for the federal government to be involved by, for 

example, rewriting labor laws to enable such a transformation.
The potential for many new technological developments to lead to 
inequality, at least in the medium run, and the potential of some of these 

technologies, through automation, to reduce employment opportunities 

for major segments of the population, make the need for responsive 

national policies more important than ever, in the committee™s judgment. 

At the same time, many feel that today™s political institutions are less 

responsive and less accountable to the welfare of the whole. Part of this 

may be unrelated to technology and may result from a change in the 

distribution of power between different segments of society (or it may be 
80
  In particular, the experiment is studying the impact of an annual income equivalent to 
roughly US$13,000 (T.B. Hamilton, 2016, ﬁThe Netherlands™ upcoming money-for-nothing 
experiment,ﬂ 
The Atlantic
, June 21).
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
driven by ideological factors that have made major political parties in the 
United States less responsive). However, even these developments may 

be a result of technological change. Some technological transformations 

may have increased the political voice and power of some segments of 

society over others. Some writers contend, for example, that Wall Street™s 

rise to political power is partially rooted in technological capabilities that 

allow traders and hedge fund managers to accumulate wealth at a faster 

rate than other groups.
81
No matter what its causes, the debate over increasing the responsive
-ness and accountability of the political process is an important part of the 

broader debate about how to reshape organizations and institutions to be 

more congruent with social needs, including vibrant dialogue on how to 

make better use of new technologies. Some of this has already taken place 

in other countries, for example, by enabling greater voter participation 

and direct input into politics and creating greater transparency.
THE ROLE OF WORK IN OUR LIVES
Work occupies a great deal of people™s time and attention and has 
played a central role in shaping a sense of worth and identity. More 

importantly, in the context of this report, technological developments 

have at least indirectly shaped how people experience the place of work 

in their lives. For example, prior to the development of the clock and 

eventually electrical lighting, work time and personal time were largely 

 synchronized to daily and seasonal cycles. Following the spread of these 
technologies, work hours became partially decoupled from nature™s 

cycles. Stints of work grew increasingly longer until, after decades of 

union agitation, Congress eventually passed the Fair Labor Standards Act 

of 1938, which limited the standard work week to a maximum of 40 hours 

and mandated premium pay for additional hours.
82
 The 8-hour day, cou
-pled with the routine and repetitive nature of many jobs (such as typing, 

data entry, and operating machine tools on assembly lines), contributed to 

the separation of work and leisure typical of many 
 workers of the 1940s 
through the 1970s. After working an 8-hour shift, workers returned to 

their homes exhausted and fatigued, but the evenings were theirs to use 
81
  N. Fligstein, 1993, 
The Transformation of Corporate Control
, Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, Mass.; M. Lewis, 2014, 
Flash Boys
, Norton, New York.
82
  J. Grossman, ﬁFair Labor Standards Act of 1938: Maximum Struggle for a Minimum 
Wage,ﬂ United States Department of Labor, https://www.dol.gov/oasam/programs/
history/˚sa1938.htm#1.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 103as they wished, and weekends became times for leisure and for dreaming 
of vacations and retirement.
83
Computerized information and communication technologies are simi
-larly affecting workers™ lives on at least four fronts: (1) the gradual erasure 

of the boundaries between work and other aspects of their lives, par
-ticularly the family; (2) the use of computer systems to monitor 
 workers™ 
performance, with potential intrusion on the workers™ privacy; (3) the 

potential to displace the physical workplace as a primary locus of social 

identity and sociality; and (4) shifts in the labor market that could help 

confound gender stereotypes.
Because of IT (including e-mail, teleconferencing systems, and the use 
of the Web as a work tool), it is now much easier for work to spill over 

into workers™ family life in any ˜eld that employs them. Although these 

developments are often heralded as a form of freedom that can allow 

indi
 viduals to work from anywhere at any time, thereby maximizing 
a 
 
worker™s temporal freedom and ˚exibility, there is considerable evi
-dence that such ˚exibility has come at the cost of blurring the boundaries 
between work and other aspects of life. Over the last several decades, 

researchers have accumulated a large body of research on work-family 

balance, and most of the evidence points toward a single conclusion: 

work has begun to in˜ltrate times and places it previously did not (and 

vice versa), potentially leading to an increase in work-family con˚ict.
84
 Although the rise of dual-career families has contributed strongly to these 

developments, the use of IT is also strongly implicated.
85
 When workers 
are linked on distributed teams, the ability to hold meetings and send 
83
  For excellent account of the role of work and leisure among blue collar factory workers 
of the 1940s and 1950s, see C.R. Walker and W.H. Guest, 1952, 
The Man on the Assembly Line
, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
84
  J.B. Schor, 1993, 
The Overworked American: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure
, Basic Books, 
New York; J.A. Jacobs and K. Gerson, 2004, 
The Time Divide: Work, Family and Gender Inequal
-ity
, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.; P. Moen, 2003, 
It™s About Time: Couples 
and Careers
, ILR Press, Ithaca, N.Y.; L. Alvarez, 2005, ﬁGot 2 Extra Hours for Your E-Mail?,ﬂ 
New York Times
, November 10, http://www.nytimes.com/2005/11/10/fashion/got-2-extra-
hours-for-your-email.html?_r=0; W.C. Murray and A. Rostis, 2007, Who™s running the ma
-chine? A theoretical exploration of work, stress and burnout of technologically tethered 
workers, 
Journal of Individual Employment Rights 
12:349-263. 
85
  J.A. Jacobs and K. Gerson, 2004, 
The Time Divide: Work, Family and Gender Inequality
, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.; L.A. Dabbish and R.E. Kraut, 2006, ﬁEmail 

Overload at Work: An Analysis of Factors Associated With Email Strain,ﬂ pp. 431-440 in 

Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
, ACM Press, New 
York; N. Chesley, 2005, Blurring boundaries? Linking technology use, spillover, individual 

distress, and family satisfaction, 
Journal of Marriage and Family
 67:1237-1248; K. Renaud, J. 
Ramsay, and M. Hair, 2006, ‚You™ve got e-mail!™ . . . . Shall I deal with it now? Electronic 

mail from the recipient™s perspective, 
International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction
 21(3):313-332. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
work-related e-mails across time zones extends people™s work into the 
mornings before they go to the of˜ce and into the evenings after they 

come home.
86
 The ability to engage in work-related communications dur
-ing lunches, dinners, and even social events leads people to feel obligated 

to do so and infuses settings that were previously primarily social with 

work-related content.
87
 At the same time, technology provides increased 
opportunities for leisure activities at work, from mobile games and online 

shopping to social media and personal communications. There is evi
-dence that the blurring of work and other aspects of life are especially 

common among people in managerial, professional, and technical occu
-pations.
88
 Given the strength of the research on this phenomenon and the 
evolving functionality of smartphones, there is no reason to believe this 

phenomenon will disappear. In short, information and communication 

technologies appear to be eliminating the boundary between work and 

the other arenas of life that were forged by the combination of technolo
-gies, institutions, and social understandings that marked the mid-20th 

century.
Over the last several decades, employers have increasingly used 
information technologies to monitor the productivity and diligence of 

white-collar workers, even as the shift from physical to mental tasks 

reduced the direct visibility of many types of work. The use of data col
-lected by computers and information technologies enables employers to 

impose and enforce productivity objectives and to reward and punish 

workers who do or do not achieve those objectives. Although this kind 

of monitoring is widespread in call centers, for example, where workers 

are expected to handle a set number of calls per unit time and to spend a 

set number of minutes per call, monitoring also extends to workers of all 

types, including professionals.
89
 Computerized monitoring extends and 
intensi˜es the kind of performance monitoring analogous to the time and 

motion studies typically conducted by industrial engineers in factory set
-86
  S.R Barley, D.M. Meyerson, and S. Grodal, 2011, Email as a source and symbol of stress, 
Organization Science 
22:262-285.
87
  M. Mazmanian, J. Yates, and W.J. Orlikowski, 2006, ﬁUbiquitous Email: Individual 
Experiences and Organizational Consequences of Blackberry Use,ﬂ
 in 
Proceedings of the 65th 
Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management
, Academy of Management, Atlanta, Ga.
88
  S. Schieman and P. Glavin, 2008, Trouble at the border?: Gender, ˚exibility at work, 
and the work-home interface, 
Social Problems
 55(4):590-611; S. Schieman and P. Glavin, 2011, 
Education and work-family con˚ict: Explanations, contingencies and mental health conse
-quences, 
Social Forces
 89(4):1341-1362.
89  R. Batt and L. Moynihan, 2002, The viability of alternative call center production models, 
Human Resource Management Journal
 12(4):14-34; R. Batt, V. Doellgast, and H. Kwon, 2006, 
Service management and employment systems in U.S. and Indian call centers, in 
Brookings 
Trade Forum 2005: Offshoring White-collar WorkŠThe Issues and Implications 
(S. Collins and L. 

Brainard, eds
.), Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 105tings to white-collar and professional work. Monitoring has been poorly 
received in the past by blue-collar employees; some attempts to put such 

monitoring systems into place led to strikes, for instance the 1911 strike at 

the Watertown Arsenal in response to Frederick Taylor™s attempt to intro
-duce time and motion studies.
90
 It is not clear that contemporary workers 
are any more willing to accept computerized monitoring, assuming that 

they are aware it is happening, but they are less likely to possess forums 

for collective action.
For many, the workplace acts as a site for social engagement, both 
positive and negative, and serves as a key interface between people™s 

working and personal lives. Indeed, out of social interactions at the work-
place and the work that people actually perform, they construct signi˜
-cant components of their identities and self-worth. Communication tech
-nologies shape many aspects of when, where, and how social interactions 

occur and the tenor of their experience. If work becomes less centered on a 

speci˜c geographic locality, this will fundamentally transform the nature 

of the social interactions around work. Offshored call-center workers pro
-
vide an illuminating example. On the one hand, the call center itself may 

continue to serve as a site of interaction, camaraderie, and competition, 

while on the other hand, it shifts relations at home when a spouse, sibling, 

or parent works nights and learns to speak in another accent.
91
 In short, 
the offshoring of work via new communications technology can bring to 

people in other cultures some of the same work-family dynamics found in 

the United States and discussed above. Other bene˜ts of virtual working 

include the potential for greater inclusion of people with disabilities and 

those with children or elder dependents. But not every organization or 

person will ˜nd that this model works for them.
More generally, however, the rise of distributed and contingent 
 project-based work that can be completed from anywhere, including one™s 
home, while attractive to some workers (especially parents of young chil
-dren), threatens to undermine the social bene˜ts of being co-present with 

others in a workplace. Indeed, one of the chief complaints of full-time 

telecommuters has long been the sense of being isolated and disconnected 

from one™s colleagues and the fear that being away from the workplace 

will lead to fewer opportunities for visibility and advancement.
92
 Despite 
90  H.G.J. Aitken, 1985, 
Scienti˜c Management in Action: Taylorism at Watertown Arsenal, 1908-
1915
, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
91
  A. Aneesh, 2006, 
Virtual Migration: The Programming of Globalization
, Duke University 
Press, Raleigh, N.C.
92
  R.E. Kraut, 1989, Telecommuting: The tradeoffs of home work, 
Journal of Communica
-tion
 39:19-47; D.E Bailey and N.B. Kurland, 2002, A review of telework research: Findings, 
new directions, and lessons for the study of modern work, 
Journal of Organizational Behavior
 23(4):383-400; L.A. Perlow,
 1997, 
Finding Time
, ILR Press, Ithaca, N.Y.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
a great deal of initial fanfare, telecommuting was for decades actually 
quite rare because managers discouraged it regardless of company policy 

and, in part, because only certain occupations performed work that was 

amenable to long absences from the workplace (for instance, software 

developers and academics). However, working when and where one 

prefers may become an option for more people with the increased access 

to work through digital devices and Internet connections, including open-

call work platforms, and more opportunities for just-in-time contracts and 

other temporary work arrangements. Such arrangements preclude the 

opportunity for social engagement and the sustained work relationships 

afforded by spatial and organizational co-location.
Under such circumstances, what role will work play in shaping social 
identities and sense of self? At the moment, very little is known about 

this topic. There is a long stream of research on careers that suggests that 

people will construct careers and identities whether or not they have the 

support of an organization or a recognized occupation.
93
 But what sort 
of identities, careers, and selves will people construct in the future, for 

example, if work becomes a series of gigs done for and with people one 

never actually meets? Conceivably, under such conditions, people will 

reemphasize connections with nonwork friends and family. They may 

also construct unique careers by acquiring additional skills and achieve
-ments. But, coupled with the previously discussed precariousness of mak
-
ing a living in contingent labor markets, the committee suspects that these 

changing employment relations will alter the role work has played in how 

people assess their sense of value and self-worth.
Gender is yet another aspect of the interplay between technology and 
work. Most new occupations begin without a gender label, until they are 

˜lled by employers and gender correlations emerge.
94
 To the extent that 
IT contributes to the creation of new occupations, it provides employment 

opportunities that are less likely to be associated with gender stereotypes. 

To the extent that IT and automation may contribute to the displacement 

of jobs, they are likely to encroach more slowly on many types of care and 

interactive service workŠoccupations that have been traditionally popu
-lated by women. Indeed, many of the fastest-growing occupations are in 

labor-intensive service and care occupations, such as child care, nursing, 

and health technicians. 
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the 
health care and social assistance sector is projected to experience the 
93
  E.C. Hughes, 1958, 
Men and Their Work
, Free Press, Glencoe, Ill.; S.R. Barley, 1989, Ca
-reers, identities, and institutions: The legacy of the Chicago School of Sociology, pp. 41-66 
in 
Handbook of Career Theory
 (M.B. Arthur, D.T. Hall, and B.S. Lawrence, eds.), Cambridge 
University Press, New York.
94
  For historical examples, see R. Milkman, 
Gender at Work: The Dynamics of Job Segregation 
by Sex during World War II
, University of Illinois Press, 1987.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 107largest number of new jobs creation from 2014 to 2024.
95 If this trend con
-tinues, a key question is whether men will also seek employment in such 
occupations and ˜nd it ful˜lling. There are very few historical instances 

of occupations being transformed from female to male occupations (the 

converse is more common), although males entering traditionally female 

˜elds often ride a ﬁglass escalatorﬂ to the upper levels of the ˜eld.
96
 The 
extent to which gender roles and other work-related aspirations might or 

might not con˚ict with the new world of employment that technology is 

creating, and how such social attitudes might be formed or reformed, is an 

open question for research. Rethinking attitudes toward these roles could 

bene˜t women as well as men, since the persistent gender gap in pay is 

tightly intertwined with occupational segregation by gender. 
EDUCATION AND JOB TRAINING
Technological progress affects the demand for education and train
-ing and how education and training are provided.
The common perception that college students are all young adults 
who enroll in a 4-year college upon completion of high school is no 

longer correct. For the past 30 years, close to a third of students enrolled 

in postsecondary institutions have been over the age of 30, and they 

have pursued various types of professional credentials that include but 

are no longer limited to bachelor™s degrees. These students enroll for 

many reasons, especially to become more effective or competitive in their 

current jobs.
97
 In the 21st-century economy, higher levels of educational attainment 
correlate to higher earnings in a given ˜eld. However, earnings can vary 

greatly from ˜eld to ˜eld, so skills and ˜eld of training are an important 

currency in job markets.
98
 If workers take on a larger variety of jobs over 
their career, or if skills requirements shift (whether due to technology 

or other economic factors), they will need to learn a more diverse set of 
95
  The Bureau of Labor Statistics has projected roughly 3.8 million new health care and 
social assistance jobs between 2014 and 2024, nearly 40% of all new jobs; see Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, ﬁTable 2, Employment by Major Industry Sector,ﬂ Economic News Release, last 

modi˜ed December 8, 2015, http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ecopro.t02.htm.
96
  B. Reskin and P. Roos, 1990, 
Job Queues, Gender Queues
, Temple University Press, Phila
-delphia, Pa.;
 C. Williams, 1995, 
Still a Man™s World: Men Who Do Women™s Work
, University 
of California Press, Berkeley, Calif. 
97
  A.P. Carnevale, N. Smith, M. Melton, and E.W. Price, 2015, 
Learning While Earning: The 
New Normal
, Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce, Washington, 
D.C.
98
  A. Carnevale, S.J. Rose, and B. Cheah, 2011, 
The College Payoff: Education, Occupations, 
Lifetime Earnings
, Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce, Wash
-ington, D.C. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
skills over time. This requires an educational system that provides access 
to continuing education relevant to the changing nature of work. It also 

requires a primary and secondary education that prepares students to be 

˚exible learners who are capable of acquiring more diverse skills over 

time.
At the same time, IT is changing how education is providedŠboth 
the nature of coursework, and access to education via the Internet. As 

described in the section ﬁEducational Tools and Platformsﬂ in Chapter 2, 

recent years have witnessed a growth in the availability of online classes 

over the Internet, creating a new mechanism for access to education by stu
-
dents worldwide. Organizations such as Coursera, edX, and Khan Acad
-emy offer hundreds of online courses, and companies such as 
 Udacity 
now team with employers to create and deliver online training in areas 

that enable employees to move up the career ladder and acquire skills in 

high demand. The promise of change in online education is enabled by 

a combination of broad access to the Internet, ease of creating video and 

recorded lectures and hosting them (e.g., on YouTube), and innovations 

in combining lecture-style training, online exercises, and crowd-sourced 

grading. Although this model of online education is still young and its 

eventual impact unproven, it does offer the promise of a potentially sig
-ni˜cant increase in access to education. By globalizing the delivery of 

education, it also holds the potential of giving students access to the best 

teachers worldwide, although the extent of this access will be limited to 

the volume of participating students. Despite the increased availability 

of courses and educational materials over the Internet, there is a large 

skew in the utility of this content to different types of students and in the 

educational topics covered. Furthermore, as discussed in Chapter 2, there 

is evidence that online courses bene˜t most those students who already 

have well-developed learning skills and a strong educational background, 

and may leave students already behind in education even further behind.
It should be noted, however, that a large number of ﬁtraditionalﬂ uni
-versities also provide a wide range of online education programs leading 

to undergraduate and graduate degrees, and these programs have a sepa
-
rate set of rankings within the US News and World Report
 ranking system.99 Students enrolled in online degree programs may complete some or all of 

their courses online, resulting in degrees with identical designations and 

transcript notations as campus-only students. Not only bachelor™s but 

master™s degree programs are taught with this model, which emphasizes 

students™ ability to return to gain additional ﬁlifelong learningﬂ experi
-ences while working full time in a professional setting.
99  U.S. News, 2016, ﬁBest Online ProgramsŠU.S. News & World Report Rankings,ﬂ http://
www.usnews.com/education/online-education
, accessed April 2016.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 109In contrast to MOOC (massive open online course) models such as 
those promoted by Coursera or edX, some traditional universities have 
been engaged in distance education for 40 years or more, ranging from 

radio and television programs
100
 to web-based offerings.
101
 The advances 
of IT access and bandwidth have reduced the barriers of delay and cost 

compared to sending audio or video tapes through the U.S. Postal Service. 

Even during the 1990s, when this model of videotapes through mail deliv
-
ery was the dominant form of ﬁdistance education,ﬂ more than 1,200 U.S. 

higher-education institutions were engaged in distance education, enroll
-ing over 1 million students per year.
102
 From this perspective, IT can be 
seen as enabling and enhancing a traditional form of public higher educa-
tion, rather than a completely new approach to higher education. The dif
-ference in perspectives may be due in part to differences in assumptions 

about the content (what) and form (for whom) of higher education, and 

not just its mechanisms for delivery (how).
As for 
what
 needs to be learned by future employees, the situation 
is even more complex. Surveys of employers show that they evaluate 

both elements of domain knowledge (things one knows about) and spe
-ci˜c skills (things one knows how to do) when considering employment 

readiness.
103
 In fact, areas of domain knowledge, facility with speci˜c 
tools and interfaces, and communication skills can even be considered 

as distinct 
dimensions
 of expertise, with different foundations as well as 
varying demands for education and training programs.
104
 It is unrealistic 
to assume that all members of the U.S. populace should be able to inter
-changeably attend any model
105
 of educational institution and receive an 
100  Wikipedia
, ﬁSunrise Semester,ﬂ last modi˜ed May 2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Sunrise_Semester.
101  Purdue Engineering, 2016, ﬁAccreditations & Rankings,ﬂ https://engineering.pur
-due.edu/ProEd/accreditations-rankings, accessed April 2016; D. Goldberg, 1998, ﬁLearn
-ing from a Distance,ﬂ 
The Washington Post
, April 5, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
archive/1998/04/05/learning-from-a-distance/124a3b3b-c1c6-46fc-8d50-bcdaaa61cdca/.
102
  D. Goldberg, 1998, ﬁLearning from a Distance.ﬂ
103
  J. Casner-Lotto, L. Barrington, and M. Wright, 2006, ﬁAre they really ready to work?,ﬂ 
Conference Board,
 http://www.p21.org/storage/documents/FINAL_REPORT_PDF09-29-06.
pdf.
104
  S.K. Garrett, B.S. Caldwell, E.C. Harris, and M.C. Gonzalez, 2009, Six dimensions of 
expertise: A more comprehensive de˜nition of cognitive expertise for team coordination, 

Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science
 10(2):93-105; J. Winterton, F. Delamare-Le Deist, and 
E. Stringfellow, 2006, ﬁTypology of knowledge, skills and competences: clari˜cation of the 

concept and prototype,ﬂ Of˜ce for Of˜cial Publications of the European Communities, 

Luxemburg, http://www.cedefop.europa.eu/˜les/3048_en.pdf.
105
  Higher-education institutions can be separated into four general emphases, based on 
four distinct historical contexts. The ﬁliberal arts collegeﬂ model derives from a European 

tradition, where general knowledge and intellectual re˜nement, rather than speci˜c job skills 

development, were the primary goals. By contrast, the ﬁvocationalﬂ programs in community 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
interchangeably robust experience to attain broad knowledge, a vast array 
of speci˜c job skills, and ˚uid access to any element of the workforce. 
As 
IT continues to impact the evolution of types and numbers of jobs avail
-
able, as well as the skills required for these positions, educational options 

must shift as well. It is in the best interest of society to develop a system 

that enables everyone who wants to work to have employable skills. If 

this does not happen, societal tensions will mount, and those unable to 

adapt will be left further behind and dependent upon social safety nets. 

Studies on the adaptability of workers from different educational and 

demographic backgrounds could highlight areas where changes to the 

educational system or new economic or social policies would help.
It is very dif˜cult to predict speci˜c future skills needs for differ
-ent components of the workforce.
106
 There are three areas of capabilities 
that can be emphasized: (1) general adaptability, as evidenced by critical 

thinking and ˚exibility of learning approach;
107
 (2) capacity for lifelong 
learning;
108
 and, as mentioned previously, (3) social skills.
109
For decades, American companies have sent manufacturing work 
overseas to places with signi˜cantly lower wages, such as China, Vietnam, 

India, and the Philippines. As mentioned previously, IT facilitated this 

by enabling communication between headquarters and remote locations. 

This ﬁoff shoringﬂ reduced production costs in the manufacturing sec
-tor, translating into cheaper prices for U.S. consumers. Since 2009, some 
colleges are more the philosophical heirs of the apprenticeship guilds of pre-industrial Eu
-rope, where students focused primarily or exclusively on the activities of particular trades 
(J.L. Epstein, 1988, ﬁHomework Practices, Achievements, and Behaviors of Elementary 

School Students,ﬂ Center for Research on Elementary and Middle Schools, http://˜les.eric.

ed.gov/fulltext/ED301322.pdf). A third, ﬁpractical artsﬂ model of public universities grew 

largely out of the Morrill Act of 1861-62, substantially changing American attitudes towards 

engineering and agriculture as a more economic- and jobs-based form of education among 

the land grant universities (J.Y. Simon, 1963, ﬁPolitics of Morrill Act,ﬂ 
Agriculture History,
 Volume 37, p. 103). (Importantly, a second ﬁland-grantﬂ Act of 1890 led to the development 

of a set of institutions for the training of African-Americans, creating a majority of what 

is now known as Historically Black Colleges and Universities, or HBCUs, such as North 

Carolina A&T, Prairie View A&M, or Tuskegee (Conner et al., 2006). A subset of ﬁliberal artsﬂ 

and ﬁpractical artsﬂ universities have also evolved, primarily since World War II, to create 

the concept of a fourth type of university: the ﬁresearch university,ﬂ where fundamental 

advancements in knowledge occurs with substantial extramural funding from government, 

industry, and research enterprise sources.
106
  This was a recurring theme at the committee™s information-gathering workshop. See 
Appendix B for workshop agenda.
107  D.F. Halpern, 1998, Teaching critical thinking for transfer across domains: Dispositions, 
skills, structure training, and metacognitive monitoring, 
American Psychologist 53(4):449-455.108
  R. Blakiston, 2011, Building knowledge, skills, and abilities: Continual learning in the 
new information landscape, 
Journal of Library Administration
 51(7-8):728-743.
109
  D.J. Deming, 
The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market
, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, 2015, doi: 10.3386/w21473.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 111American companies have begun bringing some manufacturing back to 
the United States in a process known as ﬁreshoring.ﬂ
110 
Multiple factors 
are understood to contribute to this trend. In part, further improvements 

in technology have reduced some labor requirements of manufacturers, 

which in turn reduces the importance of lower labor costs overseas. 
At the same time, rising wages overseas, growing risk of reengi
-neering of products by overseas competitors, geopolitical risks, natural 

disasters, evolution toward customization of products to the preferences 

of individual consumers (aided by closer proximity to consumers), and 

growing demand for faster delivery have also increased incentives for 

companies like GE and Whirlpool to reshore some of their production 

activities to the United States. Such new efforts have renewed concerns 

about skills shortages in technical ˜elds that have grown in importance 

to manufacturers. This has led to renewed efforts to ˜nd more ef˜cient 

ways of training workers for middle-skill jobs. However, as automation of 

manufacturing processes continues, there may be lower overall demand 

for manufacturing workers, whether abroad or reshored.
111
 The impact of 
this trend on jobs in the developing world may be substantial; however, 

this topic is beyond the scope of this report.
A number of discussions regarding an increasing emphasis on certi
-˜cations and ﬁbadgesﬂ have attempted to clarify the ability of employers 

to evaluate ﬁwhat one knows aboutﬂ and ﬁwhat one knows how to doﬂ 

in rapidly changing organizational contexts and technological environ
-ments. There have been calls for more traditional universities to pro
-vide more badges and more speci˜c open-access training modules, and 

even patents for evaluating and calibrating such badges.112
 Unfortunately, 
such efforts to provide badging are themselves subject to substantial 

conceptual development and empirical and theoretical research, and in 

some cases subsequent discon˜rmation.113
 Conversely, some speci˜c skills 
110
  According to one report, between 2003 and 2014 the United States has gone from losing 
140,000 manufacturing jobs per year to offshoring to gaining 10,000 manufacturing jobs per 
year due to reshoring and foreign direct investment (Reshoring Initiative, 2014, 
Reshoring 
Initiative Data Report: Reshoring and FDI Boost Manufacturing in 2014
, Kildeer, Ill.).
111  M.B. Sauter and S. Stebbins, 2016, ﬁManufacturers Bringing the Most Jobs 
Back to America,ﬂ 
USA Today
, April 23, http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/
business/2016/04/23/24-7-wallst-economy-manufacturers-jobs-outsourcing/83406518/.
112
  T.V. Kurien, D.F. Brinkman, V. Balasubramaniam, S. Sinha, A.R. Gaglani, and T.S. Nene, 
ﬁU.S. Patent: 13/925,632ŠBadge Noti˜cation Subscriptions,ﬂ October 9, 2014; T.V. Kurien, 

D.F. Brinkman, V. Balasubramaniam, S. Sinha, A.R. Gaglani, and T.S. Nene, ﬁU.S. Patent: 

13/925,619ŠBadge Authentication,ﬂ October 9, 2014; T.V. Kurien, D.F. Brinkman, V. Bala
-subramaniam, S. Sinha, A.R. Gaglani, and T.S. Nene, ﬁU.S. Patent: 13/925,630ŠBadge Local 

Grouping According to Skills and Training,ﬂ October 9, 2014. 
113
  See, for example, S. Abramovich, C. Schunn, and R.M. Higashi, 2013, ﬁAre Badges Use
-ful in Education? It Depends Upon the Type of Badge and Expertise of Learner,ﬂ Associa
-Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
badges, such as training in automotive robotics, have been in place for 
nearly 30 years.
114
New competency-based education and noncredit education models 
that empasize mastery rather than accomulation of course hours could 

also bene˜t students and workers who return to college for job training. 

Such approaches are common in vocational or career-based education 

and training programs, with curriculum often informed directly by local 

employer needs. They enable direct matching of individuals with employ
-
ment opportunities, and can be ideal for those whose time is largely 

already dedicated to work.
Despite innovations in the delivery of education, several rigidities 
remain, particularly in enrollment and completion disparities in post
-secondary institutions linked to race and ethnicity, propoagated from 

those apparent from K-12. As school attendance in most school districts 

is based on residence, residential segregation has resulted in de facto 

segregation of schools. And though college attendance has increased,  

for African Americans and Hispanics, participation is lower for these 

students compared to white students, and they have lower completion 

rates and less favorable post-graduation outcomes largely because they 

are more likely to attend open-access or less-selective colleges. African 

Americans and Hispanics who attend a selective college exhibit 50% 

higher completion rates and earn 21 percent more than those who attend 

open-access schools.
115
 In today™s information-based economy that favors 
skills, this means that many low-income and minority groups lack access 

to many of the skills and opportunities higher education provides.
116
 Regardless of reason, it has been suggested that many community college 

students are unprepared to move into the realms of advanced liberal arts 
tion for Educational Communications and Technology, http://www.lrdc.pitt.edu/schunn/
research/papers/Abramovich-Schunn-Higashi.pdf; R. Elliott, J. Clayton, and J. Iwata, 2014, 

Exploring the use of micro-credentialing and digital badges in learning environments to en
-courage motivation to learn and achieve, pp. 703-707 in 
Rhetoric and Reality: Critical Perspec
-tives on Educational Technology. Proceedings of the Ascilite Conference 
(B. Hegarty, J. McDonald, 

and S.K. Loke, eds.); R.S. Davies, D.L. Randall, and R.E. West, 2015, Using open badges to 

certify practicing evaluators, 
American Journal of Evaluation
 36(2):151-163; E. Fields, 2015, 
Making visible new learning: Professional development with open digital badge pathways, 

Canadian Journal of Library and Information Practice and Research
 10(1).
114
  H. Shimatake, 1987, Training in robotics at Nissan Motor Company, 
Advanced Robotics
 2(4):389-395.
115
  A.P. Carnevale and J. Strohl, 2013, 
Separate & Unequal: How Higher Education Reinforces 
the Intergenerational Reproduction of White Racial Privilege
, Georgetown Public Policy Institute 
Center on Education and the Workforce, Washington, D.C., https://cew.georgetown.edu/

wp-content/uploads/2014/11/SeparateUnequal.FR_.pdf. 
116
  Ibid.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CHANGES IN THE NATURE OF WORK AND ITS ORGANIZATION
 113
or research university environments, either from a technology innovation 
or advanced communication skills perspective.
117
It may have once been thought that more advanced educational 
attainment, as is characteristic of the research university, would make 

one immune to the IT-based automation affecting others in the workforce. 

Evidence suggests this is no longer the case. For example, automated 

image recognition and processing is changing the work of the research 

astronomer, and robotic techniques for automatic gene sequencing affect 

the need for graduate assistants in bench research in the life sciences. 

Thus, prior lessons gained from training shop-˚oor operators in increas
-ingly automated manufacturing settings
118
 could be important across a 
range of job categories whose associated tasks were previously thought 

to be uniquely human activities.
Technical change and evolving work models are leading to new 
demands for a more ˚exible and lifelong educational system, while at the 

same time providing the basis for new kinds of broadly accessible online 

education. Primary, secondary, and postsecondary educational institu
-tions, including the liberal arts, practical arts, and vocational schools and 

research universities, attempt to offer different types of education. The 

curricula of all of these may need to be reevaluated and redesigned to 

better meet the needs of future workers.
The rapid recent growth in online education at both post-secondary 
(e.g., edX) and primary and secondary levels (e.g., Khan Academy) pro
-vide a new kind of educational resourceŠone where geographic distance 

need not prevent access, although access to the necessary technology 

is still not universal. These tools may also facilitate a lifelong learning 

approach that makes it easier for many people to update their knowl
-edge and skills throughout their careers (though, as noted in Chapter 2, 

the reach and ef˜cacy of such technology-enabled platforms likely varies 

with student demographics). For all these types of education providers, 

a key unknown is exactly what should be taught in order to best prepare 

individuals for their future career. It is easy to support the idea of educa
-tion that prepares the workforce for future dynamism in employment 

opportunities and enables lifelong learning. It is much more dif˜cult to 

answer the question of what speci˜cally to teach, and how, in order to 

achieve that educational goal. This is a question deserving of substantial 

new research and experimentation.
117
  H. Coates, 2013, Assessing higher education outcomes and performance, in 
Tertiary
 Education Policy in Australia
 (S. Marginson, ed.), Centre for the Study of Higher Education, 
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
118
  See, for example, A. Pennathur, A. Mital, V. Rajan, D. Kaber, P. Ray, R. Huston, D. 
Thompson, et al., 1999, A framework for training workers in contemporary manufacturing 
environments, 
International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing
 12(4):291-310. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
SUMMARY
Several important themes emerged from the committee™s review of 
how technology is changing the nature of work and organizations.
1.
 In the judgment of the committee, contingent work will expand as 
a result of the continued use and development of computer-based infor
-mation technologies and business models based on web-based matching 
algorithms.
2.
 With the decline of unionization, the prevalence of contingent 
work, and a more mobile workforce, new institutions that also offer work
-
ers a greater voice in their workplace and in the political arena are becom
-
ing increasingly important for worker fairness and equality.
3.
 Because work has become increasingly nontraditional (detached 
from single employers over the course of a career), enabled in part by 

technology, employment institutions may need to change in order to 

provide all workers with access to health care, pension funds, and other 

elements of the social safety net that have been historically tied to full-

time traditional employment.
4.
 Because of the increasing ability to use IT to reduce the need for co-
location, a widening geographical division of labor is likely to continue, and 

new ways of organizing that preclude regular face-to-face interaction will 

emerge, at least for those tasks in which direct interaction is not essential.
5.
 To the degree that IT alters the skill structure on which the divi
-sion of labor is based, educational systems will need renewed attention. 

Although encouraging more young people to pursue a college education 

and acquire the skills needed for service-oriented jobs or for STEM ˜elds 

makes sense, these efforts will not be suf˜cient; strategies for strengthen
-ing social and other uniquely human skills and enabling ˚exibility in the 

face of changing circumstances will likely be important.
6.
 The exact nature of the changes depends not only on technologi
-cal advances, but on a complex interplay of skills, organizations, insti
-tutions, culture, and policies. There is no guarantee that economic and 

social changes will be gradual or that they will be bene˜cial for everyone. 

 Unanticipated breakthroughs not only in technology, but in any of these 
other factors, or in their interaction, could lead to large-scale disruption 

of the status quo.
Research on how work ˜ts into and shapes the lives of individuals 
who are pursuing new forms of employment would help elucidate the 

range of potential outcomes and the policy and other choices that will 

create the greatest bene˜ts for society. New data and methods would 

enable this research. These issues are discussed in more detail in Chap
-ters 5 and 6.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Data Sources and Methods
INTRODUCTION
We can be con˜dent that technologies and applications for digitiza
-tion and automation will continue to advance. However, it is dif˜cult to 
predict the exact nature of these advances, much less their myriad effects 

on the U.S. workforce. This underscores the need for careful and timely 

evaluation and monitoring of trends in technology and the workforce, 

and for an improved understanding of the relationship between the two. 

Such analyses will rely heavily on data, and new data sets and analyses 

may be needed or become available as the landscape continues to change.Today, a variety of data sets exist that contain important information 
about technology, workers, employment, and the national economy. In 

particular, federal statistical agencies have been the predominant source 

for national-level collection of economic, employment, and demographic 

data about individuals and businesses. Additional data are increasingly 

being collected by other means, both in the private sector and by academic 

researchers. Such data range from ﬁnaturally occurringﬂ data, created and 

saved as a byproduct of digital transactions, to detailed case studies of a 

work process or environment, obtained by methodical, scienti˜c observa
-tion of employees at work. All of these categories of information present 

both advantages and challenges.
In this chapter, the committee discusses (1) key existing federal data 
sets and how they inform understanding of the impact of technology on 

the U.S. labor market and the economy at large; (2) emerging data sources 
115
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
and analytical tools that are increasingly enabled by the Internet and 
digitization of information; (3) the use of ethnographic and other qualita
-tive data for understanding causality, and (4) strategies for quantifying 

technological advancement and its ability to automate work functions. 

The committee then addresses the value of integrating these diverse data 

sets to better understand the implications of technology in the changing 

workforce, both from the top down and the bottom up.
DATA FROM FEDERAL STATISTICAL AGENCIES
The U.S. government collects important economic and employment 
data that have been critical for understanding workforce trends and the 

changing nature of ˜rms and workplaces.
There are three primary and general federal statistical agencies: the 
Bureau of the Census, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), and 

the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS); additional federal statistical agen
-cies are dedicated to particular sectors or activity of speci˜c types, such 

as the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS).
The agencies collect data via surveys on both households and busi
-nesses, yielding statistics that are made available to the public and 

aggregated at the national, state, local, and industry levels. Tabulations 

at these levels are further classi˜ed by worker characteristics, such as 

 demographics and education, and ˜rm characteristics, such as ˜rm size 
and ˜rm age. Individual-level data from household surveys are also 

released to the public in aggregate to protect privacy and con˜dentiality. 

The data collected and statistics produced from these surveys are used to 

generate key national economic indicators such as gross domestic product 

(GDP), productivity, employment, unemployment, and in˚ation.
In addition, federal agencies obtain administrative data as byprod
-ucts of various programs and activities, such as household and business 

tax collection and related ˜lings or other transactions or record keeping. 

Core administrative data are housed at the Internal Revenue Service and 

Social Security Administration, both of which have statistical arms that 

provide important measures of economic activity; much of these data are 

also provided to the Census Bureau.
The Con˜dential Information Protection and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act 
of 2002 (44 U.S.C. § 101) standardized the privacy and con˜dentiality pro
-
tections of data collected by the three major federal statistical agencies and 

enabled limited data sharing. However, this legislation does not permit 

the business tax data used by the Census Bureau to be shared with BLS 

and BEA, and thus impedes the integration of these data into a common 

framework to improve the quality of key indicators, such as the GDP, 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 117
and enable new discoveries. Furthermore, researchers must query these 
organizations individually and may encounter data gaps.
In recent years, some repositories of key administrative data have been 
made available to the research community on a restricted-use basis. For 

example, the Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, funded jointly by 

the Census Bureau and the National Science Foundation, allow approved 

research institutions to access census and NCHS data for statistical use; 

other agencies, such as BLS, are scheduled to join this system. Studying 

restricted-use data at the household and business level has already proven 

essential for improving understanding of changing workforce trends and 

the changing nature of employer-employee relationships. Further integra
-
tion of these and other alternative data sources on workers and ˜rms has 

great promise for enabling future research, as discussed in research theme 

8 in Chapter 6. The goals for and bene˜ts of reuse of federal administra
-tive data for statistical purposes are discussed extensively in 
Fiscal Year 

2016: Analytical Perspectives of the U.S. Government
, a deeper analysis of 
content in the 2016 budget request.
1Changes in technology and automation are both facilitating and gen
-erating new challenges for collecting and producing core economic indi
-cators from the U.S. statistical system. IT enables processing and integra
-tion of large-scale administrative data with traditional survey data in 

unprecedented ways. In addition, data can be collected from households 

and businesses electronically rather than simply through paper forms. 

However, response rates on surveys by both households and businesses 

are declining, even when respondents use digital methods. Given these 

challenges, the statistical agencies are beginning to explore naturally 

occurring data from the private sector (e.g., transactions or scanner data 

in the retail trade sector). Fortuitously, the digital data revolution is creat
-ing a wealth of such naturally occurring data and providing new oppor
-tunities for more timely and comprehensive data for tracking economic 

activity. The future of economic statistics is likely to involve partnerships 

between the public and private sector.
For the purposes of this study, while current surveys and administra
-tive data provide a wealth of information for tracking workforce trends 

and the changing nature of ˜rms and the workplace, this information 

does not provide much contextual information about the evolving work
-place. In the discussion of data sources below, the committee addresses 

how contextual information could be acquired and integrated into these 

sources. Sometimes this is through supplemental modules on surveys, 
1  Of˜ce of Management and Budget, 
Fiscal Year 2016: Analytical Perspectives of the U.S. 
Government, 2015, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/omb/budget/fy2016/
assets/spec.pdf, Chapters 7 and 16.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
and sometimes it is by integrating data from other sources, including the 
private sector.
The following sections describe key federal databases, the types of 
data they contain and how they were collected, their curation and access 

models, and the infrastructure that supports them. The utility of each 

data set as well as the challenges faced by researchers using the data are 

discussed.
Current Establishment Survey and the Quarterly 
Census of Employment and Wages
The Current Establishment Survey (CES), often called the ﬁpayroll 
survey,ﬂ is the core source of key national, industry, and regional indica
-tors of earnings and employment for the United States. It is a monthly 

survey of approximately 300,000 establishments tracking earnings, hours, 

and employment statistics for wage and salary workers, administered 

by BLS. Survey enrollment is conducted over the phone, with data sub
-sequently collected each month via computer-assisted telephone inter
-viewing or self-reporting via touch-tone phone entry, fax, Web collection, 

or electronic data interchange.
2 The CES provides a monthly picture of 
wage and salary earnings and employment dynamics for the U.S. private, 

nonfarm sector, to supplement the Quarterly Census of Employment and 

Wages (QCEW), a comprehensive data set (or ﬁuniverse ˜leﬂ) generated 

from administrative data on all private, nonfarm establishments in the 

United States. CES data are generally used to evaluate monthly employ
-ment and earnings growth rates, rather than absolute levels, and are annu
-ally benchmarked (or normalized) to the more comprehensive QCEW.
The CES, the QCEW, and related sources (such as county business 
patterns) are used to track the changing industrial structure of employ
-ment activity in the United States. For example, these data have been 

used to track the shift away from goods production to services in detail 

by sector and location.
Current Population Survey, Decennial Censuses, 
and the American Community Survey
The Current Population Survey (CPS) is the primary household sur
-vey used to track the monthly labor market activity of individuals. The 

survey is conducted in person or by phone by the Census Bureau on behalf 

of the BLS, reaching approximately 60,000 households every month. The 
2  Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2016, ﬁCurrent Employment StatisticsŠCES (National),ﬂ 
http://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cesfaq.htm, accessed April 2016.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 119
CPS is used to produce key indicators such as the unemployment rate, 
the employment-to-population ratio, measures of wages, and hours per 

worker. The CPS covers all forms of work, including workers engaged in 

wage and salary employment as well as those who are self-employed and 

those who are unemployed but actively seeking employment, in contrast 

to the CES, which only covers employees of industries that are covered 

by unemployment insurance. Results from the CPS are made publicly 

available online in the form of aggregated statistics and as ﬁpublic-use 

microdataﬂ (individual-level responses about which additional informa
-
tion, such as geographic location, has been suppressed for anonymization 

purposes). These data play a critical role in tracking workforce trends in 

employment, unemployment levels, the employment-to-population ratio, 

and working hours and wages; these data are also tracked by demo
-graphic information (such as an individual™s race or marital status) and 

job characteristics (such as industry and occupation).
The CPS is one of the primary sources for tracking self-employment 
activity. As noted in the section ﬁThe On-Demand Economyﬂ in Chapter 

4, the CPS shows no recent increase in the share of workers having at least 

some self-employment activity, nor does it show any increase in the share 

of workers with multiple jobs. Both of these ˜ndings raise questions about 

the quantitative importance of the growth of the on-demand or ﬁgigﬂ 

economy. However, as noted, there is some question as to whether chang
-
ing workforce arrangements are appropriately captured via the current 

interview process (e.g., workers may identify differently than researchers 

would have classi˜ed them). It is also possible that new uses of technol
-ogy for organizing such work are not creating a new growth sector, but 

rather centralizing existing informal work patterns. Existing data do not 

allow for a de˜nitive interpretation.
The Census Bureau conducts an annual supplement to the CPS 
that it uses for tracking key trends in the U.S. economy. The CPS and 

other household surveys also include additional, periodic supplements 

designed to capture changing workforce trends. For example, the CPS 

has had periodic supplements focused on the contingent workforce, the 

last of which was conducted in 2005. An updated ﬁContingent Worker 

Supplementﬂ is planned to be included in the May 2017 CPS.
3Related household-based sources for tracking the evolution of the 
workforce include the long form of the Decennial Census through 2000 

and the more recent American Community Survey (ACS), both collected 

by the Census Bureau. The much larger samples in the Decennial Census 

and the ACS permit cross-classifying workforce trends by demographics, 
3  T. Perez, 2016, ﬁInnovation and the Contingent Workforce,ﬂ U.S. Department of Labor blog, 
January 25, https://blog.dol.gov/2016/01/25/innovation-and-the-contingent-workforce/.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
occupations, industries, and locations in a manner not possible for the 
CPS due to factors such as CPS sample size and location suppression in 

its public-use microdata.
Data Sources Tracking Workforce and Employer 
Dynamics: JOLTS, BED, BDS, and QWI
The CES and CPS are invaluable sources for tracking core indicators 
of the labor market, but they should primarily be interpreted as provid
-ing information about the changing characteristics of workers and ˜rms 

over time. To understand the changing nature of the labor market, it is 

also critical to track workforce and employer dynamics and transitions.
Measures of vacancy postings, hires, and separations from the BLS 
Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) enables the tracking 

of workers engaged in labor market transitions. The JOLTS survey is 

establishment-based and provides these statistics at the national, regional, 

and industry level along with statistics by employer characteristics, like 

employer size.
BLS Business Employment Dynamics (BED) data track establishment 
expansions and contractions and establishment openings and closings 

on a quarterly basis, using administrative data about private, nonfarm-

sector establishments. Similarly, the Business Dynamic Statistics (BDS) 

data at Census Bureau tracks job creation and destruction statistics annu
-ally using administrative data on U.S. businesses in the private, nonfarm 

sector. A highlight of the BDS is that it permits the tracking of business 

formation and business failure at the ˜rm level. Entrepreneurship has 

historically played a critical role in the innovation, growth, and job cre
-ation dynamics of the United States. The BDS has shown that business 

formation rates have declined in the United States even in the high-tech 

sector in the post-2000 period. The BED and BDS data are available in the 

public domain at the national, industry, and local levels and by a variety 

of ˜rm and establishment characteristics. These data are also available for 

restricted-use analysis in the Federal Statistical Research Data Centers.
JOLTS, BED, and BDS provide rich information tracking labor market 
dynamics but are limited in that they are based on establishment- and 

˜rm-level information alone. The Longitudinal Employer Household 

Dynamics (LEHD) project at the Census Bureau has created a longitudi
-nal employer-employee matched data infrastructure for studying labor 

market dynamics from both the worker and business perspective. Key 

data products from the LEHD project are the Quarterly Workforce Indi
-cators (QWI), which provide information on labor market transitions, 

including both worker and ˜rm characteristics. Indicators of job-to-job 

˚ows that track workers transiting directly from one job to another, even 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 121without ˜rst being unemployed, are a novel component of the QWI that 
has recently been released. As discussed in Chapter 4, job-to-job ˚ows 

have been a critical way for young workers to build careers and also show 

how workers impacted by changing technologies have adapted by chang
-
ing employers. The new job-to-job ˚ow statistics show there has been a 

decline in the pace of such transitions, posing concerns about workers 

getting caught up in the changing nature of work.
These household surveys and censuses are increasingly being inte
-grated with administrative data to yield new statistical products. For 

example, all of these data have been integrated in the LEHD data infra
-structure, discussed in the next subsection. Such data integration enables 

researchers to combine information on ˜rm-level measures of changing 

technology with what happens to the workers caught up in such changes.The business-level and person-level data underlying the JOLTS, BED, 
BDS, and QWI are increasingly being used in restricted-use environments 

to track workforce trends. Development and access to the longitudinal 

microdata are critical for capturing the changing nature of work. For 

example, Abraham et al.
4 use the integration of the person-level CPS and 
the LEHD-matched employer-employee data to study changing labor 

market trends. They ˜nd, for example, that many individuals in the CPS 

state that they are working as wage and salary workers, but the adminis
-trative data underlying the QWI and other related sources at the Census 

Bureau show that they are working as independent contractors. It is such 

discrepancies that may in part underlie the dif˜culty of identifying the 

impact of the on-demand economy on the workforce.
As discussed further in the following subsection, the longitudinal 
business data and longitudinal employer-employee matched data have 

great promise for tracking the impact of changing technology on workers. 

Workers who ˜nd themselves at ˜rms engaged in changing the nature of 

the workplace can be tracked over the course of their career. If displaced, 

the outcomes in terms of employment and earnings can be tracked. Alter
-natively, the changing nature of the workplace at some ˜rms may lead to 

new opportunities that can be tracked.
Given the interest in and possible growth of the on-demand economy, 
the matched employer-employee data need to be supplemented to include 

workers who are independent contractors. Fortunately, the statistical agen
-
cies, as well as Internal Revenue Service and Social Security Administra
-tion, have administrative data sources that track such activity alreadyŠ

although for the most part these sources have not yet been integrated into 
4  K.G. Abraham, J. Haltiwanger, K. Sandusky, and J.R. Spletzer, 2013, Exploring differ
-ences in employment between household and establishment data, 
Journal of Labor Economics
 31(2,part 2):S129-S172.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
the LEHD data infrastructure.
5 Integrating alternative types of workforce 
arrangements should be a high priority for the future.
Tracking Changes in Technology Using U.S. Federal Data Sources
The federal statistical agencies have a wide array of business sur
-veys that provide information on the changing nature of technology and 
workplace organization at U.S. ˜rms. At the core, the business surveys 

and economic censuses yield the data that permit constructing indicators 

of productivity (such as labor productivity or total factor productivity). 

Productivity measures are commonly used to make inferences about the 

pace of technological change in the economy. As discussed in Chapter 3, 

productivity growth in the United States surged during the tech boom 

in the 1990s through the early 2000s but has slowed since the mid-2000s.
Direct measures of changing technology and innovation stem from 
survey and administrative sources. The Census Bureau conducts the Busi
-
ness Research and Development and Innovation Survey on behalf of the 

National Science Foundation. This survey tracks research and develop
-ment (R&D) activity and innovation activity at the ˜rm-level. It provides 

invaluable information about the sectors where R&D and innovative 

activity are concentrated, which is disproportionately in manufacturing. 

The data have been integrated into the wide range of business survey 

and administrative data to study the impact of R&D and innovation on 

productivity and job creation.
Modules and supplements are periodically added to business surveys 
to track changes in technology. For example, in some sectors and ˜rms, 

the design of new products is conducted in the United States, but all or 

much of the actual production is outsourced. As a result, some ˜rms are 

considered producers of goods even though they conduct little or no pro
-duction activity. To capture such activity, the Census Bureau has added a 

series of modules to the U.S. economic censuses since 2002 on the contrac-
tion of manufacturing services.
6Household surveys conducted by the Census Bureau have been col
-lecting data on computers and Internet use periodically since the 1980s. 

The CPS has had periodic modules about computer use at the household 

level through the early 1990s and about both computer and Internet use 
5  See, however, the NBER/CRIW paper by Goetz et al. (2015) that discusses integrating 
the self-employed including independent contractors into the LEHD data infrastructure 
(C. Goetz, H. Hyatt, E. McEntarfer, and K. Sandusky, 2015, ﬁThe Promise and Potential of 

Linked Employer-Employee Entrepreneurship Research,ﬂ NBER Working Paper w21639, 

doi: 10.3386/w21639).
6  A.B. Bernard and T.C. Fort, 2015, Factoryless goods producers in the US, 
American Eco
-nomic Review 
105(5):518-523.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 123from the late 1990s through the present. The ACS has collected data about 
computers and Internet use annually since 2013. Such household data 

does not provide much detail about the speci˜c nature of technological 

innovation, but it is important for quantifying the penetration of the use 

of IT across the population.
The U.S. Patent and Trademark Of˜ce tracks all patents in the United 
States, including information on the ˜rms and inventors for the patents as 

well as the nature of the patents. The research community has been using 

this as an important source for tracking technological change for years, 

but these data are now increasingly being integrated into the other survey 

and administrative data discussed above. Research projects with partici
-pants from the academic community, the patent of˜ce, and the statistical 

agencies are integrating patent and other related data on innovation to 

longitudinal business data (i.e., the microdata underlying the BDS) and 

the longitudinal, matched employer-employee data (i.e., the LEHD data 

infrastructure).
7 Such data integration permits tracking of the outcomes 
of innovative activity in unprecedented ways as well as tracking of the 

careers of innovators. Along with patent citation data, integration with 

matched employer-employee data enables the study of the networks and 

clustering activity of innovation in unprecedented ways.
Integration of data tracking changes in technology at the ˜rm level 
with matched employer-employee data also has the potential to per
-mit study of the impact of changing technology on the workers caught 

up in such changes. This would allow tracking of employment, earn
-ings, and career paths for those workers who ˜nd themselves at ˜rms 

that are replacing production workers with machines or with globalized 

production.
Tracking Changing Occupational and Skill Requirements
Changes in the demand for different types of skills are a critical aspect 
of the changing nature of work. Data on the changing occupational mix 

and the skill requirements of these occupations are a vital source for track
-
ing these changes. As noted above, household surveys such as the CPS, 

ACS, and the Decennial Census are useful sources for characterizing the 

changing occupational mix of the U.S. workforce over time.
The Occupational Employment Statistics survey, administered coop
-eratively by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and state workforce agencies, 

collects information about employees at nonfarm establishments. These 
7  D. Acemoglu, U. Akcigit, N. Bloom, and W. Kerr, 2013, ﬁInnovation, Reallocation, and 
Growth,ﬂ Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Economics, April 12, http://
economics.mit.edu/˜les/8790. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
data complement the household-based surveys by providing data on 
wages by detailed occupation and location as reported by employers. 

These data are actively used for occupational projections.
In order to classify jobs by their types, functions, conditions, and 
associated competency requirements, the U.S. Department of Labor™s 

Employment and Training Administration established the Dictionary of 

Occupational Titles (DOT), in use from 1938 through the late 1990s. The 

DOT details a taxonomy of occupations and the associated competencies 

(cognitive and noncognitive) required for success in those occupations. 

Autor et al. used elements of the DOT data in their discussion of how 

IT relates to a decline in the demand for routine-intensive occupations.
8In 1992, the Employment and Training Administration established 
the Occupational Information Network (O*NET) online database, which 

describes the detailed competencies and characteristics of occupations 

required for success on the job; it ultimately replaced the DOT. Whereas 

the DOT offered detailed information on more than 10,000 occupations, 

O*NET consolidated and grouped these occupational titles and now 

 covers about 1,000 occupations.
 The content model contains information 
on 33 knowledge bases, 35 skills, and 52 abilities, among other compe
-tencies. The pro˜les are periodically updated based on results from the 
O*NET Data Collection Program™s worker questionnaire, which is sent to 

a sampling of workers and occupational experts.
While O*NET is quite valuable for understanding current jobs and 
associated requirements, researchers face some challenges when aiming to 

use its content to help assess changing skills requirements and the likely 

impacts of technology on a given occupational ˜eld. First, the database is 

not intended to be longitudinal; O*NET 20.2 (released in February 2016) is 

not directly compatible with previous versions of O*NET. Both the O*NET 

questionnaire and associated occupational codes have changed signi˜
-cantly over time in such a way that O*NET classi˜cations are not directly 

comparable from year to year. Furthermore, the system is updated on a 

rolling basis, with competency requirements for some fraction of all occu
-pations updated every year. The census occupational coding system was 

signi˜cantly altered between the 1990 and 2000 censuses to account for 

technological advances in occupational structure and structural changes 

in the economy overall, representing a further challenge to monitoring 

changes within a given ˜eld.
It has also been noted that the degree of variability in the responses 
between occupations is lower than expected. For example, one might 

expect an engineer to use critical thinking skills more intensely or at a 
8  D.H. Autor, F. Levy, and R.J. Murnane, 2003, The skill content of recent technological 
change: An empirical exploration, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics
 118(4):1279-1333. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 125higher level than, for example, a baker. However, worker survey responses 
might show similar required levels or intensity of use of critical thinking 

between these two different occupational categories. The sheer number of 

competencies identi˜ed for each occupation can be overwhelming, with 

120 identi˜ed skills, knowledge areas, and abilities used as classi˜ers; 

consolidating to a more manageable number of factors proves challeng
-ing. The classi˜ers themselves are not necessarily directly linkable to 

requirements for using technology, making it dif˜cult to assess the diffu
-sion of technology into the corresponding occupational ˜elds.
In addition, the knowledge provided by O*NET about which occupa
-tional competencies are required for success in a given occupation is not 

accompanied by information about how to teach or attain these compe
-tencies. There is also little guidance on attainment levels required to meet 

the demands of the occupation, although the data set does separately 

identify ﬁjob zones,ﬂ or groups of occupations with similar requirements.
Despite these challenges, this information has been valuable to labor 
market analysts and workforce participants and has also proven criti
-cal for use by the research community to help quantify and address the 

nature of work. For example, MacCrory et al. have identi˜ed and tracked 

changes in seven orthogonal dimensions of skill in the O*NET data set,
9 and O*NET classi˜cations have been used in several recent studies aim
-
ing to examine what current jobs or work functions could potentially be 

automated, as discussed in the section ﬁEvaluating Job Susceptibility to 

Automationﬂ below.
10
WEB-BASED AND PRIVATE-SECTOR DATA
Government statistics are invaluable sources of longitudinal, large-
scale, and standardized data. However, such data can be costly and 

time-consuming to collect, especially from of˚ine surveys. However, the 

digitization of economic and labor market transactions has created new 

opportunities for tracking and evaluating workforce trends. In particu
-lar, the rise of the Internet, enterprise software systems, mobile devices, 
9  F. MacCrory, G. Westerman, and E. Brynjolfsson, 2015, ﬁIdentifying the Multiple Skills 
in Skill-Biased Technical Change,ﬂ Thirty Sixth International Conference on Information 
Systems, http://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1655&context=icis2015.
10  S.W. Elliott, 2014, Anticipating a Luddite revival, 
Issues in Science and Technology
 30(3):27-36; C.B. Frey and M.A. Osborne, 2013, ﬁThe Future of Employment: How Sus
-ceptible Are Jobs to Computerization,ﬂ 
Oxford Martin School
, September 17, http://www.
oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf; McKinsey 

Global Institute, 2015, ﬁFour Fundamentals of Work-place Automation,ﬂ 
McKinsey Quar
-terly, http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/business-technology/our-insights/

four-fundamentals-of-workplace-automation.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
and computational and data storage capacity have led to unprecedented 
amounts of data being ﬁborn digital,ﬂ including some of the administra
-tive data discussed in the Introduction to this chapter. Much as advances 

in analytical methods have enabled new products, services, and tools for 

research and business (with implications for the workforce), such meth
-ods also present new opportunities for identifying and understanding 

changes in the labor economy.
For example, consider the rise of ﬁbig dataﬂ and associated analytics. 
Digital data are now being created at vastly greater quantities than ever 

before. They are available more quickly, often in real time, and they are 

available in many forms and types.
11 Big data are commonly described as 
differing from traditional data sources due to the volume, velocity, and 

variety of these data.
12
 The following types of naturally occurring dataŠthat is, data that 
would exist in digital form whether or not someone sought themŠpro
-vide key examples of analytical opportunities for researchers.

Individual worker pro˜les. 
Online networking platforms, especially 
professional networking or job-seeking platforms such as LinkedIn or 

Monster.com, enable individuals to create and maintain personalized 

pro˜les and help to match individuals with potential job prospects. Users 

may input their employment status, current and past employers, job 

titles, certi˜cations, and skills, as well as their educational background, 

geographical location, professional interests, relevant experience, and 

the type of job they are seeking (if applicable). Some of these data are 

publicly searchable onlineŠfor example, if a user chooses to make his or 

her pro˜le visible to the public. Some of it is kept private or con˜dential, 

either to protect the personal information of the individual or to be used 

exclusively by the platform owner for its own analyticsŠto generate rev
-enue by selling targeted advertising or to enhance its service or product. 

Analysis of privately held data can also enable a company to conduct its 

own research about the labor market to inform future business models, 

or the data could be made available to outside researchers.

Job listings. 
Companies seeking to hire may post vacancy announce
-ments on a range of websites, including their own and those of pro
-fessional societies, local news outlets, employment services, and online 

professional networking platforms. Again, much of this information is 
11  See also E. Brynjolfsson and A. McAfee, 2012, Big data: The management revolution, 
Harvard Business Review
 90(10):60-68.
12
  META Group, 2001, ﬁ3D Data Management: Controlling Data Volume, Velocity, and 
Variety,ﬂ February 6, https://blogs.gartner.com/doug-laney/˜les/2012/01/ad949-3D-Data-
Management-Controlling-Data-Volume-Velocity-and-Variety.pdf.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 127publicly accessible and searchable. Advances in big data approaches and 
computational and storage capacity make it possible to monitor, track, 

and analyze job openings over time, including key elements such as posi
-tion title, industry sector, listed skills and educational requirements for 

a given job title, and how long the posting persists before it is removed. 

Factors that must be taken into account during aggregation and inter
-pretation of these data include the existence of multiple postings for the 

same position, delayed updates or removal of advertisements for ˜lled 

positions, a lack of information about jobs not posted on publicly search
-able sites, and other incomplete or inaccurate information. Analysis of 

these and other data mined from the Web present opportunities for close 

monitoring and dynamic analysis of the labor market. For example, Burn-
ing Glass Technologies analyzes millions of job postings to track skills 

gaps in real time.
13
 Real Time Macroeconomics works similarly, making 
use of Google Trends and scraping online data from job postings, layoff 

announcements, and wage reports to develop economic indicators that 

supplement government data.
14
Additional information, such as retail or online purchasing trends 
(tracked via bar-code scanners in brick-and-mortar stores or product 

numbers in online purchases), search queries (inputs into online search 

engines), social media content, and related data, may contain useful evi
-dence of technology diffusion, economic change, and employment or 

business trends.
A wealth of information (including from some of the categories iden
-ti˜ed above) is held or generated by the private sector, such as corpora
-tions with large employment numbers, employment services, and others 

whose business practices would shed light on how technology is chang
-ing the U.S. and global economies and workforce. However, much of this 

is not publicly available for reasons such as the need to protect individual 

privacy or proprietary business information.
Overall, Web-based and private-sector data present great potential for 
enabling new insights into the changing nature of work and workforce 

trends. For example, in 2009, Hyunyoung Choi and Hal Varian developed 

a model that predicted initial claims for unemployment bene˜ts using 

data from Google Trends.
15
 They created two variables to account for the 
frequency of job-related as well as welfare and unemployment search 
13  Burning Glass Technologies, 2016, ﬁAbout Burning Glass Technologies,ﬂ http://
burning-glass.com/about/, accessed April 2016.
14
  Real Time Macroeconomics, 2016, ﬁReal Time Online Economic Data,ﬂ http://www.
realtimemacroeconomics.com/#real-time-online-economic-data, accessed April 3, 2016.
15  H. Choi and H. Varian, 2012, Predicting the present with Google Trends, 
Economic Record 88(s1):2-9.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
terms. After adding the variables to the standard forecasting model, Choi 
and Varian found their Google Trends model outperformed other models 

of the Department of Labor™s initial claims data. Wu and Brynjolfsson
16
 also used Google Trends to predict housing-price changes. Although they 

constructed the model to be simpler than the one used by the National 

Association of Realtors, by using real-time data, they were able to make 

predictions more accurately than the experts.
17
Federal statistical agencies have begun to use big data sources in their 
evaluations. For example, the BLS currently uses ﬁweb-scrape character
-istics for hedonicsﬂ to help calculate the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
18
 Meanwhile, the BEA also uses various digital data sources, including 

QuickBooks, Mint Bills, PayCycle, credit card data, and the Consumer 

Financial Protection Bureau Consumer Credit Panel as well as ﬁbillions 

of claims from both Medicare and private commercial insurance to deter
-mine the spending for over 250 diseases.ﬂ
19
A very promising example of analytics using web-based data is the 
Billion Prices Project (BPP), which includes a daily price index to extend 

the monthly CPI.
20
 The BPP collects and aggregates the prices of approxi
-mately 15 million products and calculates a 
daily
, not annual, in˚ation 
index for 20 countries. It is considered more accurate than the of˜cial 

price indexes of some governments and enables analysis of other trends, 

such as premiums paid for green products, adjustment of prices to shocks, 

and price ﬁstickiness.ﬂ
21
 It is important to note that the BPP is not meant 
to be treated as a substitute for of˜cial statistics, but rather as a comple
-ment, in part because BPP and the CPI do not always measure the same 
16  L. Wu and E. Brynjolfsson, 2009, The future of prediction: how Google searches 
foreshadow housing prices and quantities, p. 147 in 
ICIS 2009 Proceedings
; L. Wu and E. 
Brynjolfsson, 2014, ﬁThe Future of Prediction: How Google Searches Foreshadow Housing 
Prices and Sales,ﬂ paper presented at the meeting Economics of Digitization: An Agenda, 

June 6-7, 2013, http://conference.nber.org/confer//2013/DIGs13/Wu_Brynjolfsson.pdf.
17
  Ibid.
18  E. Groshen, Bureau of Labor Statistics, ﬁGovernment and Big Data: What™s Our future?,ﬂ 
presentation at American Enterprise Institute for the Federal Statistical System in a Big Data 

world, March 12, 2015.
19
  D. Johnson, ﬁCommercial Big Data and Of˜cial Statistics,ﬂ Bureau of Economic Analy
-sisŠFederal Economic Statistics Advisory Committee presentation in BEA Expert Meeting 

on Exploiting Commercial Data for Of˜cial Economic Statistics on November 19, 2015; B.C. 

Moyer, ﬁBig Data Landscape, 2015-2020,ﬂ Bureau of Economic Analysis, presentation at 

Global Conference on Big Data for Of˜cial Statistics, October 20, 2015.
20
  A. Cavallo and R. Rigobon, 2016, The Billion Prices Project: Using online prices for 
measurement and research, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives
 30(2):151-178.
21
  A. Cavallo, 2013, Online and of˜cial prices indexes: Measuring Argentina™s in˚ation, 
Journal of Monetary Economics
 60(2):152-165; N. DuVergne Smith, 2010, ﬁBillion Prices Project: 
Introducing Real-Time Economics,ﬂ 
MIT News
, December 1, http://news.mit.edu/2010/
billion-prices-project.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 129prices. (For example, the BPP cannot easily account for services.) Similar 
complementary models could be developed to identify technology trends 

and advances, changing employment opportunities or skills demands 

for different occupational ˜elds, and potential correlations between these 

trends.
Work is also under way to use social media to track economic trends. 
In particular, analysis of Twitter ˜elds, conducted jointly by experts in 

computer science and economics, has been used to track and predict 

unemployment trends.
22
Such successes demonstrate the potential for digital and web-based 
data to yield new insights into current and potential workforce changes. 

In general, these data could be uniquely useful to researchers and policy 

makers since they can be collected and searched in real time, at high 

granularity, and reveal unanticipated trends.
However, there are notable challenges associated with web-based 
and private-sector data sets. First, valuable data held by the private sec
-tor are not generally available to researchers; if they were, steps would 

likely be needed to protect proprietary business information. Pilot efforts 

testing the potential of public-private data sharing to yield more complete 

data sets while reducing costs are underway at BLS, the Census Bureau, 

and BEA (although details and results of these efforts are not available). 

Although private sector data sets are clearly of signi˜cant value to the 

companies that collect them, there may well be motivations on both sides 

to share and aggregate data and to make aggregate statistics available to 

researchers and the public.
23
Second, large-scale collection and analysis of nonpublic information, 
such as credit-card transactions, or even some publicly available data, 

such as social media information, and much of the administrative data 

described above could have signi˜cant privacy or ethical implications, 

which will not be explored here. Finally, big data and data-mining-based 

approaches to uncovering important trends also have the potential to sur
-face spurious correlations, and decisions about how to sort or ˜lter input 

data prior to analysis may be subjective and yield skewed results. Even if 

trends and correlations are accurately identi˜ed, analytics alone may not 
22
  D. Antenucci, M. Cafarella, M. Levenstein, C. Ré, and M.D. Shapiro, 2014, ﬁUsing social 
media to measure labor market ˚ows,ﬂ NBER Working Paper No. 20010, National Bureau 
of Economic Research, doi: 10.3386/w20010.
23
  Technical and policy issues associated with such partnerships for aggregating diverse 
data for the enhancement of federal statistics are currently being explored as part of another 

study of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. See the website 

for the Panel on Improving Federal Statistics for Policy and Social Science Research Using 

Multiple Data Sources and State-of-the-Art Estimation Methods, at http://sites.national
 academies.org/DBASSE/CNSTAT/DBASSE_170268.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
provide insight into the underlying causes of or meaning behind such 
trendsŠeven if they also yield accurate predictions.
24
 More qualitative 
or in-depth examination of workforce and technology trends, along with 

hypothesis-driven research grounded in established scienti˜c theory, will 

be needed to unravel the bigger picture.
QUALITATIVE METHODS
Macroeconomic and quantitative analytical approaches are invaluable 
for identifying and understanding overall trends and indicators, but they 

may not provide a clear picture of what is occurring at the level of indi
-vidual workers or families. As mentioned in the previous section, these 

methods may also fail to reveal causality.
For these insights, the committee may turn to microdata and qualita
-tive social science methods. These methods include case studies, participant 
observation, ethnographic interviewing, life histories, and the analysis of 

textual data. Of these methods, participant observation and ethnographic 

interviewing have contributed the most to an understanding of the chang
-ing nature of work. Participant observation (or ˜eldwork) involves long 

periods of immersion in setting, a subculture, an occupation, or a work
-place.
25
 Indeed, much of what is known about the social organization of 
work as it existed in the mid-20th century derives from ˜eldwork con
-24
  See, for example, D. Boyd and K. Crawford, 2012, Critical questions for big data: Provo
-cations for a cultural, technological, and scholarly phenomenon, 
Information, Communication 
and Society
 15(5):662-679.
25
  There are numerous texts that cover how to do ˜eldwork and ethnographic interview
-ing. Some of the most widely used include the following: A.L. Strauss and J. Corbin, 1990, 

Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques
, SAGE Publications, 
Thousand Oaks, Calif.; J.P. Spradley, 1979, 
The Ethnographic Interview
, Holt, Rinehardt and 
Winston, New York; J. Lo˚and and L.H. Lo˚and, 1984, 
Analyzing Social Settings: A Guide to 
Qualitative Observation and Analysis
, Wadsworth, Belmont, Calif.; J. Van Maanen, 1988, 
Tales 
of the Field: On Writing Ethnography
, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill.; M. Agar, 1980, 

The Professional Stranger
, Academic Press, New York.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 131ducted in mines,26,27 factories,28,29 of˜ces,30 construction sites,
31,32 and other 
work settings.
33,34
 In fact, ˜eld studies such as these provided the situated, 
contextual insights that enabled sociologists to elaborate on theories of 
bureaucratic organizing as well as the grounding for large-scale survey 

research on the nature of work and work life throughout the remainder of 

the century. Ethnographic research continues to provide grounded under
-standings of the changing nature of work in the 21st century. Examples 

include studies of ˜nite element analysis and other mathematical simula
-tion tools in automobile engineering,
35
 the work and careers of ˜nancial 
analysts on Wall Street,
36 the work of technicians in a variety of settings,37,38 
and the work of personal service workers39 and contract workers.40,41 These 
and other ethnographies offer considerable fodder for developing a more 

macro-oriented understanding of the variety of trends characteristic of 

changes in the nature of work and the structure of the workforce. More
-over, data from ˜eld studies and related methods are likely to raise ques
-tions that will fruitfully guide more macro-level research.
When carefully coupled, mixed-methods research can help to address 
26
  E.L. Trist and K.W. Bamforth, 1951, Some social psychological consequences of the 
Longwall method of coal getting, 
Human Relations
 4(1):3-38.
27
  A.W. Gouldner, 1954, 
Industrial Bureaucracy
, Free Press, New York.
28
  C.R. Walker and W.H. Guest, 1952, 
The Man on the Assembly Line
, Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
29
  F.C. Mann and R.C. Hoffman, 1960, 
Automation and the Worker
, Henry Holt and Com
-pany, New York.
30
  P.M. Blau, 1955, 
The Dynamics of Bureaucracy
, Chicago University Press, Chicago, Ill.
31
  R. Dubin, 1956, Industrial workers™ worlds: A study of the ‚central life interests™ of in
-dustrial workers, 
Social Problems
 3(3):131-142.
32
  J. Haas, 1977, Learning real feelings: A study of high steel ironworkers™ reactions to fear 
and danger, 
Sociology of Work and Occupations 
4(4):147-170.
33
  R.L. Gold, 1964, In the basement: The apartment building janitor, pp. 1-49 in 
The Human 
Shape of Work: Studies in the Sociology of Occupations
 (P.L. Berger, ed.), Macmillan, New York.
34  L. Braude, 1975, Work and Workers: A Sociological Analysis
, Praeger Publishers, New York.
35
  D.E. Bailey, P.M. Leonardi, and S.R. Barley, 2012, The lure of the virtual, 
Organization 
Science
 23(5):1485-1504.
36
  K. Ho, 2009, 
Liquidated: An Ethnography of Wall Street
, Duke University Press, Durham, 
N.C.
37
  S.R. Barley, 1996, Technicians in the workplace: Ethnographic evidence for bringing 
work into organization studies, 
Administrative Science Quarterly
 41(3):404-441.
38
  S.E. Zabusky and S.R. Barley, 1996, Rede˜ning success: Ethnographic observations on 
the careers of technicians, in 
Broken Ladders
 (P. Osterman, ed.), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, Mass.
39  A.R. Hochschild, 1983, 
The Managed Heart: Commercialization of Human Feeling
, University 
of California Press, Berkeley, Calif.
40
  S.R. Barley and G. Kunda, 2004, 
Gurus, Hired Guns and Warm Bodies: Itinerant Experts in 
a Knowledge Economy
, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
41
  V. Smith, 2001, 
Crossing the Great Divide: Worker Risk and Opportunity in the New Economy
, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, N.Y.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
important questions simultaneously from the bottom up and the top 
down, leading to more informed interpretations of data, deeper and more 

complete knowledge, and new, testable hypotheses.
EVALUATING JOB SUSCEPTIBILITY TO AUTOMATION
Until recently, it was generally accepted that routine tasks (whether 
manual or cognitive) were the most susceptible to automation (as opposed 

to nonroutine tasks).
42,43,44
 It is becoming clear that advances in arti˜cial 
intelligence (AI), machine learning, and robotics are increasingly making 

the automation of some nonroutine tasks, such as writing news articles, 

answering questions, driving, and even navigating uneven terrain, practi-
cally feasible, as discussed in Chapter 3.
Recent approaches to analyzing the types of jobs subject to automation 
have involved matching current technological capabilities with the skills 

or tasks associated with common occupational ˜elds, in particular, as 

identi˜ed in the O*NET system (see the section ﬁTracking Changing Occu
-
pational and Skill Requirementsﬂ above for a discussion of O*NET).
45,46,47
 This approach provides a systematic identi˜cation of human skills to be 

compared to or quali˜ed in terms of technical capabilities, although it is 

limited to some extent due to the challenges of using O*NET classi˜ca
-tions for longitudinal tracking, as outlined in the section.
The ˜rst such study,
48
 from 2013, estimated that approximately 47 
percent of U.S. jobs are at high risk (
70 percent probability) of being auto
-mated over the next few decades as a result of advances in AI, machine 

learning, and mobile robotics. This evaluation considered only the techno
-
logical capability of completing the associated work tasks, to the exclusion 

of other economic, organizational, and social considerations. Authors Frey 

and Osborne used a machine-learning approach, classifying the suscep
-42
  D.H. Autor, F. Levy, and R.J. Murnane, 2003, The skill content of recent technological 
change: An empirical exploration, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics
 118(4):1279-1333.
43
  M. Goos, A. Manning, and A. Salomons, 2009, Job polarization in Europe, 
American 
Economic Review
 99(2):58-63.
44
  D.H. Autor and D. Dorn, 2013, The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization 
of the US labor market, 
American Economic Review
 103(5):1553-1597.
45  S.W. Elliott, 2014, Anticipating a Luddite revival, 
Issues in Science and Technology
 30(3):27-36.
46  C.B. Frey and M.A. Osborne, 2013, ﬁThe Future of Employment: How Susceptible 
Are Jobs to Computerization,ﬂ Oxford Martin School, http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/
downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf.
47
  McKinsey Global Institute, 2015, 
Four Fundamentals of Work-place Automation
, McKinsey 
Quarterly, http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/business-technology/

our-insights/four-fundamentals-of-workplace-automation.
48
  Frey and Osborne, 2013, ﬁThe Future of Employment.ﬂ 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 133tibility of 70 speci˜c jobs to automation by eye (assigning a ﬁ1ﬂ to jobs 
for which all tasks are automatable by a state-of-the art computer with 

suf˜cient availability of big data, and a ﬁ0ﬂ to those for which at least one 

task cannot be automated), then used this assessment as the training data 

for categorizing 703 jobs classi˜ed in O*NET on a probability spectrum 

from 0 to 1.
A related study in progress, preliminarily reported on in 2014,
49
 sam
-pled a decade™s worth of articles from 
AI Magazine
 and 
IEEE Robotics & 
Automation Magazine, identifying specialized research of note in these 

˜elds and grouping the reported technical accomplishments into four 

categories (language, reason, vision, and moving). The capabilities of 

these top technologies were compared to the ﬁanchoring tasksﬂ provided 

as benchmarks for the O*NET ability-level rating system in relevant skills 

categories. This preliminary qualitative analysis suggested that the abili
-ties of these leading-edge IT and robotics systems were analogous to the 

skill level required to successfully perform approximately 81 percent 

of current U.S. jobs. While, again, there are many additional factors to 

consider, including the costs and barriers to further develop these tech
-nologies and bring them to market, challenges associated with integrating 

these components into larger systems, and market demand for and soci
-etal acceptance of such automation practices, this evaluation suggests that 

automation of a vast number of jobs is becoming increasingly technically 

feasible. A full report of these results is currently in development for 
The
 Oxford Handbook of Skills and Training
.50
Another analysis came from the McKinsey Global Institute, whose 
researchers evaluated which of 2,000 occupational activities characterized 

by the O*NET system could be automated through some application of 

current technologies. Their analysis suggested that 5 percent of jobs could 

currently be automated in their entirety, and that 60 percent of jobs could 

have at least 30 percent of their associated tasks automated by existing 

technologies. Overall, they estimate that 45 percent of work activities are 

currently automatable, although this number would rise to 58 percent if 

natural-language processing were to reach the median level of human 

performance. The researchers thus suggest that in the near term it is 

more appropriate to focus on the automation of speci˜c work tasks than 

the automation of complete jobsŠsuggesting the potential for signi˜cant 

change to the structure of work.
51
49
  Elliott, 2014, Anticipating a Luddite revival.
50
  Ibid.
51
  McKinsey Global Institute, 2015, 
Four Fundamentals of Work-place Automation.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
0.830.310.040.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Less than 20 Dollars20 to 40 DollarsMore than 40 DollarsMedian Probability of AutomationMedian Hourly Wage in 2010FIGURE 5.1 Median probability of automation by an occupation™s median hourly 
wage. SOURCE: Council of Economic Advisors (CEA), 2016, 
Economic Report 
of the President
, p. 239, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/docs/
ERP_2016_Book_Complete%20JA.pdf. Data from Bureau of Labor Statistics; C.B. 

Frey and M.A. Osborne, ﬁThe Future of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs 

to Computerisation?,ﬂ working paper, Oxford Martin Programme on the Impacts 

of Future Technology, September 17, 2013, http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/

publications/view/1314; CEA calculations.
It is noteworthy that the 2016 Economic Report of the President
52
 addressed the question of automation of work. It contains an analysis by 
the Council of Economic Advisors that makes use of Frey and Osborne™s 

results to assess the probability of automation of jobs according to wage 

groups. Figure 5.1 shows their results, illustrating the estimate that lower-

paying jobs are more likely to be automated.
While such evaluations of susceptibility of work to automation are 
relatively new and not without limitations, they are provocative and 

present systematic approaches for addressing the question of what 
52
  Council of Economic Advisors, 2016, 
Economic Report of the President
, p. 249, https://
www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/docs/ERP_2016_Book_Complete%20JA.pdf.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA SOURCES AND METHODS
 135jobs may become fully or partially automated. There is rich potential 
to expand upon this research, in particular by re˜ning or augmenting 

these approaches; identifying strategies for testing the accuracy of such 

predictions; and incorporating other factors, such as societal acceptance 

of a given technology, that contribute to automation of particular work 

functions and jobs.
SUMMARY
Data collected by federal statistical agencies have been invaluable for 
understanding the status of the workforce and the economy at large, such 

as employment numbers and salaries, and for tracking technology-related 

values such as productivity. Many of these data sets are authoritative 

and comprehensive. However, collection and curation of such statistics 

is resource-intensive, and data sets must be updated periodically, while 

limited update frequencies can be a challenge for researchers. There is 

potential for technology to reduce some of these costs, for instance, via 

automated AI telephone interview systems, large-scale digital surveys, 

and more effective use of administrative data and the increasing amounts 

of digital data created for other purposes. In many cases, data are updated 

annually; other data sets are only updated periodically (e.g., it has been 

more than 10 years since the last Contingent Worker Supplement to the 

Current Population Survey). Additional challenges to using these data 

sets include the rede˜nition of certain classi˜ers or categories over time, 

which can make it challenging to track longitudinal trends, or the irregu
-lar updating of subsections of data sets (such as with O*NET); in the com-
mittee™s judgment, some data set (whether based on O*NET or otherwise) 

that enables longitudinal analysis of shifting job de˜nitions and skills 

requirements for occupational ˜elds would be bene˜cial.
Coupled with advances in tools for data mining and big data ana
-lytics, the digitization of myriad business, employment, and economic 

transactions as well as administrative and other born-digital data presents 

new opportunities for analyzing changing economic, workforce, technol
-ogy, and societal trends. Academic researchers and private-sector orga
-
nizations are already exploring these opportunities. These approaches 

could potentially augment or complement federal statistics and provide 

new ways of monitoring emerging workforce and technology trends. 

However, these approaches require rigorous privacy-protection measures, 

protection of con˜dential business information, and cognizance of the 

potential for intrinsic bias in mined data; such challenges extend broadly 

to all data-driven research.
While large-scale quantitative data sets are critical for understanding 
current trends and correlations, they do not always reveal causality and 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
may provide a picture that is somewhat removed from actual human 
experience. The use of microscale social science methods, such as inter
-view, ˜eld work, and other ethnographic approaches, can help researchers 

bridge these critical gaps by testing conclusions from quantitative data 

and lead to new hypotheses and study, survey, or experiment design.
There are few methods for quantifying technological progress or 
foundational advances in science and engineering that can be used for 

developing indicators of impending changes to the labor economy.
There are a number of areas where useful data may be incomplete or 
unavailable. For example, there is currently no regular source of infor
-mation about contingent workers (although another Contingent Work 

Supplement to the CPS is in the works). Other gaps include information 

about computer capital broken down at the ˜rm and occupational levels; 

longitudinal information about skill changes over time by occupational 

˜eld; information about organizational practices; and data on the dif
-fusion and effectiveness of various educational practices for preparing 

individuals for work.
Moving forward, the research community would be well served by 
data collection designed to support longitudinal tracking and analysis of 

workforce trends and the role of advances in IT.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6Findings and a Path Forward
GENERAL FINDINGS
From the discussions of the preceding chapters, a number of key 
˜ndings emerge.
1. Advances in information technology (IT) are far from over, and 
some of the biggest improvements in areas like arti˜cial intelligence 
(AI) are likely still to come. Improvements are expected in some areas 

and entirely new capabilities may emerge in others.
The past decade has yielded signi˜cant scienti˜c and technological 
advances in many areas, including ubiquitous networking and sensing, AI 

and its subdisciplines of machine learning, computer vision and speech 

recognition, robotics, the Internet of Things, and other areas. 
At the same time, productivity growth has slowed, a fact often read 
as an indication of decreased technological progress. However, the com
-mittee™s judgment is that the productivity data are not necessarily incon
-sistent with a period of signi˜cant technical change, because they mea
-sure somewhat different concepts and because there are important lags 

associated with adoption, co-invention, changes in organization, and the 

updating of skills that are typically required to translate technical change 

into economic value.
As companies increasingly adopt AI-based technologies to produce 
new products, their increasing research and development (R&D) invest
-ments in these areas are likely to further technical progress over the 
137
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
coming decade. Beyond 
invention
 of altogether new technologies, we can 
also expect to see strong in˚uences over the coming decade from 
diffusion 
and maturation
 of technologies that already exist today in early forms in 
research laboratories and leading-edge technology companies (e.g., self-
driving cars, conversational AI agents). Both will affect the workforce
; it 
remains to be seen how such advances will impact productivity.
2. These advances in technology will result in automation of some 
jobs, augmentation of workers™ abilities to perform others, and the 

creation of still others. The ultimate effects of information technology 

are determined not just by technical capabilities, but also by how the 

technology is used and how individuals, organizations, and policy 

makers prepare for or respond to associated shifts in the economic or 

social landscape.
Technology has been augmenting and replacing human labor in many 
tasks for hundreds of years, and we can expect this trend to continue. 

Increasingly, we will see robots used to automate more complex physical 

tasks in manufacturing, transportation, retailing, and many other indus
-tries, and AI to automate knowledge-based tasks.
Because most jobs involve multiple subtasks, and because technol
-ogy typically targets speci˜c tasks, one common impact of technology 

is to shift the distribution of tasks the human worker performs in a job 

(e.g., authors today spend less time proofreading for incorrect spelling, 

enabling them to spend more time on the content of what they are writ
-ing). Technology also makes new tasks and new jobs possible, transform
-ing the nature of work in many, and ultimately most, industries.
While technology may threaten the existence of some jobs via auto
-mation, it is also producing new modes of education and training that are 

more accessible. It has also led to new opportunities for freelance employ
-
ment via Internet platforms that can match job seekers to jobs in real time 

and to opportunities to work from home. The net impact of technology, 

mediated by the decisions of many organizations (businesses, govern
-ments, and philanthropic entities) and individuals, is multifaceted. Its full 

impact is not predetermined, but will depend on the decisions of govern
-ments, companies, and individuals about how to use technology and how 
to prepare for or respond to associated shifts in the economic or social 

landscape. Technologists, policy makers (such as private-sector managers 

and public of˜cials), and other leaders have the power to design IT and 

deploy it for the bene˜t of society, driven by a broad discussion of what 

impacts are desirable and a deeper understanding of how design, deploy
-
ment, and policy decisions can achieve these impacts.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 1393. The recent increase in income inequality in the United States 
is due to multiple forces, including advances in IT and its diffusion, 
globalization, and economic policy.
While technologies enable the automation of some tasks, the demand 
for labor is not uniformly affected. Changes in demand affect wages and 

employment, and in turn the underlying mix of skills demanded in the 
economy. Over the past 20 to 30 years, a large fraction of income disparity 
has stemmed from changes in demand (due in part to changes in tech
-nology) and changes in supply (due to changes in the quality, quantity, 

and types of education). Employers report shortages of job candidates 

with needed skills at the same time that salaries for employees with high 

school degrees have dropped. The wage premium for college degrees 

remains quite large, even as salaries for bachelor™s degree holders have 

leveled off on average in recent years. Companies that are heavy users 

of technology and automation often require dramatically fewer workers 

than the dominant companies of the past century. This reduced need for 

labor has the effect of further skewing the distribution of income and 

wealth created by new companies in this category and could limit the 

ability of reshoring to create new jobs. At the same time, while automa
-tion has contributed to inequality, it also is a key driver of productivity 

and economic growth. This growth can enable more options for easing 

the implementation of public policies that improve the equity of economic 

outcomes in the United States. However, such policies cannot be imple
-mented without public and political support. 
4. IT is enabling new work relationships, including a new form of 
on-demand employment. Although current digital platforms for on-

demand work directly involve less than 1 percent of the workforce, they 

display signi˜cant growth potential.
Many employers are increasingly viewing their relationship with 
employees as a short-term commitment rather than a lifelong investment. 

As Manpower Group CEO Jonas Prising recently put it, ﬁEmployers have 

gone from being builders of talent to consumers of work.ﬂ
1While freelance or on-demand work has long been part of the econ
-omy, new IT platforms have changed this aspect of the economy signi˜
-cantly. Internet platforms now match drivers to riders (e.g., Uber, Lyft), 

producers of goods to buyers (e.g., Etsy, eBay), computer programmers to 

employers (e.g., Upwork), and high-end consultants to businesses (e.g., 

HourlyNerd). This ﬁon-demandﬂ or ﬁgigﬂ economy has expanded rapidly, 

although current government labor statistics make it dif˜cult to track. 
1  Manpower Group, 2016, 
Human Age 2.0: Future Forces at Work
, http://www.manpower
 group.com.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
Some workers report that they enjoy the ˚exibility of working only when 
they wish to, and some workers use these platforms as a secondary form 

of income. For workers for whom it is their only job, the question of how 

to obtain health and other standard bene˜ts is important, and some poli
-cies are being considered to make it easier for such freelancers to obtain 

and carry bene˜ts from job to job. 
Beyond enabling this on-demand economy, advances such as more 
widespread access to the Internet have also enabled more full-time employ
-
ees to work at home part of the time, enabling more full-time employers 

to offer their employees ˚exible work hours and work locations.
5. As IT continues to complement or substitute for many work 
tasks, workers will require skills that increasingly emphasize creativ
-ity, adaptability, and interpersonal skills over routine information pro
-cessing and manual tasks. The education system will need to adapt to 

prepare individuals for the changing labor market. At the same time, 

recent IT advances offer new and potentially more widely accessible 

ways to access education. 
While education must change to deliver new content and to teach 
new skills, the details of exactly what should be taught, and how, are not 

well understood. There is evidence that ﬁsofterﬂ skills have been increas
-ingly valued in the labor market. At the same time, the 20th-century 

model of degree completion followed by a semipermanent job based on 

that education is yielding to a model where degree completion is followed 

by more specialized on-demand education over one™s entire career (which 

may include multiple occupations). The most logical developers of new 

educational approaches are local, state, and federal governments, as well 

as researchers and research agencies. 
There are signi˜cant opportunities for IT to be used to advance edu
-cational strategies and delivery. For example, online education companies 

such as Coursera, EdX, and Udacity have begun to experiment with 

new modes of Internet-based continuing education. While IT is likely to 

enable broader access to education, individuals without the opportunity 

or incentives to access it are at risk of being left even further behind, 

potentially reinforcing existing racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic dispari
-ties in society. While these tools show promise, their ef˜cacy and the 

extent to which they can be truly democratizing remain to be seen.
6. Policy makers and researchers would bene˜t signi˜cantly from 
a better understanding of evolving IT options and their implications 

for the workforce. In particular, (1) sustained, integrated, multidisci
-plinary research and (2) improved, ongoing tracking of workforce and 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 141technology developments would be of great value for informing public 
policies, organizational choices, and education and training strategies.
Despite much anecdotal evidence suggesting that big changes are 
under way, surprisingly little data are available to help determine which 

anecdotes correspond to signi˜cant country-wide or economy-wide 

trends and understand the nature of these changes and how potential 
policy choices can in˚uence them.
For example, although there is much anecdotal evidence that the 
on-demand economy is growing, better data are needed to understand 
issues such as what is driving it (e.g., how much is due to the business 

cycle versus improvements in technology or the invention of new busi
-ness models?); whether it is particularly important or attractive in speci˜c 

sectors of the economy (e.g., computer programmers versus taxi drivers); 

and whether it is lowering the barrier for creation of new businesses (e.g., 

by reducing the need to hire full-time employees in early stages).
New data across all aspects of technology™s progress, its diffusion 
into ˜rms and products, and its impact on the economy, along with tools 

to analyze these data, could shed important light on the types of public 

policies that might optimize the bene˜ts of technological advances for the 

workforce and society. As new data sets emerge, it will be important to 

design them to accommodate potential future research needs.
Achieving the goal of a more evidence-based understanding of the 
forces at work depends on overcoming barriers to data access for the 

research community. A critical step is enabling collaboration between U.S. 

statistical agencies. Providing these agencies with access to and integra
-tion of (1) federal tax information for statistical purposes and (2) addi
-tional administrative data from federal and state sources would provide 

new opportunities for economic research. In March of 2016, the federal 

government passed a law to establish the Commission on Evidence-Based 

Policymaking; this group is likely to address some of these challenges and 

may facilitate enhanced data access for the research community.
2The interplay between technology and work is complex and chang
-ing, and important public policy issues are already arising. There are 

many open questions that policy makers may face. For example:
 1.
  
How can the United States make use of technology to max
-imize overall economic growth while maximizing access for 

everyone to the economic and other bene˜ts afforded by new 

technologies?
2  The Evidence-Based Policymaking Commission Act of 2016, Public Law 114-140.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
 2.
  
What policies, resources, and practices would ease transitions 
for workers forced to change occupational ˜elds due to techno
-logical change?
 3.
  
How can we anticipate and actively guide the future impacts of 

newly developed technologies before they occur?
RESEARCH PATHWAYS
While it is not within this committee™s charge to recommend speci˜c 
policy actions, it is within its purview to advocate for well-informed 

policy discussions about how IT is affecting the workforce, including job 

opportunities and workers™ quality of life. The committee believes that 

the foundational knowledge and insights essential to an informed policy 

debate can best be attained through a strategic research program to better 

track the changes that are occurring and to understand the mechanisms 

by which advances in technology in˚uence our economy, workforce, and 

society. Such a research program will be important for helping stakehold
-ers address productivity growth, job creation, and the transformation of 

work.
The committee recommends that federal agencies or other organiza
-tions that sponsor research or collect data relevant to technology and the 

workforce establish a sustained, multidisciplinary research program to 

address the many important questions about how IT is changing or how 

it might change the nature of work and the U.S. national economy. This 

program should
1.
 Target a deeper understanding of how choices about technology 
use or functionality can affect the workforce in order to inform the design 

of technologies and policies that will bene˜t workers, the economy, and 

society at large;
2.
 Emphasize integration of micro- and macro-level research methods 
from disciplines including the social sciences, economics, computer and 

information sciences, and engineering; and
3.
 Establish and facilitate the use of new data sources, tools, methods, 
collaborations, and infrastructures to facilitate such research while pro
-tecting privacy with appropriate data-management practices.
The committee envisions this as a highly multidisciplinary, sustained 
research program that integrates a range of strategies, from bottom-up 

ethnographic studies to large-scale quantitative approaches, including 

survey data, administrative data, research-generated data, and privately 

collected data. This research should take advantage of what can be learned 

from the experiences of other countries faced with similar trends, to learn 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 143from their experiences with different policies regarding education, worker 
bene˜ts, and so on, as well as learn from historically analogous events, 

such as the advent of farm and factory automation during the early 20th 

century. There are myriad opportunities for cross-fertilization across dis
-ciplines such as machine learning, data science and statistics, economics, 

sociology, anthropology, and other social sciences.
In some instances, ethnographic components will be crucial for under
-standing the right questions to ask and provide insight about how worker 

experiences may vary. The quantitative components are critical for under
-standing the breadth of developments and, perhaps more importantly, 

where within the economy effects are located (which occupations, types 

of organizations, and geographical regions). It is critical that research on 

work consider variations between different demographic groups, geo
-graphic regions, industries, technologies, and occupations.
Such a research program should span a range of research themes, 
which the committee describes below. These issues fall under the U.S. 

National Science Foundation™s ﬁBig Ideasﬂ for investigation, ﬁwork at the 

human-technology frontier,ﬂ announced in 2016.
3Theme 1: Evaluating and Tracking Technological Progress
While many researchers or individuals who follow technology trends 
may have a strong understanding of current technological capabilities, 

a uniform strategy is currently lacking for tracking new developments 

across a broad range of technology ˜elds, their capacity for automating 

or augmenting human work functions, and the degree to which they are 

diffusing into industry and ˜rms. More rigorous measures and awareness 

of the state of the art of technology would help to signal the potential for 

corresponding workforce impacts.
Research to develop new ways of evaluating, tracking, and projecting 
technological progress would help enhance understanding of the impacts 

of technology on the workforce, inform strategies to help prepare for 

likely changes, and reveal what kinds of indicators might point to upcom
-
ing disruptions.
Such research should include objectives such as the following:

Further develop, re˜ne, and test strategies for classifying tech
-nological capabilities in terms of the human skills and tasks they can or 
could replace. Several strategies making use of the O*NET (Occupational 

Information Network) classi˜cations have been reported, which could 
3  National Science Foundation, 2016, ﬁ10 Big Ideas for Future NSF Investments,ﬂ https://
www.nsf.gov/about/congress/reports/nsf_big_ideas.pdf, accessed December 2016.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
serve as a starting point. New strategies should also be exploredŠin par
-ticular, to consider not only the tasks that might be automated but also 
the context and systems within which they are conducted.

Identify key indicators that could signal the extent of the impact of 
developments in a given technological ˜eld.

Develop new mechanisms to track and forecast technological and 
economic changes of particular relevance to the future of the workforce, 

potentially via the development of metrics that would quantify such 

changes and their impact.
Key research questions include the following:

What technological ˜elds are advancing the most rapidly? What 
new ˜elds are emerging?

How can we track and predict the types of human tasks that can 
be automated? Which technologies are having the biggest impacts in 
industry, and how might we best track their adoption?

What are key benchmarks that might indicate the imminence of 
groundbreaking progress with signi˜cant economic impact?
Multidisciplinary research, including economists and technologists, 
should investigate possible input categories, measures, and output scales 

for a set of useful indexes, such as the following:
1.
 Technology progress index
. Analogous to the Consumer Price Index, 
this index would measure and summarize the 
current state
 of technology 
and its impact on the economy and workforce, aggregating quantitative 

data from diverse sources. For instance, it could track progress in compu
-tational hardware (Moore™s Law), data storage costs and speeds, communi
-
cation speed, saturation of high-speed Internet coverage across the United 

States, progress on speci˜c technologies such as speech recognition and 

computer vision using standard benchmarks (e.g., the ImageNet bench
-mark for testing computer-vision algorithms and the COCO benchmark 

for image captioning), and so on. Such a generalized index could make it 

easier to understand how technology is advancing, enabling better deter
-mination of how and whether rates of technological progress translate into 

productivity growth.
2.
 AI progress index
. The potential for AI to signi˜cantly advance auto
-mation capabilities make this a ˜eld of particular interest to track. An AI 

progress index could focus speci˜cally on the progress in AI and machine 

learning. This index would track progress on speci˜c technologies, such 

as speech recognition and computer vision, robotic dexterity and mobil
-ity, autonomous vehicles, medical diagnosis, legal and investment advice, 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 145ability to converse with humans in formats like the Turing Test, pro˜
-ciency in various games, structured and unstructured problem solving, 
and other areas of AI, using standard benchmarks (e.g., the ImageNet 

benchmark for testing computer-vision algorithms). Relatedly, a Turing 

Olympics or Turing Championship,
4 consisting of a variety of tasks, could be organized, providing both a structured way to track progress and a set 

of milestones to motivate future work.
3.
 Organizational change and technology diffusion index.
 This index might 
look at the gap between the productivity of frontier ˜rms and the median 

˜rm, adoption rates of technologies, the rate of start-ups, patenting activ
-ity, business dynamism, labor shortages and skills mismatching (e.g., the 

Beveridge curve), and the time it takes for technologies to go from inven
-tion to implementation across industries. Diffusion of AI technologies 

could be tracked via a market-based approach, perhaps analogously to 

that used in Robo Global™s index.
5 Various measures of performance of 
current AI systems could also be used to track foundational capabilities 

in AI.
In addition to the above quantitative indexes, methods for model
-ing and predicting technological progress at various con˜dence intervals 

should then be developed for speci˜c ˜elds. In addition, a forward-look
-ing panel of technical experts could be created to 
forecast technological 
progress 
and its impacts, analogous to groups of expert economists who 
attempt to forecast the economy. These forward-looking subjective fore
-casts can be combined with data from the above quantitative indexes to 

form a broad view of the state and future direction of technology and its 

impacts. While expert forecasts, whether of technology or other topics, 

generally have a poor record, practices exist that are correlated to useful 

predictions.
6Together, such indicators could provide important knowledge for 
many decision makers, from individuals considering possible training 

and job changes, to educational institutions designing their curricula, to 

the Federal Reserve Board assessing the economy. Furthermore, these 

methods of quantifying technological advances and their diffusion into 
4  See, for example, the webpage for the ﬁBeyond the Turing Testﬂ workshop at the Twenty-
Ninth AAAI Conference on Arti˜cial Intelligence (AAAI-15) on January 25, 2015 at http://
www.math.unipd.it/~frossi/BeyondTuring2015/.
5  Robo Global, 2016, ﬁRobo US Index,ﬂ http://roboglobal.com/us-index, accessed May 
2016.
6  Such practices are discussed in the context of economic and political predictions in P.E. 
Tetlock and D. Gardner, 2016, 
Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction
, Random 
House, New York.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
industry could provide a basis for testing the various hypothesized expla
-nations for the slowing of productivity growth discussed in Chapter 3.
Theme 2: Technology Adoption and Impact Within Organizations
Technologies can greatly affect the type and nature of tasks conducted 
by individual workers. Whether they can completely replace a human 
worker depends on the speci˜c context in which individual tasks are 

conducted. Understanding the impact of technology on workers within 

a ˜rm requires an understanding of the organizational systems through 

which individual tasks combine to meet the company™s goals. Research on 

how different industries use technology to organize their operations, allo
-
cate tasks, and perform speci˜c functions, at both the micro- and macro-

level scales, should be undertaken to provide a ˜rm- and industry-level 

 window into the impacts of technology on employees in a given industry 
or at a given organizational level.
Key research questions include the following:

How are decisions relating to technology and labor made within 
these organizations? How does this vary across ˜rm/enterprise types and 
life cycles, and over time?

Is the increasing importance of online data (e.g., for targeted mar
-keting) creating a less even playing ˜eld for new start-ups that lack the 

legacy data of incumbents?

Are businesses™ production processes being segmented differ
-ently? What kinds of changes are emerging, for example, with respect to 

outsourcing?

How does the adoption of IT into work processes affect the distri
-bution of work tasks for employees in speci˜c industries?
Theme 3. Impacts of Policy Choices
Important public policy issues are already arising as a result of the 
changing technological landscape and its impact on the U.S. workforce; 

the urgency of these issues may increase. Research to inform national 

and regional policy decisions and strategies to enable innovation and the 

use of IT to maximize overall economic growth while maximizing access 

for everyone to jobs, opportunities, and the economic and other bene˜ts 

afforded by technologies is critical.
This research should aim to understand which policies, resources, and 
practices would (1) mitigate technological unemployment, (2) ease transi-
tions for workers forced to change occupational ˜elds due to technologi
-cal change, and (3) provide opportunities for actively guiding the future 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 147impacts of technology development and deployment before they occur. 
In particular, this could include assessment of the ef˜cacy of new social 

policiesŠfor example, the impact of a guaranteed income or speci˜c pro
-posals for retraining and continuing education initiativesŠin the United 

States. It could also include evaluation of strategies for providing incen
-tives to private companies to share data that will enable better monitoring 

of the impacts of technology on jobs and workers.
Although this report focuses on the U.S. workforce, many of the same 
issues regarding the impacts of IT are being faced in other countries, 

whose circumstances could serve as a pool of diverse case studies to help 

illustrate the variety of mechanisms by which IT can impact the workforce 

and how related social and economic policies can mitigate or exacerbate 

any negative impacts. Similarly, U.S. history includes episodes of automa
-
tion and technological developments that have had major impacts on the 

workforce and can demonstrate how related social and economic poli
-cies can mitigate or exacerbate any negative impacts. Although today™s 

software-driven changes are different in many ways from the impact of 

earlier technological advances, there are lessons to learn from both histori
-
cal and international case studies. 
Key research questions include the following:

What are differences across existing case studies, in their demo
-graphics, pool of available jobs, training level of their workforce, exposure 
to international trade, and other factors that may in˚uence how techno
-logical advance leads to augmentation or replacement of workers? How 

can these different case studies be used to build a more robust model of 

how technologies can impact the workforce and how policies can in˚u
-ence these impacts?

What is the inventory of policies attempted across different coun
-tries and throughout history regarding continuing education, workforce 

bene˜ts, social safety nets, and other relevant issues?

What data exist regarding the impact of past policies adopted in dif
-ferent contexts? What projections might be made regarding the impact of 

such policies on particular sectors of today™s U.S. workforce and economy?

What are the global interactions that in˚uence how technologi
-cal advances impact the workforce, given today™s highly multinational 

economy? How do differing labor pools and labor conditions in different 

countries lead to different types or rates of in˚uence of new technologies 

on the workforce? Do these differences result in an uneven playing ˜eld 

in the rate of adoption of new technologies?
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
Theme 4: Working with Emerging Technologies
As emerging technologies are increasingly implemented in different 
industries, individuals must learn how to interact with and successfully 
complete tasks with them. One key implication of this shift is a change 

in the nature of decision making, teamwork, and organization. In some 

cases, robots are displacing positions that would have previously been 

assigned to people,
7 and other members of the team must learn to col
-laborate with nonhuman members and interact with technology in the 

place of human intelligence. Organizations are also increasingly relying 

on teams that primarily use virtual tools to collaborate.8 These are just two 
examples; there are many current changes occurring that are affecting the 

way individuals collaborate.
More research is needed examining how these teams may function 
differently than traditional teams and how this will impact organizations. 

Research is also necessary to uncover under what conditions these teams 

are as effective as, or more effective than, traditional teams.
Key research questions include the following:

How do teams using these technologies function, and how is that 
different from teams without them?

What impact do different technologies have on the functioning 
of teams? For instance, are there discernible differences between those 
physically augmenting human actions, such as robotic arms, versus those 

providing data or making decisions?

How do emerging technologies impact organizational outcomes 
and, ultimately, high-level organizational trends?

What conditions affect the effectiveness of teams using emerging 
technologies? When are they as effective as or more effective than tradi
-tional teams?
Theme 5: Societal Acceptance of Automation Technologies
While tasks cannot be automated without mature technologies capa
-ble of performing a given function, the mere existence of technological 

capabilities does not guarantee that a given technology will be deployed. 

Economic costs and bene˜ts will in˚uence decisions to deploy technolo
-7  G. Graetz and G. Michaels, 2015, ﬁRobots at Work,ﬂ CEP Discussion Papers dp1335, Cen
-tre for Economic Performance, LSE, https://ideas.repec.org/p/cep/cepdps/dp1335.html.
8  T. Minton-Eversole, 2012, ﬁVirtual Teams Used Most by Global Organizations, Survey 
Says,ﬂ Society for Human Resource Management, July 19, https://www.shrm.org/resources
 andtools/hr-topics/organizational-and-employee-development/pages/virtualteamsused
 mostbyglobalorganizations,surveysays.aspx.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 149gies, but other factors may also be at play. In some contexts, people 
(either workers or consumers) may prefer to interact with a human over 

a machine. This may re˚ect the existence of important yet largely invisible 

and unremunerated human skills that can easily be missed in existing skill 

categories and national statistics but are valued by individuals. Consumer 

behaviors and worker preferences and bargaining power drive markets; 

understanding automation™s behavioral economics will be important for 

understanding its adoption patterns. Additional human factors and the 

social, philosophical, and psychological dynamics of automation should 

be explored.
Key research questions include the following:

What factors determine whether or not individuals will accept 
automated analogues to traditionally human-performed tasks? How does 
this vary with the type of technology or task?

Can such behavior or preferences be modeled? To what extent do 
current behaviors conform to existing economic models? How might this 

change as technologies become more established?

Can existing deployments of automation (such as digital assistants, 
ATMs, or self-service checkout lines) serve as models for understanding 

new applications of AI, machine learning, or robotics?

What opinions and perceptions does the public have about auto
-mation in various contexts? How are these related to established societal 

norms, and how might this inform decisions about what to automate and 

how to design automated systems?
Theme 6: Changing Labor and Skills Demands and 
Implications for Education and Training
Changes in technology use affect the roles of workers and contrib
-ute to changing labor and skills demands. This creates challenges for 

individuals as they plan and adjust their career strategies, as well as for 

employers, educational institutions, and policy makers. The economic 

insecurity felt by many workers underscores the importance of under
-standing the interplay of technology with jobs, wages, and opportunity, 

and not simply looking at technology in isolation. Furthermore, there is 

a good likelihood that already disadvantaged groups will bear the brunt 

of the costs of automation.9 Research examining changing labor and skills 
demands in speci˜c industries and occupational ˜elds over time, along 
9  In addition, there is some evidence that the rise in disability rolls may, in part, re˚ect 
a lack of employment prospects for some groups. The extent to which automation of jobs 
contributes to this is an open question. See D.H. Autor and M.G. Duggan, 2007, Distin
-Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
with regional variations and associated policy implications, would help 
to provide a basis for understanding and anticipating future trends and 

for informing education, training, and retraining strategies. 
This research should examine existing trends in both authoritative 
economic statistics and emerging data sources and methods, identify cor
-relations to changes in technological capabilities and diffusion in different 

˜elds, and hypothesize and test causal relationships using results from 

research about organizational practices. 
Key research questions include the following:

What types of worker skills and traits are currently becoming more 
or less valuable in speci˜c sectors of the labor market?

Do these changes correlate to the development or deployment of 
speci˜c technologies that enable, augment, or replace such skills?

How might measures and projections of technology impact and 
diffusion enable modeling of changing skills demands and income distri
-butions, and how much might such models be tested?

How do the uses of speci˜c technologies in speci˜c jobs impact 
work conditions and worker job satisfaction in the most common occu
-pational ˜elds?

Under what scenarios might the creation of new jobs outpace the 
reduction in existing jobs, and vice versa? How is this balance likely to 
change over time? Which job types are likely to be most affected?

What kinds of indicators might be useful for identifying disrup
-tions to the types of skills required by workers in a given occupational 

˜eld? What data-collection strategies would enable the development of 

such indicators?
The new workplace requires a workforce trained for expertise in areas 
that will drive the future economy and with the ˚exibility to adapt to 

rapid change. The U.S. education system has already begun to evolve in 

response at the levels of primary, secondary, vocational, college, gradu
-ate, and continuing education. However, it is far from clear at this point 

exactly what children should be taught and how to best prepare displaced 

workers for the future. It is unclear how to best take advantage of the new 

opportunities for online or other IT-enabled training, how to construct 

the most effective online courses, and how to best incentivize students 

and workers to complete the courses they begin. Because education will 

largely determine the success of the United States in responding to the 

changing workplace, a better understanding of effective strategies is criti
-guishing income from substitution effects in disability insurance, 
American Economic Review 
97.2:119-124.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 151cal. Some insight into changing skill needs can be inferred from how skill 
demands are currently changing; additional insights might be gleaned by 

a partnership between computer scientists, labor economists, and educa
-tion researchers to discuss the kinds of technology capabilities that are 

likely to emerge in coming years.
Research in this area should aim to assess educational and training 
needs based on understanding of skills demands driven by technological 

change, and ways in which technology can be best used to prepare and 

train the future workforce.
Key research topics include the following:

Educational needs.
 What skills will be most valuable for young stu
-dents and for employed and unemployed adults seeking better jobs? 
What are the best practices for teaching these different skills, and what 

new innovations are possible? What are the current and emerging tech
-nological substitutes and complements to these skills?

Education delivery.
 How can education best be delivered? How 
can traditional classroom models be augmented by online education, 

workplace apprenticeships, peer-to-peer education, and other models for 

optimal success rates? How might new approaches that leverage IT, such 

as gami˜cation or simulation-based learning, be deployed to improve 

learning outcomes?

Education access and incentives.
 How can the bene˜ts from educa
-tional opportunities be extended to all segments of society, including 

students who cannot or will not attend 4-year colleges? What programs 

are needed to assure that primary and secondary schools have the tools 

they need to help students?

Education policy. 
Various countries have policies that provide for 
worker education. For example, workers in France accrue a credit of 20 

hours of paid time for continuing education for each year they work.
10
 What would be the expected impact if the United States were to adopt 

similar policies?
Additional questions include the following:

What are the factors contributing to gaps in educational attain
-ment, and is the United States on a trajectory to narrow or widen current 
gaps in educational attainment? Where can learning technologies help to 
10
  Y. Lochard and B. Robin, 2009, ﬁFrance: Collective Bargaining and Continuous Voca
-tional Training,ﬂ EurWORK, http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/observatories/eurwork/
comparative-information/national-contributions/france/france-collective-bargaining-and-

continuous-vocational-training, accessed May 2016.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
bridge these gaps, especially for women, underrepresented minorities, 
people with disabilities, and the economically disadvantaged?

What is the mean time to development for the most valued skills, 
and how do these relate to job hopping?

Are certi˜cate and test-based certi˜cate programs serving employ
-ment goals? What does the future look like as certi˜cate programs con
-tinue to proliferate and compete for attention?

What is the current state of vocational education opportunities? 
Are these meeting current needs?

What changes should be made to what is being taught, how it is 
being taught, and who is being taught?

What positive outcomes can online learning effectively offer in 
both general education and training programs to prepare individuals for 

the workforce?

How can online or other IT-assisted learning techniques be best 
leveraged to assist in retraining or just-in-time learning for individuals 

undergoing work transitions?
Theme 7: The On-Demand Economy and Emerging 
Modalities for Organizing Work
The emergence of an on-demand economy, in particular for ride-
sharing services and crowdsourced work marketplaces, has created great 

interest and excitement. However, there is little information about the 

extent of its impact on the economy and the workforce. Research on 

the ability of authoritative economic and labor statistics to capture this 

impact, and more comprehensive and persistent strategies for measur
-ing it, are needed. In addition, social science research to illustrate the 

rights, protections, and autonomies of workers, and how on-demand jobs 

˜t into workers™ lives and careers, is needed to understand the impact 

and need for policies in this domain. Through this work, the potential 

for on-demand jobs to effectively provide or augment employment for 

 unemployed or low-income workers, as well as other associated advan
-tages and disadvantages, should be elucidated.
Key research questions include the following:

To what extent do current measures of business dynamism capture 
activity in the on-demand economy? How can they be improved?

To what extent do on-demand workers in this sector lose income 
and legal protections (the right to unionize, the right to minimum wage, 
and the right to overtime pay)?

To what extent do on-demand workers gain or lose control over 
their schedules and other types of autonomy?
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 153
Where do on-demand jobs ˜t into the career path of workers? What 
are the longer-term implications of this type of work for individuals and 
society?
Physical and geographical boundaries of work have shifted over time, 
with signi˜cant impacts on worker experience and job availability and 

access. Technology has enabled this to a large extent, and the emergence 

of new technologies could continue to change this landscape. Research in 

this area could aim to elucidate the role of technology in shifting where 

and how work is conducted and lay the groundwork for anticipating 

future changes and opportunities.
Key research questions include the following:

How might new technologies continue to change the costs and ben-e˜ts of telecommuting, globalization, or other aspects of the geography of 
work? What are the technological and nontechnological drivers of these 

changes?

How might developers and organizations design technologies and 
strategies for technology use that will create more work for those at the 

margins of society, make better use of existing workers, and yield deeper 

satisfaction for workers?

What is the impact of new modalities of organizing work on orga
-nizational forms such as corporations, limited-partnerships, freelancing, 

volunteer organizations, and so on?
Theme 8: New Data Sources, Methods, and Infrastructures
As described at the outset of this chapter, the interplay between tech
-nology and work may be studied at various levels, with different lenses 

provided by a range of academic disciplines. Part of the challenge of 

developing a holistic understanding of the interplay between technol
-ogy and work stems from the vastness of these interactions, which is 

accompanied by gaps in information gathering and a need for deeper 

interdisciplinary collaboration. How can researchers design comprehen
-sive strategies for understanding the role of a given technology in a given 

occupational ˜eld, both from the top down and the bottom up?
New sources, methods, and infrastructure to enable the collection, 
aggregation, and distribution of a diverse range of data are needed to 

support investigation of the preceding themes to understand what tech
-nology advances are in fact occurring, along with their impact and the 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
mechanisms by which they affect workers and the economy.
11 Below, the 
committee discusses data strategies that would advance understanding 
of the impacts of IT and automation on the U.S. workforce. The commit
-tee recognizes that new government data-collection efforts such as those 

discussed below would most likely require additional resources.
Updating and Augmenting Authoritative Data Sources
As discussed in Chapter 5, much useful quantitative data comes from 
government sources such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and the 
U.S. Census Bureau. Updates to existing government survey tools and 

instruments with methods (e.g., questions, sampling techniques) that 

better target the impact of new technologies and related work processes 

and task structures on organizations, workers, and management capa
-bilities would greatly assist researchers. The Current Population Survey 

(CPS) (of households) and the Current Employment Statistics Survey (of 

establishments) could potentially bene˜t from new questions that can 

help to assess the impact of new technology on workers as well as the 

size of the on-demand economy. For example, the planned revival of the 

Contingent Worker supplement to the CPS is an important opportunity 

to obtain well-de˜ned information about worker participation in the on-

demand economy; sustained efforts to collect such information would 

yield an important longitudinal database. Only these large-scale surveys, 

conducted at regular intervals, have the capacity to track such phenomena 

over time.
Development of New Data Sources and Methods
Much data about investment, employment, and sales that could be of 
great value to researchers aiming to unravel technology™s role in work
-force and economic trends are currently held by private-sector organiza
-tions (discussed in Chapter 4). Opportunities for obtaining useful research 
data via partnerships with private industry should be pursued.
Furthermore, creative efforts to mine and interpret ﬁborn-digitalﬂ 
data from a range of sources could lead to new, real-time monitoring of 

key employment and economic trends. Applications of contemporary 

analytical tools based on data mining and machine learning should be 

pursued. Researchers in this area might pursue the following:
11  See also the efforts of a panel of the Committee on National Statistics of the National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine on Improving Federal Statistics for Policy 
and Social Science Research Using Multiple Data Sources and State-of-the-Art Estimation 

Methods at http://sites.nationalacademies.org/DBASSE/CNSTAT/DBASSE_170268.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 1551.
 New methods of obtaining, augmenting, or validating the informa-tion provided by authoritative sources that may be updated in real time 
and do not depend on existing cost- or labor-intensive methods; and
2.
 New types of indicators of technology diffusion, shifts in labor or 
skills demands, and the connection between the two.
Classi˜cations and Indicators for Job Types and Categories
Researchers face additional challenges with respect to monitoring. 
Key research questions include the following:

How might the classi˜cation of job types, categories, and charac
-teristics be standardized to enable identi˜cation and longitudinal tracking 
of changes due to technology-related trends?

To what extent are human attributesŠincluding creativity, empa
-thy, interpersonal skills, leadership, mentoring, and physical presenceŠ

currently valued in the U.S. labor force? How might this be tracked in the 

future?

How can independent, freelance, and contingent labor be charac
-terized and measured?

How can the deployment of new worker-engagement models and 
trends, such as the more general ﬁtask marketsﬂ that compose the intel
-lectual and physical abilities of machines and people in new, more ˚exible 

ways be monitored and understood?
12
Combination of Micro- and Macro-Level Data and Methods
The importance of targeted qualitative, ethnographic, microscale, and 
case-study and ˜eldwork investigations must not be overlooked. As many 

researchers come to rely on identi˜cation of trendsŠor even predictive 

modelsŠbased on very large and, increasingly, born-digital data sets, the 

underlying causes or mechanisms behind these trends may not be clear. 

Qualitative and interview-based approachesŠfor example, investigation 

of the speci˜c deployment of a particular technology into the work ˚ow of 

an organization, how workers are trained on it, and its impact on their 

job satisfactionŠcould be used to test conclusions that may be inferred 

from macroeconomic trends, and likewise provide insights into drivers of 

trends that may emerge on the horizon at the macro
 scale. Moreover, data 
12
  D. Shahaf and E. Horvitz, 2010, ﬁGeneralized Task Markets for Human and Machine 
Computation,ﬂ 
AAAI 2010
, July.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
from ˜eld studies and related methods are likely to raise questions that 
will fruitfully guide more macro-level research.
New Infrastructure and Partnerships for Aggregation, Sharing, and 
Collaboration
Beyond simply collecting and analyzing relevant data, the develop
-ment of an infrastructure to enable access to, interoperability of, and new 

multidisciplinary strategies for using data could be a great bene˜t for 

researchers, policy makers, and others. In particular, this infrastructure 

could enable researchers to access and share the very large amounts of 

relevant digital data being created, gathered, and shared by private com
-panies and via emerging technologies and platforms (such as the Internet 

of Things and mobile phones) and integrate it with data collected by gov
-ernments. Such an infrastructure could provide insights about the labor 

market with much more detail and at a higher frequency than ever before.
One strategy could be to establish data clearinghouses or data centers, 
ideally virtual, that permit integration of real-time data from U.S. statisti
-cal agencies with that of companies, such as the data centers currently 

used by ˜rms like Burning Glass, LinkedIn, Google, ADP, and many 

others, with these combined core data sets tracking changes in inno
-
vation, changing skill demands, productivity, and the workforce. Such 

an approach could enable continuous monitoring of where novel jobs 

are being created and how skills requirements are changing for speci˜c 

occupational ˜elds, which could be correlated to trends in technology. 

This could also be used to facilitate matching between employers and job 

applicants, or current or potential workers with training or educational 

pathways.
More generally, many believe that the future of economic statistics 
lies in the integration of survey, administrative, and commercial data,
13
 and the use of federal administrative data was named a priority of the 

executive branch for ˜scal year 2016.
14
 Such integration is expected to 
revolutionize key national indicators and also allow much more timely 

and granular tracking of economic data by detailed geography, industry, 

occupational ˜elds, worker characteristics, and other classi˜ers. Academia 

can play a critical role as honest brokers between the public and private 

sectors with respect to these data sets. This would likely require address
-13  See, for example, efforts of the American Economic Association and the Sloan Foundation 
to identify sources and procedures for researcher access to Federal Administrative Data at 
https://www.aeaweb.org/about-aea/committees/economic-statistics/administrative-data. 
14
  Of˜ce of Management and Budget, 2015, 
Fiscal Year 2016: Analytical Perspectives of the 
U.S. Government
, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/omb/budget/fy2016/
assets/spec.pdf, Chapters 7 and 16.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS AND A PATH FORWARD
 157ing organizational barriers to information and data sharing and stan
-dardization of information-sharing levels and ranks across organizations. 
There are also measurement and methodological issues in developing key 

indicators from the new data infrastructure that will emerge. These could 

build on the newly created Federal Research Data CentersŠwhich now 

house data from the Census Bureau, BLS, the National Center for Health 

Statistics, and the National Center for Education Statistics, with plans to 

add data from the Internal Revenue Service and the Bureau of Economic 

AnalysisŠand could potentially bring private-sector sources into the mix 

from willing partners. The new national Commission on Evidence-Based 

Policymaking may re˚ect efforts in this direction.
15
Such efforts may be frustrated by existing and potentially outdated 
government regulations that constrain the ability of government to share 

certain data sets with researchers. While regulations to protect the privacy 

of individuals are well justi˜ed, they may not re˚ect current approaches 

to protecting privacy while making data available for analysis. In any 

case, there is a general and persisting need for research on strategies for 

protecting the privacy of individuals™ data beyond the context of this 

particular research agenda.
Finally, creative strategies for integrating qualitative and quantitative 
data from research pursued through the lenses of social science, technol
-ogy, and economics could help to build a holistic research community and 

transform the ability to interpret technology and workforce trends, evalu
-
ate their consequences, and inform future policies, with great potential 

bene˜t for the nation.
15
  The Evidence-Based Policymaking Commission Act of 2016, Public Law 114-140.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7Conclusion
Progress in many of the basic computing and information technolo
-gies has been rapid in recent years, and the committee does not expect 
the pace of change to slow down in the foreseeable future. While some 

technologies are reaching maturity now, many important technologies 

have enormous future potential. As more of the world™s information is 

digitized and more people and things are networked, the economics of 

the digital, networked economy will become ever more important. This 

includes the ability to make copies of goods and services at almost zero 

cost and deliver them anywhere on the planet almost instantaneously. 

Furthermore, digitization of products, services, processes, and interac
-tions makes it possible to measure and manage work with far more 

precision. Data-driven decision making and machine learning provide 

vast opportunities for improving productivity, ef˜ciency, accuracy, and 

innovation.
The committee expects important innovations to come in the area 
of arti˜cal intelligence (AI) and robotics. Several decades ago, humans 

were unable to converse with machines using ordinary speech; now it is 

done routinely. Machines are learning to effectively translate from one 

language to another, a task once seen only in science ˜ction. We are 

moving from an era where machines were blind, unable to recognize 

even simple objects, to an era where they can distinguish faces, read 

street signs, and understand the content of photographs as well asŠor 

 better thanŠhumans. They are being put to work reading X-ray and MRI 
images, advising doctors on potential drug interactions, helping lawyers 
158
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSION 159sift through documents, and composing simple stories about sports and 
˜nance for newspapers. Machines are becoming much better at reason
-ing and can now defeat the best humans at most games of skill, from 

checkers and chess to trivia and Go. Machines are learning to drive cars, 

which could potentially save thousands of lives in the United States and 

millions worldwide. Bipedal robots are learning to navigate stairs and 

uneven terrain, while their cheetah-like brethren can outrun even the fast
-
est humans. Many of the technologies with the greatest impact will likely 

look unlike any human or animal, but will transport shelves of inventory 

throughout warehouses, assemble basic electronics in factories, ˚y to 

disaster zones with medicine, swim beneath the waves to gather data for 

oceanographers, and haunt computer networks in search of cyberattacks. 

In fact, many of these exist in some form already, although they are likely 

to become more widespread and more competent.
While there are undoubtedly important technological breakthroughs 
to come, it is critical to note that the technologies that exist today and 

those under active development have important implications for the 

workforce. They create opportunities for new products, services, orga
-
nizational processes, and business models as well as opportunities for 

automating existing tasks, even whole occupations. Many cognitive and 

physical tasks will be replaced by machines. At the same time, we expect 

new job opportunities to emerge as increasingly capable combinations 

of humans and machines attack problems that previously have been 

intractable.
Advances in IT and automation will present opportunities to boost 
America™s overall income and wealth, improve health care, shorten the 

work week, develop new goods and services, and increase product safety 

and reliability.
These same advances could also lead to growing inequality, decreased 
job stability, increasing demands on workers to change jobs, and changes 

in business organization. There are also important implications for other 

aspects of society, both intended and unintended, not the least of which 

include potentially profound changes in education, privacy, security, 

social relationships, and even democracy.
The ultimate effects of these technologies are not predetermined. 
Rather, like all tools, computing and information technologies can be used 

in many different ways. The outcomes for the workforce and society at 

large depend on our choices. Technology can be a powerful tool. What do 

we want for our future society? How do we decide this?
Potential future technological capabilities and innovations are largely 
unpredictable, and their implications and interactions are complex. Invest
-
ing in extensive and effective data gathering, a robust infrastructure for 

analyzing these data, and multidisciplinary research will enable a deeper 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
understanding of emerging changes in technology and the workforce. The 
results of this research will inform the adoption of policies that will help 

maximize the resilience and prosperity of the institutions, organizations, 

and individuals in our society.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AStatement of Task
A National Research Council study
 will consider the possible impacts 
of automation and other applications of IT on the U.S. workforce. An ad 
hoc committee will consider current knowledge and open questions about 

the drivers of increased automation; the types and scale of jobs that might 

be affected; the societal implications of these changes; the time frame for 

impact; and implications for education, training, and workforce devel
-opment. Through testimony, discussions convened by the committee, a 

literature review, and committee deliberations, the committee will exam
-ine currently available sources of information, consider how different 

disciplines could contribute knowledge, explore where additional data 

would help, and frame research questions aimed at better understanding 

the phenomenon. The committee™s report will set forth a research agenda 

and describe types and sources of data and analysis that would enhance 

understanding of the workforce impacts of IT and automation and inform 

future policy making.
163
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BWorkshop Agenda and 
Panelist Biographies
WORKSHOP ON IT, AUTOMATION, AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
National Academy of Sciences
 Washington, D.C.
 October 22, 2015
8:30 a.m.
 Welcome and Introduction
 Committee Co-Chairs:
  
Erik Brynjolfsson, Schussel Family Professor, the Sloan 
  School, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 Tom M. Mitchell, E. Fredkin University Professor, 
   Carnegie Mellon University
8:45
 Current and Emerging Technological Capabilities
 Moderator: 
Eric Horvitz, Technical Fellow and Managing 
   Director, Microsoft Research
 Gill Pratt, Executive Technical Director, Toyota
 Peter Lee, Corporate Vice President, Microsoft Research
 Andrew Ng, Chief Scientist, Baidu Research (remotely)
10:00
 Break
10:20
 IT and Automation in the Workplace
 Moderator: 
Ruth Milkman, Professor of Sociology, 
   City University of New York Graduate Center
 Diane Bailey, Associate Professor, University of 
   Texas, Austin
 David Rolf, International Vice President, Service 
   Employees International Union
164
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 165 Judy Wajcman, Professor of Sociology, London School of 
   
Economics
 Sree Ramaswamy, Senior Fellow, McKinsey Global 
   
Institute

  
11:35
 New Modalities of Work
 Moderator: 
Stephen R. Barley, Richard W. Weiland 
   Professor of Management, Stanford University
 Byron Auguste, Managing Director, Opportunity@Work
 Sara Horowitz, Founder and Executive Director, 
   Freelancer™s Union
 Stephane Kasriel, CEO, Upwork
 Tess Posner, Managing Director, Samaschool
12:50 p.m.
 Working Lunch
2:15
  Education, Workforce Development, and Equal 

Opportunity
 Moderator: 
Barrett Caldwell, Professor of Industrial 
   Engineering, Purdue University
 Heidi Shierholz, Chief Economist, U.S. Department of 
   
Labor

 Tom Kalil, Deputy Director for Policy, White House 
   Of˜ce of Science and Technology Policy
 David Autor, Associate Department Head, Department of 
   Economics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 Yscaira Jimenez, CEO, LaborX
3:30
 Break
3:45
 Data Sources and Needs
  Moderator: 
John Haltiwanger, Professor of Economics, 
   University of Maryland, College Park
 Erica Groshen, Commissioner, Bureau of Labor Statistics
 Yoav Shoham, Professor (emeritus), Stanford University; 
   Principal Scientist, Google
 Dan Restuccia, Chief Analytics Of˜cer, Burning Glass
5:00
  Discussion of Societal Challenges and Research 

Pathways
 Moderated by Committee Co-Chairs
5:30
 Adjourn
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
PANELIST BIOGRAPHIES
BYRON AUGUSTE is the managing director of Opportunity@Work, a civic 
enterprise based at New America in Washington, D.C., which aims to re-

wire the U.S. labor market in ways that enable more Americans to achieve 

upward mobility in the job market and workplace. Prior to co-founding 

Opportunity@Work, Mr. Auguste served for 2 years in the White House 

as Deputy Assistant to the President for Economic Policy and Deputy 

Director of the National Economic Council. Until 2013, Mr. Auguste was 

a senior partner at McKinsey & Company in Washington, D.C., and Los 

Angeles, where he was elected principal in 1999 and director in 2005. His 

professional experience prior to McKinsey was as an economist at LMC 

International, Oxford University, and the African Development Bank. 

Mr. Auguste has been active in a number of not-for-pro˜t organizations, 

serving as board chairman of the Hope Street Group and as a member of 

the boards of trustees of the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation and 

Yale University. He is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and 

the Paci˜c Council on International Policy. Mr. Auguste earned a B.A. in 

economics and political science from Yale University and a M. Phil. and 

D.Phil. in economics from Oxford University.
DAVID AUTOR is a professor and associate head of the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT) Department of Economics and a faculty 

research associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research. His 

research analyzes the labor market impacts of technological change and 

globalization, earnings inequality, and disability insurance and labor sup
-
ply. Dr. Autor is an elected fellow of the Econometrics Society, the Society 

of Labor Economists, and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. 

He received a National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER award, an 

Alfred P. Sloan Foundation fellowship, the Sherwin Rosen Prize for out
-standing contributions in the ˜eld of labor economics, and MIT™s James 

A. and Ruth Levitan Award for excellence in teaching. Dr. Autor earned 

a B.A. in psychology from Tufts University and a Ph.D. in public policy 

from Harvard™s Kennedy School of Government in 1999. Prior to gradu
-ate study, he spent 3 years directing computer skills education for eco
-nomically disadvantaged children and adults in San Francisco and South 

Africa.
DIANE E. BAILEY is an associate professor in the School of Information 
at the University of Texas, Austin, where she studies technology and work 

in information and technical occupations. Her current research interests 

include engineering product design, remote occupational socialization, 

big data in health care, and ICT4D (Information and Communications 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 167Technologies for Development). With an expertise in organizational eth
-nography, Dr. Bailey conducts primarily large-scale empirical studies, 
often involving multiple occupations, countries, and researchers. She 

publishes her research in organization studies, engineering, information 

studies, and communications journals. She is a co-author, with Paul Leon
-
ardi, of 
Technology Choices, Why Occupations Differ in Their Embrace of New 

Technology
. Dr. Bailey has won teaching awards at University of Texas, 
Austin, Stanford University, and the University of Southern California. 

Her research has won best paper awards, a dissertation award, and an 

NSF CAREER award. She is founding director of the Information Insti
-tute, the professional development resource of the School of Information. 

She holds a Ph.D. in industrial engineering and operations research from 

the University of California, Berkeley.
ERICA L. GROSHEN became the 14th Commissioner of Labor Statistics 
in 2013. Prior to joining the Board on Labor Statistics (BLS), Dr. Groshen 

was a vice president in the Research and Statistics Group at the Federal 

Reserve Bank of New York. Her research has focused on labor markets 

over the business cycle, regional economics, wage rigidity and dispersion, 

the male-female wage differential, and the role of employers in labor 

market outcomes. She also served on advisory boards for BLS and the 

U.S. Census Bureau. Before joining the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

in 1994, Dr. Groshen was a visiting assistant professor of economics at 

Barnard College at Columbia University and an economist at the Federal 

Reserve Bank of Cleveland. She was a visiting economist at the Bank for 

International Settlements in Basel, Switzerland (1999-2000). Dr. Groshen 

earned a Ph.D. in economics from Harvard University and a bachelor™s 

degree in economics and mathematics from the University of Wisconsin, 

Madison.
SARA HOROWITZ is the Freelances Union™s founder and executive direc
-tor. She has been helping the new workforce build solutions together 

for nearly two decades. A MacArthur Foundation ﬁGeniusﬂ fellow and 

deputy chair of the Federal Reserve of New York, Ms. Horowitz is a lead
-ing voice for the emerging economy. Today, 53 million Americans are 

independent workersŠabout one-third of the entire workforce. With a 

membership of more than 250,000 nationwide, Freelancers Union is build
-
ing a new form of unionism through creative, cooperative, market-based 

solutions to today™s social challenges.
YSCAIRA JIMENEZ is CEO of LaborX and founder and CEO of Plexx. 
A Dominican immigrant from the Bronx, Ms. Jimenez is inspired by the 

poverty issues of people in her community and feels compelled to use 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
education and employment to break the cycle of poverty. She started a 
tutoring business in high school helping kids in her neighborhood who 

were struggling in school. She also founded La Pregunta Arts Cafe, an 

arts cafe in Harlem, and worked for three New York education start-ups 

(Rocket Learning, Learn-It Systems, and Platform Learning) in business 

development, operation, and corporate trainer roles, bringing tutoring 

to more than 10,000 low-income students across the United States. She 

earned a B.A. in arts, English, and Latin American studies from Columbia 

University and an M.B.A. in entrepreneurship and innovation from MIT. 

She speaks Spanish, Portuguese, and conversational Italian.
THOMAS KALIL is the deputy director for policy for the White House 
Of˜ce of Science and Technology Policy and senior advisor for science, 

technology and innovation for the National Economic Council. From 2001 

to 2008, Mr. Kalil was special assistant to the chancellor for science and 

technology at University of California, Berkeley. He was responsible for 

developing major new multi-disciplinary research and education initia
-tives at the intersection of information technology (IT), nanotechnology, 

microsystems, and biology. He also conceived and launched a program 

called ﬁBig Ideas @ Berkeley,ﬂ which provides support for multidis
-ciplinary teams of Berkeley students that are interested in addressing 

economic and societal challenges such as clean energy, safe drinking 

water, and poverty alleviation. In 2007 and 2008, Mr. Kalil was the chair 

of the Global Health Working Group for the Clinton Global Initiative, 

where he developed new public and private sector initiatives in areas 

such as maternal and child health, under-nutrition, and vaccines. He 

was also a senior fellow with the Center for American Progress (CAP), 

where he co-authored 
A National Innovation Agenda
, one of the four pil
-lars of CAP™s ﬁEconomic Plan for Plan for the Next Administration.ﬂ 

He was also a member of the scienti˜c advisory board of Nanomix 

and has served on three committees of the National Academies of Sci
-ences, Engineering and Medicine, including the Committee to Facilitate 

Interdisciplinary Research. Previously, Mr. Kalil served as the Deputy 

Assistant to President Clinton for Technology and Economic Policy and 

as Deputy Director of the White House National Economic Council 

(NEC). He was the NEC™s point person on a wide range of technology 

and telecommunications issues, such as the liberalization of Cold War 

export controls, the allocation of spectrum for new wireless services, and 

investments in upgrading the U.S. high-tech workforce. He led a number 

of White House technology initiatives, such as the National Nanotech
-nology Initiative, the Next Generation Internet, bridging the digital 

divide, e-learning, increasing funding for long-term information tech
-nology research, making IT more accessible to people with disabilities, 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 169and addressing the growing imbalance between support for biomedical 
research and for the physical sciences and engineering. He was also 

appointed by President Clinton to serve on the G-8 Digital Opportunity 

Task Force. Prior to joining the White House, Mr. Kalil was a trade spe
-cialist at Dewey Ballantine, where he represented the Semiconductor 

Industry Association on U.S.-Japan trade issues and technology policy. 

He also served as the principal staffer to Gordon Moore in his capacity 

as chair of the Semiconductor Industry Association Technology Com
-mittee. Mr. Kalil received a B.A. in political science and international 

economics from the University of Wisconsin, Madison, and completed 

graduate work at the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy. He is the 

author of articles and op-eds on science and technology policy, the use 

of prizes as a tool for stimulating innovation, nanotechnology, nuclear 

strategy, newborn health, vaccines, the impact of mobile communica
-tions in developing countries, U.S.-Japan trade negotiations, U.S.-Japan 

cooperation in science and technology, the National Information Infra
-structure, distributed learning, and electronic commerce.
STEPHANE KASRIEL is the CEO of Upwork, driving the company™s 
vision of connecting businesses with talent. In today™s competitive job 

market where most face the challenging war for talent, Mr. Kasriel has 

mastered how to ˜nd, attract, and retain highly skilled talent. At Upwork 

(formerly Elance-oDesk), he built and led a distributed team of more 

than 300 engineers located around the world as senior vice president of 

engineering before ascending to be CEO of the company. His e-book
 Hire 
Fast & Build Things
 details how to think bigger and ˜nd the best technical 
talent to power your businessŠbut his expertise goes beyond just engi
-neering. He has applied his knowledge to nearly every industryŠfrom 

customer service to design to lawŠexperience that earned him his current 

role leading the company in its quest to reimagine work. Mr. Kasriel holds 

an M.B.A. from INSEAD, a master™s in computer science from Stanford 

University, and a B.S. from Ecole Polytechnique in France.
PETER LEE, corporate vice president, Microsoft Research, is responsible 
for Microsoft Research New Experiences and Technologies (MSR NExT), 

an organization of world-class researchers, engineers, and designers 

devoted to creating potentially disruptive technologies for Microsoft and 

the world. While NExT will continue to advance the ˜eld of computing 

research and produce work with signi˜cant scholarly impact, its priority 

is developing technologies that bene˜t Microsoft and the world more 

broadly. In this role, Dr. Lee oversees Microsoft Research Asia, Micro
-soft Research Technologies, FUSE Labs, and Microsoft Research Special 

Projects, along with several incubation project teams. Prior to joining 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
Microsoft, he held key positions in both government and academia, most 
recently at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), 

where he founded and directed a major technology of˜ce that supported 

research in computing and related areas in the social and physical sci
-ences. Prior to DARPA, Dr. Lee served as head of Carnegie Mellon Uni
-versity™s nationally top-ranked computer science department. He also 

served as the university™s vice provost for research. Dr. Lee has shown 

executive-level leadership in world-class research organizations spanning 

academia, government, and industry. He is a fellow of the Association 

for Computing Machinery and serves the research community at the 

national level, including policy contributions to the President™s Council 

of Advisors on Science and Technology and membership on the Com
-puter Science and Telecommunications Board of the National Academies 

and the Advisory Council of the Computer and Information Science and 

Engineering Directorate of the National Science Foundation. He was the 

former chair of the Computing Research Association and has testi˜ed 

before both the U.S. House Science and Technology Committee and the 

U.S. Senate Commerce Committee. Dr. Lee holds a Ph.D. in computer and 

communication sciences from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, and 

bachelor™s degrees in mathematics and computer sciences, also from the 

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
ANDREW NG is an associate professor of computer science at Stan
-ford University; chief scientist of Baidu; and chairman and co-founder 

of Coursera. In 2011, he led the development of Stanford University™s 

main MOOC (Massive Open Online Courses) platform and also taught an 

online machine-learning class to more than 100,000 students, leading to the 

founding of Coursera. Dr. Ng™s goal is to give everyone in the world access 

to a great education, for free. Today, Coursera partners with some of the 

top universities in the world to offer high-quality online courses and is the 

largest MOOC platform in the world. Dr. Ng also works on machine learn
-
ing with an emphasis on deep learning. He founded and led the ﬁGoogle 

Brainﬂ project, which developed massive-scale deep learning algorithms. 

This resulted in the famous ﬁGoogle catﬂ result, in which a massive neural 

network with 1 billion parameters learned from unlabeled YouTube videos 

to detect cats. More recently, he has continued to work on deep learning 

and its applications to computer vision and speech, including such appli
-cations as autonomous driving. Dr. Ng received an undergraduate degree 

in computer science from Carnegie Mellon University, a master™s degree 

from MIT, and a Ph.D. from University of California, Berkeley.
TESS POSNER is the managing director of SamaUSA. Ms. Posner built 
and launched the ˜rst SamaUSA program in 2013. She oversees current 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 171programs and SamaUSA departments, funding, and advisory partner
-ships and leads geographic and programmatic expansion efforts. Prior 
to Sama, she was assistant director of employment and education at First 

Place for Youth, where she led their education and employment programs 

in four bay area counties. Before First Place, she managed education 

and literacy programs in underserved public schools in New York City. 

Her passion and expertise lies in creating employment and education 

programs that focus on empowerment and tangible outcomes for partici
-pants. Ms. Posner holds a master™s degree in social enterprise administra
-
tion from the Columbia University School of Social Work.
GILL PRATT joined Toyota in September 2015, after serving for 5 years 
as a program manager at DARPA. At Toyota, Dr. Pratt is directing new 

research in the ˜eld of collaborative autonomy. At DARPA, he worked 

in the Defense Sciences and Tactical Technologies of˜ces managing 

research programs in robotics and neuromorphic systems (computers 

whose architecture is inspired by the brain). His robotics work included 

the DARPA Robotics challenge, where teams from around the world 

competed to develop and test robots for disaster response. The challenge 

spurred several countries and many commercial companies to increase 

their investment in the ˜eld. Besides conceiving of and running DARPA 

research programs, Dr. Pratt facilitated the negotiation and signing of a 

landmark collaboration agreement in disaster robotics between Japan and 

the United States. From 2000 to 2010, he was a founding professor and 

associate dean of faculty affairs and research at the Franklin W. Olin Col
-lege of Engineering. Prior to working at Olin, he was an associate profes
-sor of electrical engineering and computer science (EECS) at MIT, where 

he directed the MIT Leg Laboratory. He earned his Ph.D., S.M., and B.S. 

degrees in EECS from MIT.
SREE RAMASWAMY is a senior fellow at the McKinsey Global Insti
-tute (MGI), McKinsey™s business and economics research arm. He leads 
research on the activities of corporations and their contribution to pro
-ductivity, growth, and competitiveness. Mr. Ramaswamy also leads MGI™s 

work on the future of global manufacturing and the impact of changes 

in demand costs, technologies, and policies on various industries. In this 

capacity, he has worked on issues related to advanced industries, invest
-ment and trade, and the trend of next-shoring in manufacturing. Other 

recent work includes an in-depth look at game-changing opportunities for 

the U.S. economyŠin energy, advanced industries, and infrastructureŠ

and studies on labor and talent challenges in the United States and other 

advanced economies. Previously as a McKinsey consultant for 3 years, 

Mr. Ramaswamy worked on topics related to regional and city economic 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
development, public sector ef˜ciency, and business strategy for private-
sector clients in aerospace, energy, and high-tech industries. Prior to join
-ing McKinsey, he spent 10 years in the U.S. telecom and aerospace sector. 

He worked on systems research and design for advanced telecommunica
-
tion networks and holds three patents in the ˜eld. Mr. Ramaswamy also 

worked on international regulation and policy issues related to satel
-
lite communications. He has an M.B.A. from Columbia Business School, 

where he received a board of overseers fellowship. He also has an M.S. in 

telecommunications from the University of Pittsburgh and a bachelor™s 

degree in computer engineering from the University of Poona in India.
DAN RESTUCCIA is Burning Glass™ chief analytics of˜cer, leading 
Burning Glass™s knowledge architecture and research divisions. Prior to 

becoming chief analytics of˜cer, he served as Burning Glass™ director of 

applied research. Mr. Restuccia joined Burning Glass following a decade 

in education reform, driving innovations that improve college and career 

success for young people. While at Jobs for the Future, a national edu
-cation reform and advocacy organization, he developed partnerships 

between high schools and colleges to improve college matriculations and 

graduation rates for low-income and at risk students. Mr. Restuccia has 

also served as a middle and high school math teacher. He holds a B.A. in 

applied mathematics and urban studies from Brown University. His work 

has been published in numerous education and community development 

publications.
DAVID ROLF has been called ﬁthe most successful union organizer of 
the last 15 years.ﬂ He is the architect of the historic ˜ghts to win a $15 

living wage in SeaTac, Washington, in 2013 and a citywide $15 minimum 

wage in Seattle in 2014. Mr. Rolf is the president of Service Employ
-
ees International Union (SEIU) 775, the fastest growing union in the 

Northwest, representing 44,000 home care and nursing home workers. He 

serves as an international vice president of the SEIU in Washington, D.C. 

Mr. Rolf has helped to organize more than 100,000 workers into unions 

during his career. The 
American Prospect
 said that ﬁno American union
-ist has organized as many workers, or won them raises as substantial, 

as Rolf.ﬂ Known nationally as an innovative labor leader, Mr. Rolf has 

founded organizations including the Fair Work Center in Seattle, which 

enforces labor laws such as the $15 minimum wage, and Working Wash
-ington, which supports economic justice activism. In 2014, he founded the 
California-based Workers Lab, an ﬁacceleratorﬂ for new labor initiatives. 

The Workers Lab invests in projects that will create the next generation™s 

labor movement, building economic power for working people at a large 

scale while developing self-suf˜cient organizational revenue models. Mr. 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 173Rolf is also the founder and chair of the SEIU Bene˜ts Group, which 
provides health bene˜ts to tens of thousands of home care aides in the 

Northwest and runs the largest long-term care sector workforce develop
-ment institution in the country.
HEIDI SHIERHOLZ is chief economist to U.S. Secretary of Labor Thomas 
E. Perez. She held previous positions at the Economic Policy Institute in 

Washington, D.C., and the University of Toronto in Toronto, Ontario. She 

has done research in the areas of wage inequality, employment and unem
-
ployment policy, long-term unemployment, labor force participation, the 

minimum wage, young workers, and immigration. She received an M.A. 

and Ph.D. in economics from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, an 

M.S. in statistics from Iowa State University, and a B.A. in mathematics 

from Grinnell College.
YOAV SHOHAM
 is a professor of computer science at Stanford Uni
-versity, where he has been since receiving his Ph.D. in computer science 
from Yale University in 1987 and after spending an abbreviated post-

doctoral position at the Weizmann Institute of Science. He has worked 

in various areas of arti˜cial intelligence, including temporal reasoning, 

nonmonotonic logics and theories of commonsense. Dr. Shoham™s inter
-est in recent years has been multiagent systems and in particular, the 

interaction between computer science and game theory. He is a fellow of 

the American Association of Arti˜cial Intelligence and a charter member 

of the Game Theory Society. Dr. Shoham is an author of four books, an 

editor of one, and an author of numerous articles. He is also a founder of 

several successful e-commerce software companies.
JUDY WAJCMAN is the Anthony Giddens Professor of Sociology at the 
London School of Economics. She is also a research associate of the Oxford 

Internet Institute. She was previously a professor of sociology in the 

Research School of Social Sciences at the Australian National University. 

She has been president of the Society for the Social Studies of Science 

and was the 2013 recipient of the William F. Ogburn Career Achievement 

Award of the Communication, Information Technologies, and Media Soci
-ology section of the American Sociological Association. Her books include 

the following: 
The Politics of Working Life
, 
TechnoFeminism
, Managing Like 
a Man: Women and Men in Corporate Management
, Feminism Confronts Tech
-nology
, and 
The Social Shaping of Technology
. Her work has been translated 
into French, German, Greek, Korean, Japanese, Portuguese, and Spanish. 

Her latest book is 
Pressed for Time: The Acceleration of Life in Digital Capital
-ism
 (2015).
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CBiographical Sketches of 
Committee Members and Staff
COMMITTEE
ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON, 
Co-Chair
, is the Schussel Family Professor at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Sloan School of Management 
and the director of the MIT Initiative on the Digital Economy, research 

associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), and chair
-man of the 
MIT Sloan Management Review
. His research examines the effects 
of information technologies on business strategy, productivity and perfor
-mance, Internet commerce, pricing models, and intangible assets. At MIT, 

he teaches courses on the economics of information. Dr. Brynjolfsson was 

among the ˜rst researchers to measure the productivity contributions of 

information technology (IT) and the complementary role of organizational 

capital and other intangibles. His research also provided the ˜rst quanti
-˜cation of the value of online product variety, often known as the ﬁlong 

tail,ﬂ and developed pricing and bundling models for information goods. 

His recent work examines the social networks revealed by digital informa
-
tion ˚ows, such as e-mail traf˜c, and their relationships to information 

worker productivity. Dr. Brynjolfsson™s research has appeared in leading 

economics, management, and science journals. It has been recognized 

with 10 best paper awards and ˜ve patents. He is the author or co-editor 

of several books, including 
The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and 
Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies
; 
Wired for Innovation: How IT is 
Reshaping the Economy
; and 
Understanding the Digital Economy
; and editor 
of the Social Science Research Network™s Information System Network. 
174
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 175He has served on the editorial boards of numerous academic journals as 
well as Time
 magazine™s Board of Economists and the Academic Advisory 

Council of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. He served on the National 

Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine committee that pro
-duced the 1998 report 
Fostering Research on the Economic and Social Impacts 
of Information Technology
. Dr. Brynjolfsson holds bachelor™s and master™s 
degrees from Harvard University in applied mathematics and decision 

sciences and a Ph.D. from MIT in managerial economics.
TOM M. MITCHELL, 
Co-Chair
, is the E. Fredkin University Professor in 
the School of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) 
and chair of the Machine Learning Department at CMU. His research 

interests are generally in machine learning, arti˜cial intelligence, and 

cognitive neuroscience. His recent research has focused both on machine 

learning approaches to extracting structured information from unstruc
-tured text and on studying the neural representation of language in the 

human brain using functional magnetic resonance imaging. Dr. Mitchell 

is a past president of the American Association of Arti˜cial Intelligence 

(AAAI), past chair of the American Association for the Advancement of 

Science (AAAS) Section on Information, Computing, and Communica
-tion, and author of the textbook 
Machine Learning
. From 1999 to 2000, he 
served as chief scientist and vice president for WhizBang Labs, a company 

that employed machine learning to extract information from the Web. Dr. 

Mitchell has served on the Computer Science and Telecommunication 

Board of the National Academies and on the committee that produced 

the report 
Information Technology for Counterterrorism: Immediate Actions 

and Future Possibilities
. He has been a member of the National Academy 
of Engineering (NAE) since 2010. He is also a fellow of the AAAS and a 

fellow of the AAAI. Dr. Mitchell received his Ph.D. in electrical engineer
-ing with a computer science minor from Stanford University.
DARON ACEMOGLU is the Elizabeth and James Killian Professor of Eco
-nomics in the Department of Economics at MIT. He is also af˜liated with 

NBER, the Center for Economic Performance, the Center for Economic 

Policy Research, and Microsoft Research Center. Dr. Acemoglu is a leader 

in both theoretical and empirical research in political economics, macro
-economics, and growth, focusing especially on human capital and the 

roles and evolution of institutions. His work covers a wide range of areas 

within economics, including political economy, economic development 

and growth, human capital theory, growth theory, innovation, search 

theory, network economics, and learning. He is a fellow of the Society 

of Labor Economists, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the 

Econometric Society, the European Economic Association, and a member 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
of the National Academy of Sciences. Dr. Acemoglu received his Ph.D. in 
economics from the London School of Economics in 1992.
STEPHEN R. BARLEY is the Christian A. Felipe Professor of Technology 
Management at the College of Engineering at the University of California, 
Santa Barbara (UCSB). Prior to coming to UCSB, Dr. Barley served for 

10 years on the faculty of the School of Industrial and Labor Relations 

at Cornell University. He then moved to Stanford University where he 

was the Richard Weiland Professor of Management Science and Engi
-neering, the associate chair of the Department of Management Science 

and Engineering (2011-2015), and was the co-founder and co-director of 

the Center for Work, Technology and Organization at Stanford™s School 

of Engineering (1994-2015). He was editor of the 
Administrative Science 

Quarterly
 (1993-1997) and the founding editor of the 
Stanford Social Inno
-vation Review
 (2002-2004). Dr. Barley serves on the editorial boards of the 
Academy of Management Discovery, the Academy of Management Annals, 
the 
Research in the Sociology of Organizations
 (book series), 
Information and 
Organization
, 
Engineering Studies
, and the 
Journal of Organizational Eth
-nography
. He has been the recipient the Academy of Management™s New 
Concept Award and was named Distinguished Scholar by the Academy 

of Management™s Organization and Management Theory Division (2006), 

Organization Communication and Information Systems Division (2010), 

and Critical Management Studies Division (2010). He has been a fellow at 

Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences and is a fellow of 

the Academy of Management. In 2006, the 
Academy of Management Jour
-nal
 named Dr. Barley as the author of the largest number of interesting 
articles in the ˜eld of management studies. He was a member of the board 

of senior scholars of the National Center for the Educational Quality of 

the Workforce and co-chaired National Academies™ committee on the 

changing occupational structure in the United States. He holds an AB. in 

English from the College of William and Mary, an M.Ed. from Ohio State 

University, and a Ph.D. in organization studies from MIT.
BARRETT S. CALDWELL is a professor in the School of Industrial Engi
-neering and holds a courtesy appointment in the School of Aeronautics 
and Astronautics at Purdue University. His research applies human fac
-tors and industrial engineering principles to team performance in com
-plex task environments. Dr. Caldwell™s group is concerned with analysis, 

design, and improvement of how humans work with, and share knowl
-edge through, information and communication technology systems on 

Earth and in space. His early research examined the potential social and 

technological effects of Internet multimedia communications, even before 

the release of the Mosaic browser in 1993. Dr. Caldwell™s discovery of the 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 177importance of information delay with increasing bandwidth has been 
meaningful since the growth of Internet ˜le sharing, which demonstrated 

that delay remains a concern to ensuring satisfactory quality of service. 

He is a fellow of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. Dr. Caldwell 

received his Ph.D. in social psychology in 1990 from the University of 

California, Davis.
MELISSA CEFKIN is a principal scientist and design anthropologist at the 
Nissan Research Center, Silicon Valley, where she focuses on the devel
-opment of autonomous vehicles from a social and cultural standpoint. 

Before joining Nissan, she served as manager of the Discovery Practices 

group in IBM™s Accelerated Discovery Lab. At IBM, she focused on recon
-
˜gurations of work and labor related to new ways of conceptualizing, 

designing, and executing work using open, crowd, and big data-driven 

practices. Dr. Cefkin previously served as director of user experience and 

member of the Advanced Research group at Sapient Corporation. She was 

also a senior research scientist at the Institute for Research on Learning. 

She is the editor of 
Ethnography and the Corporate Encounter: Re˚ections on 

Research in and of Corporations
 (2009) and served as the president of the 
board of the Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference. Dr. Cefkin is a 

Fulbright award grantee. She received her Ph.D. in anthropology from 

Rice University in 1993.
HENRIK I. CHRISTENSEN is the KUKA Chair of Robotics at the Col
-lege of Computing of the Georgia Institute of Technology. He is also the 
executive director of the Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines. 

Dr. Christensen does research on systems integration, human-robot inter
-action, mapping, and robot vision. The research is performed within the 

Cognitive Robotics Laboratory. He has published more than 300 contri
-butions across arti˜cial intelligence, robotics, and vision. His research 

has a strong emphasis on ﬁreal problems with real solutions.ﬂ A problem 

needs a theoretical model, implementation, evaluation, and translation to 

the real world. He is actively engaged in the setup and coordination of 

robotics research in the United States (and worldwide). Dr. Christensen 

received the Engelberger Award in 2011, the highest honor awarded by 

the robotics industry. He was also awarded the Boeing Supplier of the 

Year in 2012, with three other colleagues at Georgia Tech. Dr. Christensen 

is a fellow of AAAS and the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers 

(IEEE). He received an honorary doctorate in engineering from Aalborg 

University in 2014. He collaborates with institutions and industries across 

three continents. His research has been featured in major media such as 

CNN, 
The New York Times
, and BBC. He serves as a consultant to compa
-Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
nies and government agencies across the world. Dr. Christensen received 
his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Aalborg University in 1990.
JOHN C. HALTIWANGER is a distinguished university professor in the 

Department of Economics at the University of Maryland, College Park. He 

is also the ˜rst recipient of the Dudley and Louisa Dillard Professorship, 

in 2013. After serving on the faculty of the University of California, Los 

Angeles (UCLA) and Johns Hopkins University, Dr. Haltiwanger joined 

the faculty at University of Maryland in 1987. In the late 1990s, he served 

as chief economist of the U.S. Census Bureau. He is a research associate 

of NBER, a senior research fellow at the Center for Economic Studies at 

the U.S. Census Bureau, and a fellow of the Society of Labor Economics. 

Dr. Haltiwanger has played a major role in developing and studying U.S. 

longitudinal ˜rm-level data. Using these data, he has developed new sta
-tistical measures and analyzed the determinants of ˜rm-level job creation, 

job destruction, and economic performance. He has explored the impli
-cations of these ˜rm dynamics for aggregate U.S. productivity growth 

and for the U.S. labor market. The statistical and measurement methods 

Dr. Haltiwanger has helped develop to measure and study ˜rm dynam
-ics have been increasingly used by many statistical agencies around the 

world. His own research increasingly uses the data and measures on ˜rm 

dynamics from a substantial number of advanced, emerging and transi
-tion economies. His work with the statistical agencies has been recently 

recognized in his being awarded the Julius Shiskin Award for economic 

statistics in 2013 and the Roger Herriott Award for innovation in federal 

statistics in 2014. He has published more than 100 academic articles and 

numerous books, including 
Job Creation and Destruction
 (with Steven Davis 

and Scott Schuh). Dr. Haltiwanger received his Ph.D. in economics from 

Johns Hopkins University in 1981.
ERIC HORVITZ is a technical fellow and director at the Microsoft Research 
Lab at Redmond, Washington. He has pursued principles and applica
-tions of machine intelligence, with a focus on the use of probability and 

decision theory in systems that learn and reason. Dr. Horvitz has made 

contributions in automated diagnosis and decision support, models of 

bounded rationality, machine learning, human-computer collaboration, 

and human computation and crowdsourcing. His research and collabora
-tions have led to ˜elded systems in health care, transportation, human-

computer interaction, robotics, operating systems, networking, and 

aerospace. Dr. Horvitz has been awarded the Feigenbaum Prize and the 

AAAI-Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Allen Newell Award 

for contributions to arti˜cial intelligence and human-computer interac
-tion. He has been elected fellow of the AAAI, the ACM, the American 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 179nies and government agencies across the world. Dr. Christensen received 
his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Aalborg University in 1990.
JOHN C. HALTIWANGER is a distinguished university professor in the 
Department of Economics at the University of Maryland, College Park. He 

is also the ˜rst recipient of the Dudley and Louisa Dillard Professorship, 

in 2013. After serving on the faculty of the University of California, Los 

Angeles (UCLA) and Johns Hopkins University, Dr. Haltiwanger joined 

the faculty at University of Maryland in 1987. In the late 1990s, he served 

as chief economist of the U.S. Census Bureau. He is a research associate 

of NBER, a senior research fellow at the Center for Economic Studies at 

the U.S. Census Bureau, and a fellow of the Society of Labor Economics. 

Dr. Haltiwanger has played a major role in developing and studying U.S. 

longitudinal ˜rm-level data. Using these data, he has developed new sta
-tistical measures and analyzed the determinants of ˜rm-level job creation, 

job destruction, and economic performance. He has explored the impli
-cations of these ˜rm dynamics for aggregate U.S. productivity growth 

and for the U.S. labor market. The statistical and measurement methods 

Dr. Haltiwanger has helped develop to measure and study ˜rm dynam
-ics have been increasingly used by many statistical agencies around the 

world. His own research increasingly uses the data and measures on ˜rm 

dynamics from a substantial number of advanced, emerging and transi
-tion economies. His work with the statistical agencies has been recently 

recognized in his being awarded the Julius Shiskin Award for economic 

statistics in 2013 and the Roger Herriott Award for innovation in federal 

statistics in 2014. He has published more than 100 academic articles and 

numerous books, including 
Job Creation and Destruction
 (with Steven Davis 

and Scott Schuh). Dr. Haltiwanger received his Ph.D. in economics from 

Johns Hopkins University in 1981.
ERIC HORVITZ is a technical fellow and director at the Microsoft Research 
Lab at Redmond, Washington. He has pursued principles and applica
-tions of machine intelligence, with a focus on the use of probability and 

decision theory in systems that learn and reason. Dr. Horvitz has made 

contributions in automated diagnosis and decision support, models of 

bounded rationality, machine learning, human-computer collaboration, 

and human computation and crowdsourcing. His research and collabora
-tions have led to ˜elded systems in health care, transportation, human-

computer interaction, robotics, operating systems, networking, and 

aerospace. Dr. Horvitz has been awarded the Feigenbaum Prize and the 

AAAI-Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Allen Newell Award 

for contributions to arti˜cial intelligence and human-computer interac
-tion. He has been elected fellow of the AAAI, the ACM, the American 
Academy of Arts and Sciences, and the NAE, and he has been inducted 
into the CHI Academy.
RUTH M. MILKMAN is a distinguished professor of sociology at the 
City University of New York (CUNY) Graduate Center and at the Joseph 

F. Murphy Institute for Worker Education and Labor Studies, where she 

also serves as research director. She is a sociologist of labor and labor 

movements who has written on a variety of topics involving work and 

organized labor in the United States, past and present. Her early research 

focused on the impact of economic crisis and war on women workers in 

the 1930s and 1940s. She then went on to study the restructuring of the 

U.S. automobile industry and its impact on workers and their unions in 

the 1980s and 1990s; in that period she also conducted research on the 

labor practices of Japanese-owned factories in California. More recently 

Dr. Milkman has written extensively about low-wage immigrant workers 

in the United States, analyzing their employment conditions as well as 

the dynamics of immigrant labor organizing. She helped lead a multi-

city team that produced a widely publicized 2009 study documenting the 

prevalence of wage theft and violations of other workplace laws in Los 

Angeles, Chicago, and New York. She also recently co-authored a study of 

California™s paid family leave program, focusing on its impact on employ
-
ers and workers. After 21 years as a sociology professor at UCLA, where 

she directed the Institute for Research on Labor and Employment from 

2001 to 2008, she returned to New York City in 2010. Dr. Milkman received 

her Ph.D. in sociology from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1981.
EDUARDO SALAS is a professor and the Allyn R. and Gladys M. Cline 
Chair in Psychology at Rice University. Previously, he was a trustee chair 

and the Pegasus Professor of Psychology at the University of Central 

Florida where he also held an appointment as program director for the 

Human Systems Integration Research Department at the Institute for 

Simulation and Training (IST). Before joining IST, he was a senior research 

psychologist and head of the Training Technology Development Branch 

of Naval Air Warfare Center Training Systems Division for 15 years. Dur
-ing this period, Dr. Salas served as a principal investigator for numerous 

research and development programs that focused on teamwork, team 

training, simulation-based training, decision making under stress, safety 

culture, and performance assessment. He has co-authored more than 450 

journal articles and book chapters and has co-edited 27 books. His exper
-tise includes assisting organizations in how to foster teamwork, design 

and implement team training strategies, facilitate training effectiveness, 

manage decision making under stress, develop performance measure
-ment tools, and create a safety culture. Dr. Salas is a past president of 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
the Society for Industrial/Organizational Psychology and the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, a fellow of the American Psychological 

Association and a recipient of the Meritorious Civil Service Award from 

the Department of the Navy. He is also the recipient of the 2012 Society for 

Human Resource Management Losey Lifetime Achievement Award and 

the 2012 Joseph E. McGrath Award for Lifetime Achievement.
NICOLE SMITH is a research professor and senior economist at the 
Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce where 

she leads the center™s econometric and methodological work. Dr. Smith 

has developed a framework for restructuring long-term occupational 

and educational projections. This framework forms the underlying meth
-odology for 
Help Wanted
, a report that projects education demand for 
occupations in the U.S. economy through 2020. She is part of a team of 

economists working on a project to map, forecast, and monitor human 

capital development and career pathways. Dr. Smith was born in Trinidad 

and Tobago and graduated with honors in economics and mathematics 

from the University of the West Indies (U.W.I.), St. Augustine campus. She 

was the recipient of the Sir Arthur Lewis Memorial Prize for outstanding 

research at the master™s level at the U.W.I. and is co-recipient of the 2007 

Arrow Prize for Junior Economists for educational mobility research. 

Prior to joining the center, Dr. Smith was a faculty member in economics 

at Gettysburg College in Pennsylvania, and the University of the West 

Indies, St. Augustine campus. Dr. Smith taught classical and modern 

econometrics, introductory and advanced level courses in microeconom
-ics, macroeconomics, statistics, mathematics for economists, and Latin 

American economic development. Her previous macroeconomic research 

focused on the political economy of exchange rates and exchange rate 

volatility in the Commonwealth Caribbean, the motivation for her M.S. 

thesis and a joint-publication at the Inter-American Development Bank. 

Her current research investigates the role of education and socioeconomic 

factors in intergenerational mobility. She is a co-author of 
The Inheritance of 

Educational Inequality: International Comparisons and Fifty-Year Trends
 (2007). 
She received her Ph.D. in economics from American University.

 
CLAIRE J. TOMLIN is a professor of electrical engineering and computer 

sciences at the University of California, Berkeley, where she holds the 

Charles A. Desoer Chair in Engineering. Dr. Tomlin held the positions of 

assistant, associate, and full professor at Stanford University from 1998 

to 2007, and in 2005 joined Berkeley. She received the Erlander Professor
-ship of the Swedish Research Council in 2009, a MacArthur Fellowship in 

2006, and the Eckman Award of the American Automatic Control Council 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 181in 2003. She works in hybrid systems and control, with applications to 
air traf˜c systems, robotics, and biology. Dr. Tomlin received her Ph.D. in 

electrical engineering and computer science at the University of Califor
-nia, Berkeley, in 1998.
NATIONAL ACADEMIES STAFF
JON EISENBERG is director of the Computer Science and Telecommu
-nications Board (CSTB) of the National Academies. He has also been 

study director for a diverse body of work, including a series of studies 

exploring Internet and broadband policy and networking and commu
-nications technologies. From 1995 until 1997, he was an AAAS Science, 

Engineering, and Diplomacy Fellow at the U.S. Agency for International 

Development, where he worked on technology transfer and information 

and telecommunications policy issues. Dr. Eisenberg received his Ph.D. 

in physics from the University of Washington in 1996 and B.S. in physics 

with honors from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, in 1988.
EMILY GRUMBLING is a program of˜cer with the CSTB, where she coor
-dinates projects addressing the societal impacts of emerging information 
and communication technologies. She previously served as an AAAS Sci
-ence and Technology Policy Fellow in the Directorate for Computer and 

Information Science and Engineering at the National Science Foundation 

(2012-2014) and as an American Chemical Society (ACS) Congressional 

Fellow in the U.S. House of Representatives (2011-2012). Dr. Grumbling 

currently serves as a volunteer associate of the ACS Committee on Envi
-ronmental Improvement. She received her Ph.D. in physical chemistry 

in 2010 from the University of Arizona, where she was the 2008 Marvel 

fellow, and her B.A. with a double-major in chemistry and ˜lm/electronic 

media arts from Bard College in 2004.
MARGARET HILTON
  is a senior program of˜cer of the Board on Sci
-ence Education (BOSE) of the National Academies where she is currently 
directing a study on assessing intrapersonal and interpersonal compe
-tencies and a study on developing indicators for undergraduate STEM 

education.
  Her previous studies, 
Enhancing the Effectiveness of Team Science
 (2015) and 
Education for Life and Work: Developing Transferable Knowledge 
and Skills in the 21st Century
 (2012) drew widespread interest in the scien
-ti˜c and education communities. In 2011 and 2012, she directed two large 

national summitsŠone on community college STEM education and one 

on assessment of informal and afterschool science learning. She contrib
-uted to the BOSE study 
Discipline-Based Education Research: Understanding 
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
and Improving Learning in Undergraduate Science and Engineering
, was a 
primary author of the report 
Learning Science through Computer Games and 
Simulations
; and directed a study of high school science laboratories. For 
the National Academies™ Committee on National Statistics, she directed 

a study of a large database of occupational information. Prior to joining 

the National Academies staff, as an analyst at the Congressional Of˜ce of 

Technology Assessment, Ms. Hilton directed studies of workforce train
-ing, work reorganization, and international competitiveness. She earned a 

B.A. in geography, with high honors, from the University of Michigan, an 

M.A. in regional planning from the University of North Carolina, Chapel 

Hill, and an M.A. in education and human development from George 

Washington University.
SHENAE BRADLEY is an administrative assistant for the CSTB. She cur
-rently provides support for multiple projects, including Continuing Inno
-vation in Information Technology; Information Technology, Automation, 
and the U.S. Workforce; and Toward 21st Century Cyber-Physical Systems 

Education, to name a few. Prior to this, she served as a senior project 

assistant with the board. Prior to coming to the National Academies, she 

managed a number of apartment rental communities for Edgewood Man
-
agement Corporation in the Maryland/DC/Delaware metropolitan areas.
KATIRIA ORTIZ is a research associate for the CSTB. She previously 
served as an intern under the U.S. Department of Justice and as an under
-graduate research assistant at the Cybersecurity Quanti˜cation Labora
-tory at the University of Maryland College Park. She received a B.S. 

in cell biology and molecular genetics and a B.A. in criminology and 

criminal justice from the University of Maryland College Park, in 2014. 

She recently completed her M.A. in international science and technology 

policy from George Washington University.
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DAcronyms and Abbreviations
ACS
 American Community Survey
AI
 arti˜cial intelligence
ATM
 automated teller machine
 BDS
 Business Dynamic Statistics
BEA
 Bureau of Economic Analysis
BED
 Business Employment Dynamics
BLS
 Bureau of Labor Statistics
BPP
 Billion Prices Project
 
CES
 Current Establishment Survey
CPI
 Consumer Price Index
CPS
 Current Population Survey
 
DOT
 Dictionary of Occupational Titles
 
EHR
 electronic health record
 
GDP
 gross domestic product
GPS
 Global Positioning System
 
IDT
 interdisciplinary team
IT
 information technology
 183
Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND THE U.S. WORKFORCE
JOLTS
 Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey
 LEHD
 Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics
 
MOOC
 massive open online course
 
NCHS
 National Center for Health Statistics
 
O*NET 
 Occupational Information Network
 
QCEW
 Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
QWI
 Quarterly Workforce Indicators
 
R&D
 research and development
 
STEM
 science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
 
VoIP
 Voice-over Internet Protocol
