DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/24886Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The UndergraduatePerspective: Interim Report68 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-46502-1 | DOI 10.17226/24886Committee on Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The UndergraduatePerspective; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Board onMathematical Sciences and Analytics; Committee on Applied and TheoreticalStatistics; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; Board on ScienceEducation; Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education; NationalAcademies of Sciences, Engineering, and MedicineEnvisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CENVISITHCommittee o
nIONING 
HE UNDEn Envisionin
gCompu
tBoard Comm
iDivisiDivision of THE DAERGRADInterg the Data Sciter Science anon Mathem
aittee on Applon on Engin
eBoard on Behavioral a
nA ConsensuATA SCIDUATE rim Reporience Discipl
ind Telecomm
uatical Science
sied and Theo
eering and Ph
yScience Edu
cnd Social Scius Study Re
pIENCE DPERSP
Ert ine: The Undmunications Bos and Analyt
ioretical Statisthysical Scien
ccation  iences and Edport of 
DISCIPLECTIVEdergraduate Peoard ics tics ces 
ducation LINE:   erspective Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS           500 Fifth Street, NW       Washington, DC 20001 
This activity was supported by Contract No. 162
6983 from the National Science Foundation. Any 
opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations
 expressed in this publication do not necessarily 
reflect the views of any organization or agency that provided support for the project. 
Digital Object Identifier: https://doi.org/10.17226/24886 

Additional copies of this publication are available 
for sale from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth 
Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800
) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313; http://www.nap.edu. 

Copyright 2018 by the National Academ
y of Sciences. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America 
Suggested citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 201
. Envisioning The Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim Report. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/24886. Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The NatiPresidenrelated tcontributThe NatiNational MembersMote, Jr.The Nati1970 undand heal
medicineThe threand Me
dconduct National contributengineerLearn mowww.na
onal Acade
t Lincoln, asto science a
ntions to res
eonal Acade
 Academy ofs are elected., is preside
onal Acade
der the char
th issues. M
e and healt
he Academieicine to proother activi
 Academies tions to kno
wring, and m
eore about t
htionalacademy of Scie
ns a private,
 nd technolo
earch. Dr. 
Mmy of Engi
nf Sciences t
od by their p
ent. my of Medi
cter of the N
embers are
 h.Dr
. Victor
s work toge
ovide indepeties to solve also encour
wledge, an
dedicine.  
he National 
Aemies.org
.  nces was est nongovern
mgy. MemberMarcia McNu
tneering 
was o bring the peers for ext
rcine (formeational Aca
d elected by 
 J. Dzau is 
pther as the endent, obj
ee complex page educati
d increase p
Academies otablished in 
mental insti
trs are electett is preside
 establishe
dpractices of
 raordinary 
crly the Insti
tdemy of Sci
etheir peers fpresident. 
National A
cective analy
sroblems andon and rese
ublic under
sof Sciences,  1863 by an 
Atution to adved by their pnt. d in 1964 un
d engineeringcontribution
stute of Med
ences to ad
vfor distinguicademies ofsis and advi
cd inform pu
bearch, recognstanding in 
m EngineeringAct of Congvise the nat
ipeers for ou
tder the charg to advisin
gs to engineeicine) was 
evise the nat
iished contri
f Sciences, Ece to the nablic policy d
nize outstanmatters of sg, and Medi
cress, signed
ion on issue
ststanding 
rter of the g the nation
ering. Dr. C.
established iion on medi
butions to Engineeringation and ecisions. T
hnding science, 
cine at  by s .  D. in cal g, he Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ConsensMedicineauthoringrecommedeliberatprocess aProceedchronicleconvenedare thoscommitteFor inforwww.na
tus Study Ree document g committeendations b
tions. Each
 and it repre
sings
 publishe the presed by the N
ase of the 
pee, or the 
Nrmation abotionalacade
meports 
publi the evidenee of expeased on in
f report has
 sents the p
ohed by the entations anational Acad
participants
 National Aca
dout other p
rmies.org/a
bshed by th
ence-based coerts. Repo
rformation 
g been subj
eosition of the National And discussi
oemies. The
  and are n
demies. 
roducts and
 bout/whatw
ee National A
onsensus o
nrts typicallygathered b
yected to a e National 
Academies oons at a 
w statements
ot endorsed activities oedo. 
Academies ofn the studyy include y the commrigorous a
nAcademies 
oof Sciences, workshop, ss and opinio
d by other
 of the Natiof Sciences, ™s statemenfindings, cmittee and tnd indepen
don the state
m Engineerin
symposium, 
ns containe participan
tonal AcademEngineeringnt of task bconclusions,
 the commitdent peer-rement of taskg, and Me
dor other ed in proce
ets, the pla
nmies, please, and 
by an 
 and 
ttee™s eview k. dicine 
event 
edings 
nning 
e visit 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.v COMMITTEE ON ENVISIONING THE DATA SCIENCE DISCIPLINE: THE 
UNDERGRADUATE PERSPECTIVE 
LAURA HAAS, NAE,
1 University of Massachusetts Amherst, 
Co-Chair ALFRED O. HERO III, University of Michigan, 
Co-Chair
 ANI ADHIKARI,
 University of California, Berkeley DAVID CULLER, NAE, University of California, Berkeley 
DAVID
 DONOHO, NAS,
2 Stanford University E. THOMAS EWING, Virginia Tech LOUIS J. GROSS,
 The University of Tennessee, Knoxville 
NICHOLAS
 HORTON, Amherst College 
JULIA LANE, New York University ANDREW MCCALLUM, University of Massachusetts Amherst 
RICHARD MCCULLOUGH, Harvard University REBECCA NUGENT,
 Carnegie Mellon University 
LEE RAINIE, Pew Research Center 
ROB RUTENBAR,
 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
KRISTIN TOLLE, Microsoft Research  

TALITHIA WILLIAMS, Harvey Mudd College 
ANDREW ZIEFFLER, University of Minnesota  
Staff JON EISENBERG, Board Director, Computer Sc
ience and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), Study Co-Director 
MICHELLE K. SCHWALBE, Board Director, Board on Mathematical Sciences and Analytics (BMSA), 
Study Co-Director LINDA CASOLA, Associate Program Officer and Editor, BMSA 
JANEL DEAR,
 Senior Program Assistant, CSTB (until May 2017) 
RENEE HAWKINS,
 Financial Manager, CSTB AMY STEPHENS, Program Officer, Board on Science Education 

BEN WENDER, Program Officer, BMSA 
1 Member, National Academy of Engineering. 
2 Member, National Academy of Sciences. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD 
FARNAM JAHANIAN, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Chair 
LUIZ ANDRE BARROSO, Google, Inc. 
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, NAE,
1 Columbia University ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC 

DAVID CULLER, NAE, University of California, Berkeley 

EDWARD FRANK, Cloud Parity, Inc. 

LAURA HAAS, University of Massachusetts Amherst 
MARK HOROWITZ, NAE, Stanford University 
ERIC HORVITZ, NAE, Microsoft Corporation 

VIJAY KUMAR, NAE, University of Pennsylvania 

BETH MYNATT, Georgia Institute of Technology 

CRAIG PARTRIDGE, Raytheon BBN Technologies 
DANIELA RUS, NAE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
FRED B. SCHNEIDER, NAE, Cornell University 

JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia 

MOSHE VARDI, NAS
2/NAE, Rice University 
KATHERINE YELICK, NAE, University of California, Berkeley 
Staff JON EISENBERG, Board Director  
SHENAE BRADLEY, Administrative Assistant 

JANEL DEAR, Senior Program Assistant (through May 2017) 
EMILY GRUMBLING, Program Officer 
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 

LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director  

KATIRIA ORTIZ, Research Associate 

VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Officer 
1 Member, National Academy of Engineering. 
2 Member, National Academy of Sciences. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii BOARD ON MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES AND ANALYTICS 
STEPHEN M. ROBINSON, NAE,
1 University of Wisconsin, Madison,
 Chair JOHN R. BIRGE, NAE, University of Chicago 
W. PETER CHERRY, Independent Consultant 
DAVID CHU, Institute for Defense Analyses 

RONALD R. COIFMAN, NAS,
2 Yale University JAMES CURRY, University of Colorado, Boulder 

CHRISTINE FOX, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory 
MARK L. GREEN, University of California, Los Angeles 
PATRICIA A. JACOBS, Naval Postgraduate School 

JOSEPH A. LANGSAM, Morgan Stanley (retired) 

SIMON A. LEVIN, NAS, Princeton University   

ANDREW W. LO, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
DAVID MAIER, Portland State University 
LOIS CURFMAN M
CINNES, Argonne National Laboratory 
JUAN C. MEZA, University of California, Merced 

FRED S. ROBERTS, Rutgers University 

ELIZABETH A. THOMPSON, NAS, University of Washington 
CLAIRE TOMLIN, University of California, Berkeley 
LANCE WALLER, Emory University 

KAREN WILLCOX, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

DAVID YAO, NAE, Columbia University 
Staff MICHELLE K. SCHWALBE,
 Board Director LINDA CASOLA, Associate Program Officer and Editor
 BETH DOLAN, Financial Manager RODNEY N. HOWARD, Administrative Assistant 
BEN WENDER, Program Officer 
1 Member, National Academy of Engineering. 
2 Member, National Academy of Sciences. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii COMMITTEE ON APPLIED AND THEORETICAL STATISTICS  
ALFRED O. HERO III, University of Michigan, 
Chair ALICIA CARRIQUIRY, Iowa State University 
MICHAEL J. DANIELS, University of Texas, Austin 

KATHERINE BENNETT ENSOR, Rice University 

AMY HERRING, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 
NICHOLAS HORTON, Amherst College 

DAVID MADIGAN, Columbia University 
JOSÉ M.F. MOURA, NAE,
1 Carnegie Mellon University NANCY REID, University of Toronto 
CYNTHIA RUDIN, Duke University  

AARTI SINGH, Carnegie Mellon University Staff BEN WENDER,
 Director 
LINDA CASOLA, Associate Program Officer and Editor
 BETH DOLAN, Financial Manager RODNEY N. HOWARD, Administrative Assistant 
1 Member, National Academy of Engineering. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix BOARD ON SCIENCE EDUCATION 
ADAM GAMORAN, William T. Grant Foundation, 
Chair SUNITA V. COOKE, MiraCosta College 
MELANIE COOPER, Michigan State University 
RODOLFO DIRZO, NAS, Stanford University 

RUSH D. HOLT, American Association for the Advancement of Science 

MATTHEW KREHBIEL, Achieve, Inc. 

MICHAEL LACH, University of Chicago 
LYNN LIBEN, The Pennsylvania State University 
CATHRYN (CATHY) MANDUCA, Carleton College 

JOHN MATHER, NAS,
1 NASA Goddard Space Flight Center TONYA M. MATTHEWS, Michigan Science Center 

BRIAN REISER¸ Northwestern University 
MARSHALL ﬁMIKEﬂ SMITH, Carnegie Founda
tion for the Advancement of Teaching 
ROBERTA TANNER, Thompson School District (retired) 
SUZANNE WILSON, Michigan State University 
Staff HEIDI SCHWEINGRUBER,
 Board Director KERRY BRENNER, Senior Program Officer 
KENNE DIBNER, Program Officer 

COREETHA ENTZMINGER, Program Assistant  

LETICIA GARCILAZO GREEN, Senior Program Assistant 
MARGARET HILTON, Seni
or Program Officer 
MARGARET KELLY, Senior Program Assistant 
MATTHEW LAMMERS, Program Coordinator 

AMY STEPHENS, Program Officer 
1 Member, National Academy of Sciences. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Acknowledgments 
This Consensus Study Report was reviewed in draf
t form by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise. The purpose of 
this independent review 
is to provide candid and 
critical comments that will assist the National Academ
ies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in making each published report as sound as possible and to
 ensure that it meets the institutional standards for quality, objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness 
to the study charge. The review comments and draft 
manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrit
y of the deliberative process. We thank the following 
individuals for their review of this report: 
Richard De Veaux, Williams College, 
W. Eric L. Grimson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
C.K. Gunsalus, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 

Iain M. Johnstone, NAS,
1 Stanford University, 
Brian Kotz, Montgomery College,  

Peter Norvig, Google, Inc., and 
Renata Rawlings-Goss, Georgia Institute of Technology. 
Although the reviewers listed above provided ma
ny constructive comments and suggestions, they 
were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations of this report nor did they see the final 
draft before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Raghu Ramakrishnan, Microsoft 
Corporation. He responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried 
out in accordance with the standards of the National Academies and that all review comments were 
carefully considered. Responsibility for the final cont
ent rests entirely with th
e authoring committee and the National Academies. 
The committee would like to thank Andy Bu
rnett, Knowinnovation, for facilitating the 
committee™s May workshop as well 
as the following staff members fro
m the National Science Foundation 
for their input, assistance, and support of this stud
y: Stephanie August, Chaita
n Baru, Eva Campo, Erwin 
Gianchandani, Nandini Kannan, Sara Kiesler, Gabriel Perez-Giz, Earnestine Psalmonds-Easter, and Elena 
Zheleva. The committee would also like to thank the fo
llowing individuals for providing input to this 
study: 
John Abowd, U.S. Census Bureau, 
Deb Agarwal, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 

Jon Ahlquist, Florida State University,  

Barbara Alvin, Eastern Washington University, 

Barbara Anthony, Southwestern University, 

David Austin, North Carolina State University, 
Maria Aysa-Lastra, Winthrop University, 
Tom Barr, American Mathematical Society, 

Laura Bartley, University of Oklahoma, 

Nina Bijedic, University ﬁDžemal Bijedi
ﬂof Mostar, 
1 Member, National Academy of Sciences. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sally Blake, Flagler College, 
Roselie Bright, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 
Quincy Brown, American Association for the Advancement of Science, 
Andy Burnett, Knowinnovation, 
Dave Campbell, Simon Fraser University, 

Robert Campbell, Brown University, 

Robert Carver, Stonehill College, 

Amy Chang, American Society for Microbiology, 

Lei Cheng, Olivet Nazarene University, 
Hongmei Chi, Florida A&M University, 
Alok Choudhary, Northwestern University, 

William Coberly, University of Tulsa, 

Peyton Cook, University of Tulsa,  

Bill Corey, University of Virginia,  
Catherine Cramer, New York Hall of Science, 
James Curry, University of Colorado, Boulder, 

Nicole Dalzell, Duke University, 

Juliana DeCastro, Núcleo de Planejamento Estratégico de Transporte e Turismo, 

Sam Donovan, University of Pittsburgh, 
Renee Dopplick, Association for Computing Machinery, 
Maureen Doyle, Northern Kentucky University, 

Ruth Duerr, Ronin Institute, 

Arturo Duran, IVA Ventures, 

Stephen Edwards, ACM Administrative Centre, 

Sandra Ellis, Texas A&M University, Corpus Christi, 
Paula Faulkner, North Carolina Agricult
ural and Technical State University, 
Raya Feldman, University of California, Santa Barbara, 
Dilberto Ferraren, Visayas State University, 

William Finzer, Concord Consortium, 

Julia Fisher, Coker College, Roger French, Case Western Reserve University, 
Kimberly Gardner, Kennesaw State University, 

Sommer Gentry, U. S. Naval Academy, 

Tara Ghazi, University of California, Berkeley, 

Richard Gill, Brigham Young University, 

Shana Gillette, U.S. Agency for International Development,  
Juan Godoy, Universidad Nacional de Cór
doba, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones   
     Cientificas y Técnicas, 

Greg Goins, North Carolina A&T State University, 
Robert Gould, University of California, Los Angeles, 

C. K. Gunsalus, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 
Mirsad Hadzikadic, University of North Carolina, Charlotte, 
Jim Hammerman, TERC, 

Michael Harris, Bunker Hill Community College, 

John Hathaway, Brigham Young University-Idaho, 

Kristin Hunter-Thomson, Rutgers University, 

Ambra Hyskaj, National Association of Public Health Albania, 
Charles Isbell, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
Mark Jack, Florida A&M University, 

Bob Jecklin, University of Wisconsin, La Crosse,  

Xia Jing, Ohio University,  
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Jeremiah Johnson, University of New Hampshire, 
John Johnstone, University of Alabama, Birmingham, 
Ryan Jones, Middle Tennessee State University, 
Sungkyu Jung, University of Pittsburgh, 
Michael Kangas , Doane University, 

Roxanne Kapikian, GlaxoSmithKline, 

Danny Kaplan, Macalester College, 

Casey Kennington, Boise State University, 

Deepak Khatry, MedImmune, 
Brian Kotz, Montgomery College, 
Vldimir Krylov, Crimean Engineering and Pedagogical University, 

Kristin Kuter, Saint Mary™s College, Notre Dame, Indiana, 

Jay Labov, National Academies of Scie
nces, Engineering, and Medicine, 
Paula Lackie, Carleton College, 
Sharon Lane-Getaz, St. Olaf College,  
Duncan Temple Lang, University of California, Davis, 

Jeff Leek, Johns Hopkins University, 

Matthew Liberatore, University of Toledo, 

Haralambos Marmanis
, Marmanis Group, 
Pat Marsteller, Emory University, 

Abhinav Maurya, Carnegie Mellon University, 

Victoria McGovern, Burroughs Wellcome Fund, 

Daniel Angel Ferreira Mena, DAF-Engineering, 

Chris Mentzel, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, 

Antoni Miklewski, Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Ashlea Milburn, University of Arkansas, Alex Montilla, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 

Sheri Morgan, Mental Health Associa
tion of Franklin and Fulton Counties, 
Richard Morris, MGI-RamCo, 

Mary Kehoe Moynihan, Cape Cod Community College, 
Bhramar Mukherjee, University of Michigan, 
Sherman Mumford, University of
 North Carolina, Charlotte,  Ivo Neitzel, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia de Birigui, 

Richard Nelesen, University of California, San Diego, 

Joseph Nelson, George Washington University, 

Claudia Neuhauser, University of Minnesota, 
Deborah Nolan, University of California, Berkeley, 
Kofi Nyamekye, Integrated Activity-Based Simulation Research, Inc., 

Monika Oli, University of Florida, 

Fred Oswald, Rice University, 

Dennis Pearl, Pennsylvania State University, 
Joan Peckham, University of Rhode Island, 
Vikas Pejaver, University of Washington, 

Gabriel Perez-Giz, National Science Foundation, 

Patrick Perry, New York University, 

Steve Pierson, American Statistical Association,  

Hridesh Rajan, Iowa State University, 
Louise Raphael, Howard University, 
Renata Rawlings-Goss, Georgia Institute of Technology, 

Peggy Rejto, Normandale Community College, 

Loren Rhodes, Juniata College, 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Patrick Riley, Google, Inc., 
Martina Rosenberg, University of New Mexico, 
Kim Roth, Juniata College, 
Bill Roweton, Chadron State College, 
Andee Rubin, TERC, 

Maya Sapiurka, Society for Neuroscience, 

Karl Schmitt, Valparaiso University, 

Kala Seal, Loyola Marymount University, 

Arun Sharma, Wagner College, Lauren Showalter, National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine, 
Christine Smith, University of New Mexico, 

S. Srinivasan, Texas Southern University, Anil Srivastava, Open Health Systems Laboratory, 

Natalya St. Clair, Concord Consortium, 
Victoria Stodden, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, 
Martin Storksdieck, Oregon State University, 

George Strawn, National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine, 

Ralph Stuart, Keene State College,  

Kalum Udagepola, Scientific Research Deve
lopment Institute of Technology Australia,  
Mel van Drunen, HAS University of Applied Sciences, 

William Yslas Velez, University of Arizona, 

Ron Wasserstein, American Statistical Association, 

Cheryl Welsch, State University of New York, Sullivan, 

Mary Whelan, Arizona State University, 

Nekesha Williams, Louisiana State University, 
Emerald Wilson, Prince George's Community College, 
Brian Wingenroth, National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, 

     University of Maryland, 

William Winter, State University of New York Co
llege of Environmental Science and Forestry, 
Mary Wright, Brown University, and 
Paul Zachos, Association for the Cooperativ
e Advancement of Science and Education. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xv Contents SUMMARY  1 1 INTRODUCTION  
5 Envisioning Data Science from an 
Undergraduate Perspective, 5 Study Origin and Approach, 7 
Committee Activities to Date, 8 
2 ACQUIRING
 DATA SCIENCE SKILLS
 AND KNOWLEDGE
      10 
Foundational Skills, 10 Translational Skills, 15 Ethical Skills, 1 Professional Skills, 13 DATA SCIENCE
 EDUCATION
 IN THE
 FUTURE 19 
Innovative Curriculum Development, 19 
Suggestions for Institutions, 23 
4 BROAD PARTICIPATION IN DATA SCIENCE    26Recruitment and Retention Strategies, 2 Institutional Partnerships, 29 K-12 Objectives, 29 Public Outreach, 29 Evaluation and Assessment, 30 
5 REFLECTIONS          
31 
Hippocratic Oath, 31 
Summary of Preliminary Committee Findings and Open Questions, 31 

Input Needed, 35 
REFERENCES    37 
APPENDIXES A Biographies of the Committee       
43 B Meetings and Presentations      
49 Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1 Summary The need to manage, analyze, and extract know
ledge from data is pervasive across industry, 
government, and academia. Scientists, engineers, a
nd executives routinely encounter enormous volumes 
of data, and new techniques and tools are emerging to
 create knowledge out of these data, some of them 
capable of working with real-time streams of data. The nation™s ability to make use of these data depends 
on the availability of an educated workforce with necessary expertise.
 With these new capabilities have 
come novel ethical challenges regarding the effectiv
eness and appropriateness of broad applications of 
data analyses. 
The future of data science education is impact
ed by the continuing evolution of computing 
technology, analytical approaches, and tools; the corresponding demand from employers for new 
knowledge and skills; and new 
models for delivering education. Ed
ucational institutions may need to 
revise the content of their curricula and embrace multip
le models of educational delivery (e.g., online, 
self-paced, team teaching both in and out of the cl
assroom) to better appeal to a broad population of 
students and to better prepare students to enter the workforce. 
The field of data science has emerged to address the 
proliferation of data and the need to manage 
and understand it. Data science is a hybrid of multip
le disciplines and skill sets, draws on diverse fields 
(including computer science, statistics, and mathematics), encompasses topics in ethics and privacy, and 
depends on specifics of the domains to which it is applied. Fueled by the explosion of data, jobs that 
involve data science have proliferated and an arra
y of data science programs at the undergraduate and 
graduate levels have been established. Nevertheless, data science is still 
in its infancy, which suggests the 
importance of envisioning what the field might look li
ke in the future and what key steps can be taken 
now to move data science education in that dir
ection. Future data science programs will need to 
incorporate a variety of skills. Strong analytic skills 
are needed to work with large, complex data sets. 
Oral and written communication skills are also necessary to engage with diverse audiences about real-
world problems, to work in teams, and to participat
e in effective problem solving for both technical and 
ethical dilemmas encountered 
in uses of data science.  
The committee has also identified several apparent hallmarks of effective data science education. 
Using real data will expose students to the messin
ess they will confront when solving real-world 

problems. Selecting applications with broad impact 
will make instruction more compelling, helping to 
attract and retain students. Teaching commonly u
sed current methods will prepare them for the 
workplace, as will exposure to working in teams.
 Critical curricular topics include mathematical 

foundations, computational thinking, statistical thinking, principles of effective data management, 

techniques for data description and curation, data modeling approaches, effective communication skills, 
reproducibility challenges and current best practices,
 exposure to ethical dilemmas and problem-solving 
skills, and a range of domain-specific topics. Matur
ity in these and other areas results in what this 
committee defines as ﬁdata acumen,ﬂ wh
ich enables data scientists to 
make good judgments and decisions 
with data. The process of starting students down the path
 toward data acumen is a chief objective of data 
science education.  
Because data science is inherently concerne
d with understanding and addressing real-world 
problems and challenges, the new and expanding field 
of data science may appeal to a wider variety of 
students. The field of data science encompasses multip
le disciplines and varied skill sets and has the potential to attract students with diverse academic bac
kgrounds and interests. The opportunity to build in 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 BOX S.1 
Statement of Task 
A National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine study will set forth a vision for the 
emerging discipline of data science at the undergradua
te level. It will emphasize core underlying principles, 
intellectual content, and pedagogical is
sues specific to data science, including core concepts that distinguish it 
from neighboring disciplines. It will not consider the practicalities of creating materials,
 courses, or programs. It 
will develop this vision considering applications of and 
careers in data science. It will focus on the undergraduate 
level, addressing related issues at the middle and high 
school as well as community 
colleges as appropriate, and 
will draw on experiences in creating master™s-level prog
rams. It will also consider opportunities created by the 
emergence of a new STEM [science, technology, engineering, and mathematics] field to engage underrepresented 
student populations and consider ways to reduce the ﬁleakageﬂ seen in existing STEM pathways. Information 
gathering will center around two workshops, the first likely fo
cused on principles and intellectual content, and the 
second likely focused on pedagogy and implications for middle and high schools and community colleges. To get 
material on the record quickly and spark community feedback, an interim report will be issued following the first 
workshop. The interim report will not include recommendati
ons, but may include findings or conclusions if the 
evidence warrants. A final report will be issued followi
ng both workshops and committee deliberations setting 
forth a vision for undergraduate education in data science.  
broad participation, diversity, and 
inclusion from the onset is a notable advantage, as compared to other 
related fields of study. The field presents new opportunities to attract and engage underrepresented 
student populations. Such potential opportunities can 
be realized through innovative cross-disciplinary 
pedagogical approaches led by highly trained and flexible faculty. To further increase participation, 4-
year institutions can partner with 2-year institutions 
that have flexible programs as a way to offer more 
entry points into data science for advanced high school students, current members of the workforce, and 

future transfer students. Assessment and evaluation are especially valuable when building these new 
programs in part because it encourages consideration of how well curricular objectives are being met. The 
very tools of experimental design and analysis comm
on in the field of data science will likely prove 
valuable in evaluating the success of data science programs.   
This interim report from the Committee on Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The 
Undergraduate Perspective begins to address the statem
ent of task presented in Box S.1. Specifically, this 

report lays out some of the information and comment
s that the committee has gathered and heard during 
the first half of its study, offers perspectives on the current state of data science education, and poses 

some questions that may shape the way data science
 education evolves in the future. This National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
study, sponsored by the National Science Foundation, 
will conclude in early 2018 with a final report that lays out a vision for future data science education. 
What follows in this interim report are initial obser
vations and findings concerning the state of data science education, a discussion of forward-looki
ng opportunities, and key questions on which the 
committee seeks broad input. 
The preliminary findings from the committee are 
described throughout th
is interim report and 
recapped in Chapter 5 where they are accompanied by a set of open questions developed by the 

committee about the future of data science education (also summarized in Box S.2).  
Public input is sought on the following topics: 
Additional content for this st
udy, including but not
 limited to case studies from in
stitutionsproviding data science education, innovative ways to bring research
ers together, bestpractices for program eval
uation, and ideas for future topical webinars;Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3 A proposed Data Science Oath, outlined 
at the beginning of Chapte
r 5; andQuestions about how data science can evolve in the fu
ture.Please visit the following webpage to provid
e input: http://www.nas.edu/EnvisioningDS. BOX S.2 
Questions for Public Input 
The committee has identified the following themes, which ar
e discussed throughout this interim report, and is 
soliciting input on the open questions. Please visit the following webpage to provide input: 
http://www.nas.edu/EnvisioningDS.   
Building Data Acumen in
 a Data Science Curriculum 
Which key components should be in
cluded in data science curriculu
m, both now and in the future
?How could these components be prioritized or best conveyed for differing types of data scien
ceprograms
?How can opportunities to enhance data acumen (i.e., the ability to make good judgments and decision
swith data) be integrated into data science educational programs?
How can data acumen be measured or evaluated?
Real-World Applications
 How can partnerships between industry and educational programs be encouraged?
Could a focus on real problems serve as a means to attracting more diverse students?
How can students gain access to real-world data sets
?Ethics How can ethical considerations be best incorporated throughout the data science curriculu
m?How can students be taught to apply ethical decision making throughout the problem-solving process?
Oral and Written Communication Skills and Teamwork
 How can communication and teamwork be fostered in data science programs?
What type of multidisciplinary teams serve as effective models for the real world? Will these grouping
sbe different in the future?
Pedagogical Approaches and In
ter-Departmental Collaboration
 What are known good practices for fostering collaboration between departments and existing programs?
What new directions and opportunities exist for new curricular initiatives?
What pedagogical approaches are particularly relevant to data science, both now and in the future?
Faculty and Curriculum Development 
What types of training would be beneficial to faculty?
How could incentives be restructured to enc
ourage more faculty development in data sc
ience?Organizational Structure and Institutional Infrastructure 
What are current infrastructure obstacles and how can they be rethought going forward?
How could organizational structures be modified and/or incentives added to encourage data scien
cecollaboration and innovatio
n?Educational Approaches 
How can data science programs build in flexibility and adaptability so they can be most responsive to
changes in the field? 
How can flexibility encourage more diverse student
s?Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 Diversity, Inclusion, and Broad Participation
 How can broad participation, diversity, and inclusion be ingrained in data science programs?
What strategies to recruit and retain diverse students can data science programs deploy, and what
examples can inform th
ese efforts?Partnerships Between Institutions 
How can partnerships between 2- and 4-year institutions be facilitated?
How do the skills and concepts taught at a 2-year institution vary based on students™ goals?
What aspects of data science education are appropriate and feasible to develop at 2-year institutions
?Assessment and Evaluation  
What evaluation and assessment objectives are currently being used in data science programs, and how
will these differ in the future?  
What best practices in evaluation and assessment can inform data science programs
?What data are available to evaluate the effectiveness of different data science approach
es?What standard evaluation approaches should be adop
ted?Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 1 Introduction ENVISIONING DATA SCIENCE FROM
 AN UNDERGRADUATE PERSPECTIVE 
The emergence of a novel science of data highlights the need for new principles for data 
collection, storage, integration, and analysis. These ne
w scientific principles are leading to new tools that 
uniquely respond to the challenges of big data. However, the main concepts, skills, and ethics powering 
this emerging discipline of data science still need to 
be identified. A new generation of tool developers 
and tool users will require the ability to make good judgments and decisions with data and use tools 
responsibly and effectively (referred to as ﬁdata 
acumenﬂ throughout this report). Some of these 
developers and users will draw from computing, math
ematics, and statistics fields, but many will come 
from other fields and application domains. Educators and administrators are beginning to reimagine data 
science course content, delivery, and enrollment at th
e undergraduate level to best prepare students to 
operate in this new paradigm.  
New and greater volumes of information compound 
long-standing challenges of data analysisŠ
and raise new ones. The ability to measure, understand, 
and react to data can affect scientific discovery, 
social interaction, political tradition, economic practic
e, public health, and many other areas. Some data 
science applications are low risk, such as recommend
er systems that suggest purchases within an online 
shopping platform or select advertisements for website
 visitors. Although provider sales may be affected 
if undesirable products are recommended and users ma
y be dissatisfied with their purchases, the overall 
impact of poor recommender systems to individuals and 
society is low. Of greater impact, census data are 
used to redraw political boundaries, allocate funds, and inform other critical public policy decisions. 
While new volumes and types of information can make
 analyses more accurate than past methods that 
relied on sparse surveys with lower than desired response rates, people can be negatively affected if the 
interpretation of the data does not account for all rele
vant factors. A program that a family depends on 
may not have sufficient funding, or a policy might be
 enacted that has uninte
nded consequences for large segments of the population if weak data analysis is u
sed. Thus, it is important that data are collected and 
analyzed appropriately, especially as new demands 
are placed on data collection and evaluation and as 
new technologies emerge. It is equally important that th
ere are clear principles guiding the use of data for 
human good. Further, the complexity of the analyses 
and the increasing dependency on data across all the 
fields of human endeavor drive demand for ﬁsmarter
ﬂ tools and best practices for data science that will 
minimize mistakes in interpretation. 
Academic institutions and industry recognize these 
shifts and are rapidly embracing the idea that 
there is an emerging discipline of data science th
at is unique yet builds on knowledge from existing 
disciplines (NRC, 2014). Traditional statistical methods
 are well established and clearly understood but 
often do not scale to handle the vast volumes of data that must be analyzed for today™s data science. 
Computing is unparalleled in its capacity to handle vast volumes or fast-flowing streams of information, 
but often without statistical and inferential guarantees
, which can result in unreliable results and biased or 
unfair interpretations of the data (Jordan, 2013). Domain areas (e.g., business, medicine, natural science, 
social sciences, or engineering) are developing 
and adapting techniques to solve specific research 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 questions, which can be more effective than usi
ng general methods. However, these approaches may 
suffer from insufficient mathematical or statis
tical rigor or lack computational scalability. 
Although the definition of data science is
 evolving, it centers around the notion of 
multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary approaches to extracting knowle
dge or insights from data for use 
in a broad range of applications. It is the field of science that relies on processes and systems 
(mathematical, computational, and social) to derive
 information or insights from data. It is about 
synthesizing the most relevant parts of the foundational disciplines to solve particular classes of problems 

or applications while also creating novel techniqu
es to address the ﬁcracksﬂ 
between those disciplines where no approaches may yet exist. This flexibility 
is an essential component of data science and is 
equally important in data science education.  
Data scientists have the potentia
l to help address critical real-wor
ld challenges. The following list 
includes just a few illustrative examples:  
Enabling more accurate diagnosis of melanomas through better analysis of images.
 Withinthe clinical field, deep learning techniques1 have been applied to detect melanoma, the mo
stdeadly form of skin cancer. These methods impr
ove the analysis of tissue images
, enabling amore accurate diagnosis than traditi
onal techniques (Codella et al., 2017).
Enhancing business decisions.
 Business analytics can assist
 entrepreneurs and company
executives in making timely decisions based on market trends. This
 can be coupled withonline social media information to respond dir
ectly to consumer demands or create a mo
repersonalized advertising experience (Chen et al., 2012).Helping aid organizations respond quickly.
 Data science and analytics are used to
 assist aidorganizations to respond more quickly in times 
of need, such as when the Swedish MigrationBoard used data science to make predictions 
about and determine national im
plications forimmigration trends (Pratt, 2016).Developing ﬁsmart cities.ﬂ Cities around the world such as London, Rio de Jan
eiro, and NewYork City collect real-time data from a variety 
of sources, such as pub
lic transportation smartcards and traffic cameras, environmental sensors for parameters such as temper
ature andhumidity, and social media interactions rega
rding local issues. The data can then beprocessed, analyzed, and utilized to improve city
 efficiency and cost-effectiveness as well asresident well-being (Kitchin, 2014).However, there are also many instances of high-impac
t and high-profile data science research resulting in 
flawed or inaccurate findings, as well as ethical a
nd legal quandaries. The following list includes a few 
illustrative examples:  
Inaccurate predictions of flu trends.
 In 2013, Google Flu Trends ov
er-predicted trueinfluenza-related doctors™ visits as determined by the Centers for Diseas
e Control andPrevention. This was primarily the result of overreliance on outdated m
odels (Butler, 2013).Use of personally identifiable data. The abundance of data available on individuals from

companies and social media can present ethical d
ilemmas to researchers in terms of privacy,
scalability of results, and subject participati
on agreement. For instance, a 2013 study
 linkednumerous Twitter users to sensitive informati
on from their financial institutions, 
whichcontributed to discussions of if and when r
esearchers should be required to obtain 
writtenconsent when using nominally publicly accessi
ble information (Danyllo et al., 
2013).Predictive policing. There is much debate over the use and appropriateness of pred
ictivepolicingŠthe use of data science by law enforcem
ent to predict crime before it occurs. There1 Deep learning is a powerful class of a machine lear
ning methods that explore data representations using 
supervised, semi-supervised, or unsupervised learning. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7 is no consensus yet on the effectiveness of th
is methodology, and civil liberties groups argue 
that the data used to develop (i.e., train) the models are inhere
ntly biased (Hvistendahl, 2016).  
Data science is currently being practiced in h
undreds of organizations within industry, academia, 
and government, often by self-taught practitioners. There are indications of strong demand in a variety of 
domains for graduates with data science skills. A rece
nt study by IBM found more than 2.3 million data 
science and analytics job listings in 2015, and both
 job openings and job demand are projected to grow 
significantly by 2020. Three-fifths of the data science 
and analytics jobs are in the finance and insurance, 
professional services, and information technology sectors,
 but the manufacturing, health care, and retail 
sectors also are hiring significant numbers of data
 scientists (Miller and Hughes, 2017; Columbus, 2017). 
The IBM study also shows that it takes significant time 
to find and hire staff with the right mix of skills and experience. Since many employers are themselves 
new to the use of data science, they may not be 
able to provide training and therefore may seek indi
viduals who have appropria
te classwork and hands-on 
experience.  Current data science courses, programs, and degr
ees are highly variable in part because emerging 
educational approaches start from different instituti
onal contexts, aim to reach students in different 
communities, address different challenges, and achie
ve different goals. This variation makes it 

challenging to lay out a single vision for data science
 education in the future that would apply to all 
institutions of higher learning, but 
it also allows data science to be customized and to reach broader 
populations than other similar fields have done in
 the past. Data science educational programs are 
emerging within many existing fields such as statisti
cs, computer science, business, and social sciences. 
These field-specific approaches bring about unique distin
ctions in how data science is taught, which skills 
are emphasized, which students are served, and whic
h career paths graduates pursue. Other data science 
educational programs are taking a cross-disciplinary 
approachŠfor example, integrating statistics and 
computer science concepts into the undergraduate
 data science degree program. (Several example 
programs are discussed in Chapter 3 of this report.) 
This report highlights some of the important co
mmon threads that can be woven throughout much 
of data science education. Chapter 2 discusses the 
foundational, translational, ethical, and professional 
skills that help students acquire data science skills and knowledge. Chapter 3 explores the role of 
innovative curriculum development and provides so
me considerations for institutions. Chapter 4 
examines ways to ensure broad participation in 
data science, including recruitment and retention 
strategies, institutional partnerships, K-12 objectives, public outreach, and the role of evaluation and 

assessment. Chapter 5 provides some reflections on the committee™s findings throughout the report and 
proposes questions for public input. That chapter also 
lays out a draft Hippocratic Oath for data science, 
which is also open for public input.  
The themes described in this report underlay data
 science education, but they are not necessarily 
novel challenges or even unique to data science (as de
monstrated by the historical case study in Box 1.1). 
The lessons learned from other disciplines can help pa
ve the way to ensuring the success of data science 
education. 
This report aims to lay out some key questions to help advance conversations around data science 
education and to provide institutions and participants with a clearer picture of paths forward. 
STUDY ORIGIN AND APPROACH 
This National Academies™ interim report begins
 to address the statement of task for the 
committee, presented in Box 1.2.  
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 BOX 1.1 
Data Science Education: An Expedition 
Envisioning a vibrant and robust approach to undergraduate data science education is an important 
mission that may require considerable deliberation and effort to achieve. Such missions of exploration feature 
challenges and opportunities.  
A useful historical analogy can be made with th
e Lewis and Clark expedition (1804Œ1806), which laid 
the foundation for great discoveries about a newly expanded nation through systematic data collection and 

analysis. In his instructions to Meriwether Lewis, U.S.
 President Thomas Jefferson described the data-gathering 
equipment made accessible to the party: ﬁInstruments fo
r ascertaining by celestial obs
ervations the geography of 
the country thro™ which you will pass, have been already provided.ﬂ  
Data collection and aspects of what we might think of as reproducible data were important to Jefferson:
1  Your observations are to be taken w
ith great pains & accuracy to be entered distinctly, & intelligibly for 
others as well as yourself, to comprehend all the elements
 necessary, with the aid of the usual tables to fix the 
latitude & longitude of the places at
 which they were taken, & are to be rendered to the war office, for the 
purpose of having the calculations made concurrently 
by proper persons within th
e U.S. Several copies of 
these as well as of your other notes, should be made
 at leisure times, & put in
to the care of the most 
trustworthy of your attendants, to guard by multiplying th
em against the acci
dental losses to which they will 
be exposed. A further guard would be that one of thes
e copies be written on the paper of the birch, as less 
liable to injury from damp than common paper.  
Aspects of non-technical (politi
cal considerations) were also ack
nowledged in the instructions:
2  Your mission has been communicated to the Ministers 
here from France, Spain, & Great Britain, and through 
them to their governments: and such assurances given them as to its objects as we trust will satisfy them. The 
country of Louisiana having been ceded by Spain to
 France, the passport you have from the Minister of 
France, the representative of the pres
ent sovereign of the country, will be
 a protection with all its subjects: 
and that from the Minister of England wi
ll entitle you to the friendly aid of any traders of that allegiance with 
whom you may happen to meet. 
The Lewis and Clark expedition made important contributions to science (most notably geography, 
ecology, and biology) while spurring growth and migration into the American frontier. Many discoveries were 
serendipitous, with unanticipated positive and negative outcomes. A similar ambitious exploration of how to 

formulate effective undergraduate da
ta science education will not be easy but has the potential to have a 
significant impact on higher education and society.  
1 T. Jefferson, 1803, ﬁJefferson™s Instru
ctions for Meriwether Lewis,ﬂ in the 
ﬁThomas Jefferson Papers,ﬂ Library of 
Congress, https://www.loc.gov/exhibits/lewisandclark/tran
script57.html. 
2 Ibid. COMMITTEE ACTIVITIES TO DATE 
At the time of this writing, the study committee 
held two meetings and one webinar to collect 
information, engage a diverse community, and de
liberate. The open session presentations given during 
these meetings are listed in Appendix B. Additional 
information-gathering activities are planned for the remainder of 2017, after which the committee will release a final report.  
During the first meeting of the committee on D
ecember 12-13, 2016, participants discussed 
possible future directions based on progress with current
 data science programs; societal implications of 
the evolving field of data science; ways to expand di
versity and inclusion in data science among students, 
employees, and even topic areas; and perspectives on e
nvisioning the future of data science specifically 
for undergraduates.  
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9 BOX 1.2 
Statement of Task 
A National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine study will set forth a vision for the 
emerging discipline of data science at the undergradua
te level. It will emphasize core underlying principles, 
intellectual content, and pedagogical is
sues specific to data science, including core concepts that distinguish it 
from neighboring disciplines. It will not consider the practicalities of creating materials,
 courses, or programs. It 
will develop this vision considering applications of and 
careers in data science. It will focus on the undergraduate 
level, addressing related issues at the middle and high 
school as well as community 
colleges as appropriate, and 
will draw on experiences in creating master™s-level prog
rams. It will also consider opportunities created by the 
emergence of a new STEM [science, technology, engineering, and mathematics] field to engage underrepresented 
student populations and consider ways to reduce the ﬁleakageﬂ seen in existing STEM pathways. Information 

gathering will center around two workshops, the first likely fo
cused on principles and intellectual content, and the 
second likely focused on pedagogy and implications for middle and high schools and community colleges. To get 

material on the record quickly and spark community feedback, an interim report will be issued following the first 

workshop. The interim report will not include recommendati
ons, but may include findings or conclusions if the 
evidence warrants. A final report will be issued followi
ng both workshops and committee deliberations setting 

forth a vision for undergraduate education in data science. 
The committee hosted a public webinar on April 25, 2017, and gathered public input and outside 
perspectives on the topics the committee should disc
uss throughout the remainder of the study.  
The committee also held a workshop on May 2-3, 2017, where participants discussed (1) 
educational models to build releva
nt foundational, translational, and 
professional skills and knowledge for data scientists in various roles; (2) use of high-impact
 educational practices in th
e future delivery of data science education; and (3) strategies for broad partic
ipation in data science education that revolve around 
formal modes of evaluation and assessment. Other topi
cs emerged as well, including the role of teacher 
education, the need to consult research on learning 
styles and teaching methods, the relationship between 
data science and popular culture, better methods for assessment of student and program success, and the 
ways in which students, institutions, and programs mi
ght change over the next 10 years and how these 
changes may affect plans for the future of data science education.
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 
2 Acquiring Data Science Skills and Knowledge  Expanding data science training has the potential to transform scientific discovery, other 
academic research, many professions, and the broader society. With such an onset of new technologies, 
modes of thought, and means of communication, questions arise among industries, government agencies, 

and educational institutions: 
What skills are needed to be successful in the workplace and in society? Is 
data science a fundamental skill that all students should have some exposure to? How can data literacy 

be improved? In what skills, methods, and technologies should 
future data scientists be trained, given the 
wide variety of potential applications?
 Understanding the complexities of these questions is a first step in 
imagining the discipline for a 
diverse set of participants. 
This chapter discusses some of the foundational, tr
anslational, ethical, and professional skills that 
make it possible for students to be effective data scientists.  
FOUNDATIONAL SKILLS 
What are the key ideas and principles to be included in the data science curriculum? One way to 
determine this is to consider the typical work cycl
e in which data scientists engage. For example, this cycle is often initiated with a domain-specific question 
that then leads to data collection. The data are 
typically curated, described, and modeled. Models are 
tested and deployed, then 
the results are put to use 
and communicated to stakeholders. There are potentially 
several phases of analysis within this work cycle 
that lead to other questions and deeper understandings
. Additionally, data scientists will need to draw on 
computational, statistical, and mathematical knowle
dge, as well as domain-specific knowledge, to inform 
the analytic choices and interpretation made throughout the workflow. 
A simplified description of a data scientist™s wo
rk cycle helps illuminate the essential components 
of a data science curriculum. For example, De Ve
aux et al. (2017) describe the following six areas of 
focus for data science curricula that map well to th
is workflow: (1) data description and curation, (2) 
mathematical foundations, (3) computational thinking, (4
) statistical thinking, (5) data modeling, and (6) 
communication, reproducibility, and ethics. Given diffe
rent definitions of computational thinking, it may 
not be evident that De Veaux™s six areas are intende
d to encompass not only basic computing concepts 
(such as abstraction and indirection) but also the a
rray of computing skills required to manage data. 
Therefore, the committee suggests adding com
puting skills as a seventh important area.  
Specific topics within these seven focus areas might include the following: software engineering, 
linear algebra, optimization, algorithms and data structures, information technology, basic statistics, 
uncertainty quantification, and tools for fitting models to data. HumanŒcomputer interaction research may 
also play a role in the foundational data science cu
rriculum as it examines the design and use of computer 
technology focused on the interfaces between people a
nd computers, including the range of ways in 
which humans are integrated with computational processe
s, data collection, dissemination, and analysis.  
The path from research question to analysis has ch
anged with the advent of data science. In the 
past, data were typically collected with a specific purpose and via a particular design to answer a priori 
research questions. These data, in turn, informed the statistical analyses. More analyses are utilizing 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11 
extant data and repurposing them to answer new questions and explore new hypotheses (Groves, 2011). 
As more of these existing data sets become accessibl
e (e.g., via application programming interfaces), one 
core question is how to extract knowledge and insigh
t from data that were collected for an entirely 
different purpose and, subsequently, with little fore
thought to the design necessary for answering those 
questions. 
While it might be possible to take a piecemeal a
pproach to the data science curriculum in which 
courses are selected from existing departments, and although these courses might look reasonable as a 
curricular whole, in reality, such a curriculum 
will almost certainly lack educational and cross-
disciplinary cohesion unless there is some coordination across the departments and courses.  
In developing an undergraduate data science curriculu
m, it is important to evaluate how particular 
topics and skill sets will both fulfill program requireme
nts and prepare students to address data challenges they will face in their careers. Training in describing and documenting models, analyses, and value 
propositions effectively will benefit 
students preparing for a wide variety of data science careers. 
Although a deep theoretical foundation is less necess
ary for students pursuing data science positions after 
earning an undergraduate degree, an emphasis on developing sophisticated techniques and complex 

modeling skills is still valuable to help solve real-world data science problems. With more data and more 

complicated models available, interpretability of models is important in both data science education and 

practice, as is fairness in algorithms and computa
tion-driven decisions. Many academic researchers, 
businesses, and government agencies that are hiring 
new employees value graduates with expertise in 
survey methodology and designed data, elements of st
atistical learning that serve as the framework for 
machine learning, Bayesian data analysis, a
nd implementations of reproducible research. 
Developing and applying these skill sets requir
es ﬁdata acumenﬂŠthe ability to make good 
judgments and decisions with data. This trait is in
creasingly important, especially given the large volume 
of data typically present in real-world problems, the relative ease of (mis)applying tools, and the vast 

ethical implications inherent in many data science analyses. With large volumes of data, it can be difficult 
to understand at first glance what is needed, what is possible, and what limitations exist. Still, questions 
remain as to how to most effectively build data acumen in students. Data acumen can be developed over 

time through research experience, industry partnerships
, courses in creative data analysis, domain-specific 
data science courses or experiences, and extensions of capstone-like experiences throughout the 

curriculum. It can be enhanced through exposure to
 current key components of data science, including 
mathematical foundations, computational thinking, sta
tistical thinking, data management, data description 
and curation, data modeling, ethical problem solving, communication and re
producibility, and domain-
specific considerations. Similar to the concept of 
ﬁmathematical maturity,ﬂ which typically denotes a 
mixture of mathematical insights and experiences that
 mathematicians develop and strengthen with time, 
data acumen is not a final state to be reached but rather a skill that data scientists develop and refine over 

time.  Finding 2.1: 
A critical component of data science educati
on is to guide students to develop data 
acumen. This requires exposure to key concepts in data science, real-world data and problems 

that can reinforce the limitations of tools, a
nd ethical considerations that permeate many 
applications. Key concepts related to deve
loping data acumen include the following:  
Mathematical foundations,
Com
putational thinking,Statistical thinking,Data management,Data description and curation,Data modelin
g,Ethical problem solving,
Communication and reproducibility,
 andDomain-specific considerations.
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 
The necessary level of exposure to each area will 
vary based on the overall objectives and duration of 
the data science program as well as the goals for the students. 
As is true with curriculum design in other academic settings, it is important to build a curriculum 
in which students can recognize when they do not know
 something so that they learn which questions to 
ask. It is also important for students to learn to 
question what they may already perceive as fact, to 
understand the risks associated with using data, and to
 recognize that data is a product of the specific 
context in which it is generated, collected, analyzed, and interpreted. Incorporating insights from the 
humanities and social sciences into data science curricu
la enables students to consider how behaviors, 
interactions, and attitudes shape data in an informed and grounded way.  
Lessons learned and effective practices from othe
r domains can help shape how data science is 
taughtŠincluding co-curricular activities (such as me
ntorship programs), individualized advising, 
supplemental opportunities for students to learn f
undamentals (such as summer bridge programs), and 
introductory courses designed to appeal to a wide 
student audience. High-impact educational practices, 
such as those put forth by the Association of Amer
ican Colleges and Universities, describe teaching and 
learning practices that have been shown to be 
beneficial for postsecondary students from many 
backgrounds. These practices take many different fo
rms, depending on learner characteristics and on 
institutional priorities and contexts, but could be u
seful in ensuring that data science education is 
effective. Box 2.1 highlights the educational practices 
put forth by the Association of American Colleges 
and Universities and provides some examples of how 
they are currently being applied to data science 
education.  BOX 2.1 
High-Impact Educational Practices
1 A Brief Overview 
The following teaching and lear
ning practices have been widely tested 
and have been shown to be beneficial 
for college students from many backgrounds. These practices take many different forms, depending on learner 
characteristics and on instituti
onal priorities and contexts. 
On many campuses, assessment of student involvement in active learning practices such as these has made it 
possible to assess the practices™ contribution to students
™ cumulative learning. However, on almost all campuses, 
utilization of active learning practices is unsystematic, to
 the detriment of student learning. Presented below are 
brief descriptions of high-impact practices that educational research suggests increase rates of student retention 
and student engagement.  
First-Year Seminars and Experiences 
Many schools now build into the curriculum first-year seminars or other programs that bring small groups of 
students together with faculty or staff on a regular basis.
 The highest-quality first-year experiences place a strong 
emphasis on critical inqui
ry, frequent writing, informat
ion literacy, collaborative learning, and other skills that 
develop students™ intellectual and prac
tical competencies. First-year semina
rs can also involve students with 
cutting-edge questions in scholarship and with faculty me
mbers™ own research. An example of this first-year 
experience in data science has been explored by a professor at Duke University, who suggests the creation of a 
gateway course that would allow students to learn fundamental data science skills in a project-oriented curriculum 
(Cetinkaya-Rundel, 2017).  
Common Intellectual Experiences 
The older idea of a ﬁcoreﬂ curriculum has evolved into a variety of modern forms, such as a set of required 
common courses or a vertically organized general education program that includes advanced integrative studies 
and/or required participation in a learning community. These programs often combine broad themesŠfor 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13 
example, technology and society, an
d global interdependenceŠwith a vari
ety of curricular and co-curricular 
options for students. An example model of a course that
 could be utilized in a core curriculum is Data8, a 
foundational data science course at the University of Calif
ornia, Berkeley that analyzes the technical and social 
implications of data science in a hands-on manner. The course is intended for students without a background in 
statistics or computer science, allowing for students to explore these topics without pre-requisites (Culler, 2016). 
Learning Communities 
The key goals for learning communities are to encourage 
integration of learning across courses and to involve 
students with ﬁbig questionsﬂ that matter beyond the classroom. Students take two or more linked courses as a 
group and work closely with one another and with their professors. Many learning communities explore a 

common topic and/or common readings through the lenses of different disciplines. Some deliberately link ﬁliberal 
artsﬂ and ﬁprofessional courses;ﬂ others feature service le
arning. An example of this within the data science 
undergraduate experience is the Statistics Living-Learn
ing Community at Purdue University, which provides a 
small group of sophomore students with the ability to live 
together in the same dorm; take courses together in 
probability theory, statistical theory, and data analysis; and conduct a year-long research project together (Purdue 
University, 2013).  
Writing-Intensive Courses 
These courses emphasize writing at all levels of instruction and across the curriculum, including final-year 
projects. Students are encouraged to produce and revise various forms of writing for different audiences in 
different disciplines. The effectiveness of this repeated 
practice ﬁacross the curriculumﬂ has led to parallel efforts 
in such areas as quantitative reasoning, oral communicati
on, information literacy, and, on some campuses, ethical 
inquiry. This practice is currently incorporated into 
the core curriculum at Columbia University through the 
University Writing Course ﬁReadings in Data Science,ﬂ which aims to enhance students™ ability to understand 

data science through enhancement of reading and writing techniques (Columbia University, 2013). This aligns 
with the curriculum practices
 recommended by the American Statistical
 Association to teach students how to 
strengthen communication skills within the data science field (ASA, 2014).  
Collaborative Assignments and Projects 
Collaborative learning combines the following two key goals: learning to work and solve problems in the 
company of others and sharpening one™s own understanding by listening seriously to the insights of others, 
especially those with different bac
kgrounds and life experiences. Approaches
 range from study groups within a 
course, to team-based assignments and writing, to coopera
tive projects and research. An 
example of this currently 
in place at a university level is CS16
9, ﬁSoftware Engineering,ﬂ at the Univ
ersity of California, Berkeley. This 
course is designed for studen
ts to work in groups of six with an outsi
de client to develop a ﬁsoftware-as-a-serviceﬂ 
deliverable by course completion, highlighting the importan
ce of applying skills learned inside the classroom to a 
real-world application (University of California, Berkel
ey, 2017). Another example is 
the Michigan Data Science 
Team run out of the Michigan Institute for Data Science at the University of Michigan. This not-for-credit 
extracurricular activity is organized and run by undergraduate computer science and data science students with 
light faculty oversight. Students collect an
d analyze data in the context of an application with high impact on local 
community or society. For example, in 2016 they applied their skills to help the city of Flint, Michigan, cope with 
the lead contamination crisis through better da
ta collection and analys
is (Meisler, 2017).  
Undergraduate Research 
Many colleges and universities are now providing rese
arch experiences for students in all disciplines. 
Undergraduate research, however, has been most prominently used in science disciplines. With strong support 
from the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the research
 community, scientists are reshaping their courses to 
connect key concepts and questions w
ith students™ early and active involvement in systematic investigation and 
research. The goal is to involve students with activel
y contested questions, empirical observation, cutting-edge 
technologies, and the sense of excitement that comes from working to answer important questions. This is 

demonstrated through NSF™s Research 
Experience for Undergraduates, which 
places undergraduate students at a 
research institution for the summer to conduct innovative
 research across disciplines, including data science 
(NSF, 2017). This emphasizes the importance in exposing students to real data and problems, which can be 
messier and more challenging to work with th
an data sets used within the classroom. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 
Diversity/Global Learning 
Many colleges and universities now emphasize courses and 
programs that help students explore cultures, life 
experiences, and worldviews different from their own. These studiesŠwhich may address U.S. diversity, world 
cultures, or bothŠoften explore ﬁdiffi
cult differences,ﬂ such as racial, ethn
ic, and gender inequality, or continuing 
struggles around the globe for human rights, freedom, and power. Frequently, intercultural studies are augmented 

by experiential learning in the community and/or by study abroad. For instance, the ﬁComparative Public Health: 

The U.S. and the Worldﬂ study abroad program at St. Olaf College provides students a chance to explore public 
health facilities at the Centers for Disease Control and Prev
ention in Atlanta, Georgia, 
as well as the World Health 
Organization in Geneva, Switzerland. This interdisciplinary program allows for undergraduates to explore and 
compare international public health efforts while individually
 exploring a public health topic of interest (Legler, 
2017). Additionally, the Undergraduate Fellowships for Community Engaged and Translational Research at 

Virginia Commonwealth University seeks to provide funding to a select few undergraduate research projects 
conducted with a community partner, w
ith at least one project a year dedicated to human health (VCU, 2017).  
Service Learning, Commu
nity-Based Learning 
In these programs, field-based ﬁexperiential learningﬂ w
ith community partners is an instructional strategyŠ
and often a required part of the course. The idea is to give
 students direct experience w
ith issues they are studying 
in the curriculum and with ongoing efforts to analyze and solve problems in the community. A key element in 

these programs is the opportunity students have to both 
apply what they are learning in real-world settings and 
reflect in a classroom setting on their service experiences. 
These programs model the idea
 that giving back to the 
community is an important college outcome, and that working with community partners is good preparation for 

citizenship, work, and life. An example of this is the Cent
er for Data Science and Public Policy at the University 
of Chicago, which has several opportunities to engage 
students in the intersection of public policy and data 
science. This includes undergraduate coursework opp
ortunities such as ﬁData Analytics for Campaigns,ﬂ 
ﬁMachine Learning for Public Policy,ﬂ and ﬁComputation 
and Public Policy,ﬂ and the Eric and Wendy Schmidt 
Data Science for Social Good Fellowship at the University of Chicago, which brings together undergraduate- and 
graduate-level data scientists from around the globe to
 solve real-world social pr
oblems in conjunction with 
government agencies and nonprofits (University of Chicago, 2017).  
Internships 
Internships are another increasingly common form of experiential learning. The idea is to provide students 
with direct experience in a work settingŠusually related to 
their career interestsŠand to give them the benefit of 
supervision and coaching from professionals in the field. If the internship is taken for course credit, students 
complete a project or paper that is approved by a faculty member. The variety of internship opportunities 

available within the data science field provides students the opportunity to gain real exposure and explore all 
aspects of the field, from the more
 technical side to potential policy implications. There are a myriad of 
undergraduate data science internship examples, ranging from those housed at large technology companies to 
specialized programs such as the Atlanta 
Data Science for Soci
al Good program. 
Capstone Courses and Projects 
Whether they are called ﬁsenior capstonesﬂ or some 
other name, these culmina
ting experiences require 
students nearing the end of their college 
years to create a project of
 some sort that integrates and applies what they 
have learned. The project might be a research paper, a performance, a portfolio of ﬁbest work,ﬂ or an exhibit of 

artwork. Capstones are offered both in departmental programs and, increasingly, in general education. For 
example, the Statistics Capstone Course at the University of Georgia provides students the opportunity to engage 
in a year-long data analytics project th
at enhances understanding of advanced statistical material while reinforcing 
oral and written communication skills (Lazar et al., 2012). 
Similarly, the computer science capstone courses at 
Virginia Tech requires undergraduates majoring in that fi
eld to pursue a design-intensi
ve, team-based final project 
within the area of their choosing, ranging from ﬁI
ssues in Scientific Computingﬂ to ﬁHumanŒComputer 
Interactionﬂ (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 2007).  
Undergraduate Teaching Assistantships 
Undergraduate teaching assist
antships are another form of experientia
l learning. In the State University of 
New York system, for example, ﬁa student enrolled in a credit-bearing course with specific student learning 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15 
outcomes to assist faculty in
 providing instructional suppo
rtﬂ can serve as an undergraduate teaching assistant. 
During such an experience, a teaching assistant for a data
 science course has the oppo
rtunity to learn about the 
teaching and learning processes, acquire expertise in 
data science concepts, hone oral and written communication 
skills, develop leadership and teamwork skills, and practice good time management. Whether or not teaching 
assistants plan to join the teaching profession, this e
xperience and the skills it fosters prepares these students for a 
wide range of data science ca
reer opportunities (SUNY, 2012). 
References 
ASA (American Statistical Association)
. 2014. ﬁCurriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Programs in Statistical 
Sciences.ﬂ http://www.amstat.org/asa/files/pdfs/EDU-guidelines2014-11-15.pdf. 
Cetinkaya-Rundel, M. 2017. ﬁTeaching Data Science and Statistical Computation to Undergraduates.ﬂ United 
States Conference on Teaching Sta
tistics, State College, Pa., May 20. 
https://www.causeweb.org/cause/
uscots/uscots17/keynote/3.  
Columbia University. 2013. ﬁUniversity Writing: Readings in Data Sciences.ﬂ 
https://www.college.columbia.edu/core/node/3290/.  
Culler, D. 2016. ﬁData Science at 
the Heart of a 21st Century Univers
ity,ﬂ presentation to the National 
Academies™ Committee on Envisioning the Data Scie
nce Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective, 
Washington, D.C., December 12.  
Lazar, N.A., J. Reeves, and C. Franklin. 2012. A cap
stone course for undergraduate statistics majors. 
The 
American Statistician
 65(3): 183-189.  
Legler, J. 2017. ﬁID 280: Comparative Public H
ealth: the US and the World.ﬂ St. Olaf College. 
http://stolaf.studioabroad.com/_customtags/ct_FileRetrieve.cfm?File_ID=05027172754F73020D020306
070B1C04080C0014757800006
E06030E7A057773730271030775047172. Accessed J
une 28, 2017. Meisler, D. 2017. ﬁGoogle, U-M to build 
digital tools for Flint water crisis.ﬂ 
MDST Projects
, January 25.  
NSF (National Science Foundation). 2017. ﬁRes
earch Experience for Undergraduates (REU).ﬂ 
https://www.nsf.gov/crssprgm/reu/. A
ccessed June 21, 2017. 
Purdue University. 2013. ﬁStatistics Living-Learning Community.ﬂ http://llc.stat.purdue.edu/.  
University of California, Berkeley
. 2017. ﬁUC Berkeley CS 169 Softwa
re Engineering.ﬂ http://cs169.saas-
class.org/faq. Accessed June 21, 2017. 
University of Chicago. 2017. ﬁLearning Opportunitie
s, Center for Data Science and Public Policy.ﬂ 
http://dsapp.uchicago.edu/resear
ch-areas/learning-opportunitie
s/. Accessed June 22, 2017. 
VCU (Virginia Commonwealth University). 2017. ﬁUndergraduate Fellowships for Community Engaged and 
Translational Research.ﬂ http://www.research.vcu.edu/ugresources/ce_cctr_f
ellowship.htm. Accessed 
June 28, 2017. 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univers
ity. 2007. ﬁCapstone Courses.ﬂ http://www.cs.vt.edu 
/undergraduate/capstones.  
1 The committee adapted this list from G.D. Kuh, 2008, 
High-Impact Educational Prac
tices: What They Are, Who 
Has Access to Them, and Why They Matter (http://secure.aacu.org/imis/aacur) and provided additional content 

relevant to this interim report.  
TRANSLATIONAL SKILLS 
In addition to developing founda
tional skills, it is valuable for data science students to apply 
techniques and technologies learned in the classroom or 
laboratory to specific and different situations in 
practice. In other words, educators would train students to 
do data science in real application contexts, 
incorporating real data, broad impact applicati
ons, and commonly deployed methods, as well as working 
in teams. Students benefit from experiences such as ca
rrying out sentiment analysis of texts, generating 
interactive maps to explore spatial data, assessing re
lationships between links within social networks, Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 
drawing samples from a distribution, visualizing multidimensional data to draw conclusions, and make 
decisions using data from a variety of sources and domains.  
It is useful for students to learn how to 
translate understandings across domains and think 
critically about assertions and also to appreciate th
e importance of reusing and sharing data. As an 
example, consider the insights that can be found fro
m digitizing an entomological collection. While the 
images originally might have been thought to be important only for understanding insects, later study of 

the pollen on the legs of the insects could yield unique insights into the changing nature of ecological 

systems with local climate change over more than a 
century. There is great potential for unanticipated 
ancillary derivatives from the data 
generation and integration process, but only if the right foundational 
knowledge is instilled a
bout how one can and should combine 
sources and share findings in a 
reproducible workflow for 
others to interrogate. 
Students also benefit from experiences with inte
grating diverse data and accounting for outside 
factors. For example, randomized trialsŠwhere a trea
tment is applied to a randomly selected subgroup of 
a population and then the outcomes of the full group ar
e trackedŠare the gold standard of evidence-based 
practices. However, conducting and generalizing from ra
ndomized trials can be difficult in many settings. 
Since most trials have issues with adherence, co
mpliance, and nonresponse, it is important to account for 
post-randomization factors. Similarly, survey methods
 that undergird large surv
eys and censuses, such as 
those undertaken by the Census Bureau and Bureau 
of Labor Statistics, have contributed greatly to 
understanding and decision making about our soci
ety and economy. Today, these surveys can be 
enhanced and complementedŠbut not replacedŠb
y fusing data that do not arise from a well-
characterized sampling frame and design with data th
at were carefully sampled and vetted. While this 
integration may not be straightforward, it has the pot
ential to extend the reach of ongoing surveys and to 
answer new questions in different ways.  
A major challenge relates to how results that 
are demonstrated using unstructured data are 
verified. This struggle is analogous to that of resear
ch environments adapting to the arrival of a new 
instrument. For example, the microscope, telescope
, and genetic sequencing ma
chines have all allowed researchers to resolve something previously unresolvable
. Scientific cultures have to grapple with what to do when observations are unprecedented and when old methods are insufficient to determine whether the 

new instruments are accurate or not. The developm
ent of new data science methods to address data 
challenges and undertake new analyses will require sim
ilar adaption. This analogy may also apply to the 
expanding computational infrastructure and capacity, which will continue to provide the opportunities to 

carry out analyses that were previously infeasible. 
It is also important to better understand what typ
es of questions and information are amenable to 
data science approaches. For example, understanding 
and conveying what computational approaches have 
produced and why is an important skill. New fra
meworks and models for carefully constructed 
distillations to be communicated are needed, along 
with reports that can be validated, reproduced, and 
assessed. Similar to the ﬁJohn Henryﬂ folklore
1 that pitted man against machine, data science is furthering 
consideration of where the edges of human abilities are, what can be measured, a
nd what can be analyzed. 
Educational systems and structures need to prep
are students to inhabit a world that will have 
different tools than those currently available. Stude
nts develop judgment through the practice of working 
through the entire data science cycle. They benefit from opportunities to gradually build large systems by 
composing smaller systems where the behavior of the smaller systems is better understood. While some 
curricula offer these opportunities in the form of a capst
one course, internship or externship opportunities, 
or similar integrative experience, it is beneficial 
for additional complementary 
experiences to be provided earlier in the curriculum.  
1 As the legend goes, John Henry won but died from his efforts (see Johnstown Area Heritage Association, 
2013). 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17 
Finding 2.2: 
It is important for data science education to incorporate real data, broad impact 
applications, and commonly deployed methods.
  ETHICAL SKILLS 
In addition to the foundational and translational skills training that students receive, they would 
also benefit from a better understanding of ethics and 
social context of data (O™Neil, 2016; DeVeaux et 
al., 2017). Several ethical considerations and corres
ponding examples that could be discussed include the following: 
Fairness. This multifaceted consideration can be 
summarized as the abilit
y for data sciencetechniques to treat all people equitably and avoi
d bias that may be inherent in training 
datasets. This is an especially important factor for applications that directly
 affect individuals,such as in the design of criminal justice models that determ
ine sentencing practices withoutintroducing racial or socioeconomic bias (Berk et al., 2017).
Validity. Before data science methodologies can be app
lied, it is vi
tal to ensure that the dataset contains valid (e.g., accurate and relevant) information. Use of data that are fa
lsified, notcurrent, incomplete, from an unbalanced sample
, biased in terms of survivorship
, or notmeasuring the appropriate factors could lead to faulty conclusions, such as inacc
urateestimates for health care needs in a given ar
ea based on outdated survey inform
ation (IOM,2009).  Data context. Similar to validity, it is important for individuals to u
nderstand the context ofdata sets before they are processed and analy
zed. Knowing where, when, and how data were
collected could lead to important insights that aid in analysis, detect inherent bia
ses, andmitigate risk to individuals whose informa
tion is contained within the data sets.
Data confidence.
 Recognition of the limitations of data science is important for avoiding
overconfidence and the inclination to draw str
onger-than-appropria
te conclusions. This ﬁdatahubrisﬂ could be detrimental, for example, if 
too much confidence is invested in a 
datascience model that makes stock market predictions for investments without any c
onsiderationof model limitations (Zacharakis and Shepherd, 2001)
.Stewardship. In data science, stewardship refers to the 
supervision of a data set at
 all stages ofexistence, including collection, storage, and analysis. This facilitates protection of indivi
dualswhose information is within the data set, incl
uding considerations of intellectual property
rights or cybersecurity
 risk.Privacy. Considerations regarding individuals™ privacy
 with respect to how data are collect
edand analyzed arise in many disciplines. Furthe
r information on privacy concerns in term
s ofdata science is discussed la
ter in this section.By developing a truly integrative curriculum, it is 
possible to explore how society is affected by and 
reflected in data. Students would learn the importa
nce of asking the following sequence of questions 
frequently, consistently, and thoughtfully: Whose data
 is being collected, by whom, for what purposes, 
and with what possible implications? Data are often representations (and simplifications) of the lives of 
people; this point could be integrated into every ph
ase of a data science curriculum. Ethics plays a central 
role as students learn to problem-solve with data. An
 important lesson for students to learn is that 
transparency, trust-building, and validation/replication 
are key concepts; reputable data scientists are able 
to show why they do their work, explain the benef
its that will emerge from it, and characterize and 
communicate the limitations of that work. 
The trade-offs related to privacy play a key role
 in this discussion as well. A question arises about 
whether people and their information are ﬁpublic by defaultﬂ (Boyd, 2010), because levels of involvement 
are different and ever-changing 
for each individual. Moreover, da
ta from multiple sources can be 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 
combined, enabling an even richer and more intima
te understanding of subjects. For example, with 
widespread adoption of mobile devices, data scientis
ts may have access to detailed information about a 
person™s location over time, which, in combination wi
th other data, may yield far more information than 
the individual intended them to know. Individuals a
ppreciate the ability to make choices about and have 
control over their information; they want secure da
ta sharing, clear disclosure mechanisms, and a process 
to gain reparation from damages due to data breach
es. All of these real-world problems could provide 
robust content in a data science curriculum. 
An example of a course that integrates a study of data with a study of social context is ﬁData in 
Social Contextﬂ2 at Virginia Tech. This course promotes dual literacy (i.e., humanities skills for data 
analytics students and data analytics skills for human
ities students), explores why people turn to data to 
explain historical phenomena, and shows students a di
fferent way to approach questions with accessible 
tools and data. It highlights how valuable social context 
is in data analytics; data are filled with narratives, 
and questions often arise about ethics, probability, and bias. 
 Finding 2.3: 
Incorporating ethics into an undergraduate data science program provides students 
with valuable skills that can be applied to complex, human-centered questions across disciplines.
 PROFESSIONAL SKILLS Broad professional skills are particularly critical in data science (BHEW, 2017; Hicks and 
Irizarry, 2017). Industry partners re
late that desirable characteristics include the ability to state goals 
clearly, to validate solutions, and to communicate with both technical and nontechnical audiences. 
Communication, both written and verbal, plays a significant role in data science because of diverse 

application areas, interdisciplinary research groups, an
d the ubiquity of data spanning many fields and 
being produced by many people. Conveying information with diverse audiences, expressing nuance 

regarding evidence in the presence of uncertainty, 
communicating limitations of analyses, and ensuring 
that what is conveyed is a faithful and honest representa
tion of the data are all essential to data science.  
Communication skills can be strengthened through 
practice with communicating various types of 
information to diverse audiences, such as a course 
or experiences that emphasize public speaking as well 
as technical and nontechnical writing. Communica
tion can also be strengthened by improved 
understanding of diverse audiences. For example, wh
at aspects of the data science process and results 
would domain scientists need to know to further th
eir research, versus what would managers need to 
know to make relevant business decisi
ons, versus what would policy make
rs need to know to make sound 
policies? These courses could also include a section 
on effective data visualization and its benefits, 
especially when explaining best communication practices for an audience from a nontechnical 
background.  
The ability to work well in multidisciplinary teams 
is also important to data science and highly 
valued by industry. Multidisciplinary teamwork offers students the opportunity to use creative problem 
solving and refine leadership skills, and allows 
for diverse perspectives when tackling data science 
problems.  
Finding 2.4: 
Strong oral and written communication skills and the ability to work well in 
multidisciplinary teams are critical 
to students™ success in data science.
2 Tom Ewing, ﬁData in Social Context,ﬂ http://et
homasewing.org/disc/, accessed August 21, 2017. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19 
3 Data Science Education in the Future  What implications does the emergence of data 
science have for colleges and universities? This 
fundamental question leads to many other related questions, such as the following: How are tools and 
methods used in data science blended with other disciplines? How can students benefit from data science 
being delivered in unique ways? How do
es data science span siloed disciplines? 
Before making curricular changes, an academic 
institution needs to take into account its 
infrastructure, its budget, and its business model, as we
ll as the potential collateral benefits for the rest of 
the institution. Some universities start with curricu
lar changes at the master™s level because those 
programs are generally easier to develop than un
dergraduate programs; however, because professionals 
with undergraduate degrees will be using different sk
ill sets to fill different workforce roles than those 
with graduate degrees, essential data science skills training needs to be included at all levels of 
postsecondary education.  
This chapter describes alternatives and models 
for innovative curriculum development, provides 
suggestions for institutions, and features examples of
 both innovative data science curricular approaches 
(see Box 3.1) as well as innovative approaches to evaluation.  
INNOVATIVE CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT  
New and modified courses may be necessary to 
teach in the emerging data science field. 
Curriculum development would benefit from drawing 
on the experiences of both new faculty with first-hand knowledge of emerging areas and more seas
oned faculty with expe
rience developing other 
curriculum initiatives. Co-curricular 
activities (activities that are connect
ed to or mirror the academic 
curriculum) and interdisciplinary approaches also 
enhance educational experiences. Both established 
good practices and careful evaluations can help inform decisions among different approaches. There are a 

number of educational models that can be implem
ented in a data science curriculum depending on the 
curriculum goals that are identified.
 For example, a variety of educational pathways may each have their 
advantages in preparing students for their respective careers, whether these careers are vocational or 
professional. These pathways may include majors (and minors) centered on data science broadly, distinct 
data science concentrations in various fields (such 
as business, computer science, and statistics), or 1-year 
courses and certificate programs. Although full degree-granting programs in data science may not be 
available yet in many settings outside top-tier academic institutions, graduates will still need to come 

from community colleges, minority-serving institutions
, and smaller colleges and universities in order to 
fill the pipeline of data talent. Professional master™s programs provide another pathway, because they 
have been helpful in some other interdisciplinary fields in providing a flexible environment to explore 
new educational programs and preparing students for the kind of workforce positions that data science is 
already providing. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 
The process whereby the goals are achieved can be va
ried. In terms of delivering content, flipped 
courses, hybrid courses, independent studies, experiential learning, modular courses, hackathons,
1 data dives,2 and just-in-time learning are all viable options 
for students, although it is important for course 
design to align with course objectives and that courses are taught by faculty with the right instructional 
skills. In terms of creating content, it can be beneficial to teach some courses with a disciplinary context 
so that students appreciate that data scien
ce is not an abstract set of approaches. 
One of the limitations of course deployment is the ability of faculty to teach data science. Co-
teaching allows faculty with diverse areas of expertise the opportunity to collaborate and offer a more 
well-rounded course to the students; however, additional administrative support is often necessary, given 
the often larger resource needs for co-taught courses. 
Faculty may need to participate in re-training and 
faculty development to keep pace with changing 
technologies. Portable courses, where a course 
developed for one institution is replicated at another, help supplement f
aculty knowledge gaps.  
The differences among various programs, and the types of employees they create, are often 
unclear to both hiring organizations and human 
resource departments. Having industry involved in 
developing and/or retooling data science courses can help ensure that programs meet workplace needs and 
that students going through these da
ta science programs have employ
ment opportunities upon completion. 
Improved collaboration can also help shape and enhan
ce career paths in industry with positions that can 
both utilize data science skill sets and provide interes
ting opportunities for growth. Better integration of 
industry teachers in academia could help foster this collaboration.
 A first step in establishing a new curriculum is 
to consider relevant experiences from other 
disciplines (e.g., the digital humanities) that have recently emerged from a period of reorganization and 

innovation. However, it is important to note that
 no single curriculum will be appropriate for all 
institutions. It may be necessary for educators to cons
ider possible new disciplines and alternative degree structures and student pathways. Curricular develo
pment for quantitative material typically involves 
prioritizing concepts and skills, using educational 
research to guide pedagogy, borrowing or adapting 
existing materials, sequencing coverage of concepts, 
enhancing high-priority co
ncepts and skills through repetition, and assessing the results. Diverse pedagogical approaches are valuable; institutions could begin 
by encouraging collaboration between departments and existing programs in considering new curricular 
initiatives. For data science curricula specifically, course assi
gnments and exercises can help motivate and 
ground exploration if data sets, case studies, and examples are chosen thoughtfully. Current research 

problems may be a good source of compelling topics. Heterogeneity of examples from diverse disciplines 

is desirable for better, richer team experiences, 
and data science education will evolve as data science 
itself evolves. The evaluation and assessment of different approaches benefit from being grounded in the same 
theory of change
3 that informs curriculum development,
 including specifying curriculum goals, 
identifying the right comparison group, and stating cl
early the curricular intervention. It is helpful to 
disseminate the analytical results broadly so that the field can learn from both successes and failures. 
1 A ﬁhackathonﬂ is a competition in which programmers and analysts work together to complete a task, usually 
for a prescribed and limited time period. 
2 A ﬁdata diveﬂ is an event in which organizations, often nonprofits, present a data-driven problem to a group 
with data science expertise to solve in a limited amount of time. 
3 The 
Theory of Change is ﬁa comprehensive description and illustration of how and why a desired change is 
expected to happen in a particular context. It is focused 
in particular on mapping out or ‚filling in™ what has been 
described as the ‚missing middle™ between what a program or change initiative does (its activities or interventions) 
and how these lead to desired goals being achieved. It does 
this by first identifying the desired long-term goals and 
then works back from these to
 identify all the conditio
ns (outcomes) that must be in
 place (and how these related to 
one another causally) for the goals to occurﬂ (Center for Theory of Change, 2016). 
 Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21 
Finding 3.1: 
Data science curricula are enhanced by br
inging together faculty from different 
disciplines, utilizing diverse pedagogical appro
aches, and building upon existing educational 
programs. 
  BOX 3.1 
Examples of Current Data Science Programs  
 Carnegie Mellon University 
 Carnegie Mellon University offers various options
 for statistics majors and tracks, emphasizing the 
interdisciplinary nature of data science education.
1 Majors include statistics, economics-statistics, and statistics-
machine learning; and tracks include ma
thematical statistics and statistics-
neuroscience. This interdisciplinary 
undergraduate statistics program incorporates a breadth of
 topics central to the study of data scienceŠreal 
problems, lessons in reproducibility, statistical computing, 
advanced data analysis, methodology courses, oral and 
written communication, and interdisciplinary projects. 

 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
  The data science discipline at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign,
2 demonstrates the key 
theme of interdisciplinary data science education with
 a particular focus on the diversity of collaborative 
programs. Students choose from two broad bachelor™s degree options: (1) a degree in statistics and computer 
science (with data science electives) or (2) a degree in 
discipline ﬁX,ﬂ which has a split curriculum consisting of 
half computer science and half discipline ﬁX.ﬂ Current discipline ﬁXﬂ options include anthropology, linguistics, 
chemistry, and astronomy. Crop science, advertising, philosophy, music, and geoscience have been approved as 

future ﬁXﬂ options. Data science effort
s taking place through a massive open on
line course at the master™s level, 
including topics in machine learning
 and analytics, probability and advanc
ed methods, and lifecy
cle and curation, 
could migrate down to the undergraduate level. 

 University of California, Berkeley 
The data science curriculum at the 
University of California, Berkeley
3 focuses on data science 
applications. It takes a modular approach to the undergr
aduate data science experience by fitting courses into an 
existing curriculum using a data science foundation course 
(ﬁData 8ﬂ) and ﬁconnectorsﬂ 
(data-science-in-the-field 
courses). ﬁData 8ﬂ is designed for first- and second-year students of any major and offers hands-on experiences 

with real data while learning computing, statistical c
oncepts, and programming. The co
urse enrolls at least 500 
students per semester. Examples of data science connectors include ﬁData Science for Smart Cities,ﬂ ﬁData 
Science and the Mind,ﬂ ﬁGenomics and Data Science,ﬂ an
d ﬁMaking Sense of Cultural Data.ﬂ Current work is 
under way to develop a data science major.  
 University of Michigan 
The summer programming for data science at the University of Michigan highlights an innovative 
educational pathway available to students of all backgrounds. The Big Data Summer Institute (funded by the 
National Institutes of Health and the Michigan Institute for Data Science at the University of Michigan)
4 is a 6-week-long interdisciplinary training an
d research program in biostatistics that introduces undergraduate students 
to the intersection of big data and human health. Drawing from the expertise and experience of biostatistics, 

statistics, and electrical engineering and computer science 
departments at the University of Michigan, the institute 
exposes undergraduate students to diverse experiences a
nd techniques while also offering research experiences, 
professional development, journey lectures, and social and networking events. Students come from both 

traditional and nontraditional educational backgrounds.
 The Big Data Summer Institute shows how formal 
opportunities for teaching data science 
can extend beyond the classroom to a
ffect a broad group of students by 
using co-curricular structures. 

 Moore-Sloan Data Science Environments 
The Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation sponsor three Moore-
Sloan Data Science Environments at New York Univers
ity, the University of California, Berkeley, and the 
University of Washington. These environments aim to in
crease data science research across multiple domains by 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 
supporting cross-institutional efforts, specifically in areas 
of career development, education and training, tools and 
software, reproducibility and open scie
nce, physical and intellectual space,
 and data science studies. The 
Education Working Group for the environments is ﬁdeveloping ways to use innovative teaching methods and 
formats to offer both formal and info
rmal training in data science skills at undergraduate, graduate, and 
professional levels. Viewing education in its widest sense, the aim is to make data science technology and 
expertise far more accessible both 
within universities and beyond.ﬂ
5 Collaborations between academic institutions 
and private foundations have the potential to catalyze research efforts and foster unique partnerships. 
University of California, Irvine 
The University of California, Irvi
ne, integrates statistics and computer science into a data science 
bachelor™s degree. The Department of Statistics at the 
university is housed within 
the Donald Bren School of 
Information and Computer Sciences.
6 The variety of courses offered within the statistics department include 
classes on statistical concepts that are supplemented with
 computerized applications, 
such as ﬁIntroduction to 
Probability and Statistics for Computer Science,ﬂ ﬁStatis
tical Computing and Exploratory Data Analysis,ﬂ and 
ﬁStatistical Computing Methods.ﬂ Undergraduate students who choose to pursue the data science bachelor™s 
degree have the ability to put equal focus on computer sc
ience and statistics when choo
sing their coursework, as 
opposed to having to select a specialty
. The undergraduate program 
culminates with a capsto
ne project in the final 
year that allows for students to apply the statistics and computer science skills learned within the classroom to a 

large-scale, interdisciplin
ary, real-world problem. 
University of Massachusetts Amherst 
University of Massachusetts, Amherst (UMass Amherst)
 offers an interdisciplinary approach to data 
science education with programs coordinated across computer science, statistics, public health, management, and 

the social sciences. UMass Amherst recently created new 
data science tracks within its computer science and 
informatics undergraduate majors and is in the process of developing new ﬁX + Computingﬂ majors, with 
linguistics, humanities, and social science de
partments. Its Center for Data Science
7 coordinates with multiple 
colleges and schools across campus to create data science 
programs tuned to their own students. Jointly with the 
Department of Computer Science, the Department of 
Mathematics and Statistics has created a Data Science 
Certificate program, while also adding new courses on methods leveraging large data. The faculty from these two 
departments are also creating an introductory undergraduate course in data science foundations, which will serve 

as a general education course for UMass and other institu
tions. The Isenberg School of Management has created a 
new certificate in business analytics, a version of data 
science for business majors, while sharing some courses 

with statistics and computer science. The Computational So
cial Science Institute has dramatically increased hiring 
of computationally and statistically minded social science 
faculty and organizes a series
 of short courses in data 
science topics. 1 See the Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Statistics website at 
http://www.stat.cmu.edu/academics,
 accessed August 21, 2017.  
2 University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Department of Computer Science, ﬁCS + X Degree Programs,ﬂ 
https://cs.illinois.edu/academics/underg
raduate/degree-program
-options/cs-x-degree-pr
ograms, accessed August 
21, 2017. 
3 See the University of California, Berkeley, Division of Data Sciences website at http://data.berkeley.edu, 
accessed August 21, 2017. 
4 University of Michigan, ﬁBig Da
ta Summer Institute,ﬂ h
ttps://sph.umich.edu/bdsi/, accessed August 21, 
2017. 
5 Moore-Sloan Data Science Environments, 2017, ﬁT
hemes.ﬂ http://msdse.org/them
es/, accessed August 21, 
2017. 
6 See the University of California, Irvine, Departme
nt of Statistics website at http://www.stat.uci.edu/, 
accessed August 21, 2017. 
7 See the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Center 
for Data Science website at https://ds.cs.umass.edu/, 
accessed August 21, 2017.
 Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23 
SUGGESTIONS FOR INSTITUTIONS Evaluation, Assessment, and Accreditation 
Assessment of student skill and conceptual de
velopment within formal courses benefits from 
being informed by the overall objective of the progra
m and its associated curriculum. It is helpful for 
departments and institutions to consider criteri
a and methods for evaluating the entire program, 
particularly for interdisciplinary programs such as 
data science. Program evaluation approaches would be 
best implemented throughout the process of program/
curriculum development from the time when the 
objectives of the program are first considered. Such 
an evaluation process can inform the formative and 
summative assessment methods used within the program
 and may suggest particular metrics for success. 
Indeed, the methods of data science could readily be
 applied to ascertain the data to be collected, the 
analysis methods to be used, and the metrics thr
ough which any analysis can specify program success or 
suggest efforts to adapt or modify the program to
 meet the success metrics. Having an evaluation process 
in place could assist institutions in preparation for any formal accreditation that is already being utilized 
or that might arise as the field of data science grows. It could also enable program designers to 
characterize the outcomes of students trained in data 
science relative to comparable students trained in 
other fields. Fortunately, there is substantial literature ava
ilable on ways to build evaluation and assessment 
into program design. In a very influential series of 
papers, Handelsman et al. (2004) argue that new types 
of science need to adopt active learning techniques. 
By this, they mean changing teaching from a lecture-
based format to one that has both 
inquiry-based and modular-learning
 components and that 
treats students as scientists who ﬁdevelop hypotheses, design and conduct experiments, collect and interpret 
data, and write about their resultsﬂ (Handelsman et 
al., 2004). Handelsman et al. (2007) note that the line 
between active learning and assessment is difficult to de
fine, but teaching that promotes students™ active 
learning (e.g., asking students to perform an acti
on or task) can then help assess understanding. Hoey 
(2008) suggests that the key measures include the following:  
Knowledge of concepts in the discipline;Ability to conduct independent research;Ability to use appropriate t
echnologies;Ability to work with others, especially in teams; 
andAbility to teac
h others.Of course, new educational techniques have been 
scientifically evaluated in other contexts. The 
Department of Education™s What Works Clearinghouse
4 provides a compendium of the results of 
different interventions at different grade levels. Un
iversities are partnering with government agencies to 
link their data to administrative records to trace the earnings and employment outcomes of students well 

beyond their graduation date. For example, a pilot 
partnership among a number of universities (the 

University of California system, the University of
 Michigan, the University of Wisconsin, and the 
University of Texas), the Institute
 for Research on Innovation and Science,5 and the U.S. Census Bureau 
is linking individual-level transcript data 
to Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics
6 program data. 
The plan is to scale the pilot nationally, if succes
sful. The advantage of linking transcript data to administrative records is not only that it provides 
longitudinal information on the educational experience 
4 U.S. Department of Education, Institute of
 Education Sciences, ﬁWhat Works Clearinghouse,ﬂ 
http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/, accessed August 21, 2017. 
5 See the Institute for Research on Innovation and Science website at http:// iris.i
sr.umich.edu, accessed August 
21, 2017. 
6 See the Longitudinal Employer-House
hold Dynamics website at http://le
hd.ces.census.gov, accessed August 
21, 2017. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 
of students, but also that it permits the constr
uction of comparison groupsŠ
outcomes of groups of 
students who took data science classes can be compared with those of groups 
who did not take data 
science classes.  
There is much to be learned from the experien
ce in other fields in moving from a curriculum 
based on providing content to one that is both interdisciplinary and concept-driven. In the biological 
sciences, Gutlerner and Van Vactor (2013) argue forcefully for the development of modular classesŠ
what they call ﬁnanocourses.ﬂ Their approach bri
ngs together students from multiple backgrounds, 
engages faculty from a variety of disciplines, and 
creates ﬁsmall discussion group activities that allow 
students to practice framing experiments into larger
 scientific contexts and disciplinesﬂ (Gutlerner and Van Vactor, 2013). 
Faculty Involvement 
Faculty who are already busy teaching, engaging 
in faculty service, and conducting research, and 
who may not have deep expertise in data science 
topics, can find it hard to find time for curriculum 
development. The structure and content of faculty 
training and incentives are crucial, as is time and 
funding to support curriculum development. Netw
orks built among multiple faculty from multiple 
disciplines and professional development offered on 
a regular basis can enhance interdisciplinary 
innovation. If these do not occur, faculty may be less equipped to teach their students, and institutions 
might not benefit from the cross-department educati
onal collaborations that characterize successful data 
science programs. When data science programs or curricula are being established, it is important for 

academic institutions to consider the balance of tale
nt throughout institutes and within departments.  
Finding 3.2: 
Structured faculty training, meaningful incentives, and available time and funding to 
support curriculum development are all crucial to
 preparing faculty for data science education.
 Structures of Academic Institutions 
An institution™s infrastructure and organizational 
structure can shape, and perhaps limit, the 
possibilities for future data science programs. Econom
ic structures, especially tuition-driven models, 
often form silos within departments and between disci
plines. For example, if there are no mechanisms in 
place to adjust tuition payments, faculty pay rates, f
aculty course-load distributi
ons, and general education 
requirements to accommodate cross-department and cross-disciplinary course offerings, data science 

course options could be more lim
ited in scope and reach a smaller 
audience of students. Institutional 
considerations about whether to admit students to a pa
rticular program or a general program or to deliver 
only in-person courses may also affect a data science 
program™s ability to reach a more diverse group of 
students. Institutions offering flexible options for students who would like to en
ter the workforce with a 
wider range of skills may be more successful than th
ose that offer only very restrictive degree programs. 
Academic institutions could benefit from the creation of an office devoted to campus data initiatives, such 
as data science education programs. Such an office 
could include support for teaching and a data facility 
that would provide access to data, including a secu
re environment for confidential data as well as 
information about data standards and reusable 
code (such as Jupyter Notebooks). Another possible 
consideration would be a ﬁquantitative sciences education centerﬂ that is similar in structure and 
objectives to writing, computing, and statistics centers at most institutions but focused on development of 
broad student appreciation for quantitative
 sciences, including data science.  
Finding 3.3: 
Data science programs often adapt to the 
existing infrastructure and organizational 
structure of an academic institution, but infrastructur
e innovations by the ins
titution (e.g., in data provision, data and code access, and data documenta
tion) can help data science programs be more 
collaborative and multidisciplinary.
 Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25 
Importance of Flexibility 
The rapid flux in data science concepts, tools, and applications make flexibility and adaptability 
key to developing, achieving, and maintaining succes
sful data science programs. Although students are 
generally becoming more comfortable with some computing and data science contexts (e.g., more 

accustomed to connectedness in every 
facet of society, more accepting of new technologies like artificial 
intelligence, and more adept with software and devi
ces), it is important to identify and address potential 
gaps in knowledge to ensure data science programs are accessible to all future students, regardless of past 
experiences. Approaches to attract students who are in
terested in data science but have less quantitative 
backgrounds are important. Employers™ needs will al
so likely evolve as new skill sets are required. 
Educational institutions are also likely to experience ch
ange in their options for delivery, program types, 
and course content. Faculty flexibility in developing
 and modifying appropriate and timely course content 
to keep pace with the changes in the surrounding world may be invaluable. Instead of creating one-size-
fits-all approaches to teaching data science concepts
, institutions will have to
 remain open-minded and 
flexible to best meet the needs of students and the workplace.  
Finding 3.4: 
To keep up with the quickly evolving field of data science and recruit students with 
more diverse backgrounds, educational approaches in 
data science need to be flexible in terms of 
what concepts, skills, tools, and methods are taught; how students are recruited; and how 

departments and programs collaborate to provide
 a full data science experience to students.
 Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 
4 Broad Participation in Data Science Data science programs have the potential to a
ttract broad participation, including diverse 
members from different disciplines (including the hu
manities, social sciences, and the arts) and from 
populations that are underrepresented in other similar 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics 
(STEM) fields (see Box 4.1). Part of this potential comes from the various compelling application areas of 
data science, including digital humanities, computati
onal social science, public policy, and many others. 
There are also numerous skill sets that are currently captured under a 
data scientist label that span multiple training and education levels.  
There are many current and recent efforts aimed 
at increasing diversity, in
clusion, and broadening participation in fields related to data science. Th
ese approaches can serve to in
form emerging data science 
programs to encourage broad participation by design. Th
e following highlights just a few of these efforts:  
NSF INCLUDES (Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners ofUnderrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science)
1 is a National Science Foundation(NSF) initiative designed to enhance U.S. l
eadership in STEM discoveries and innovationswhile supporting efforts to develop talent fro
m all sectors of society to build the 
STEMworkforce. The initiative aims to improve the 
preparation, increase the participation, andensure the contributions of individuals from groups that have traditionally
 beenunderrepresented and underserved in the STEM enterprise, including women, memb
ers ofracial and ethnic groups, persons with disabilities, and persons with low socioeconomicstatus. Significant advancement of these gr
oups would result in a new generatio
n ofpromising STEM talent and leadership to secure the nation™s future in science an
dtechnology.
InGenIOus (Investing in the Next Generati
on through Innovative and Outstandi
ngStrategies)2 is a collaboration among mathematics and statistics prof
essional societies andNSF that culminated in a July 2013 workshop devoted to identifying and envisioning
programs and strategies for increasing the flow of mathematical sciences student
s into theworkforce pipeline.CS for All3 is a program that aims to provide 
all U.S. students the opportunity to pa
rticipate incomputer science and computational thinking ed
ucation in their schools at the KŒ12 levels.Funded by NSF, this program focuses on research
erŒp
ractitioner partnerships that foster theresearch and development needed to bring computer science and com
putational thinking toall schools. Specifically, the program aims to provide high school teacher
s with the1 See the NSF INCLUDES website at
 https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2
016/nsf16544/nsf16544
.htm, accessed August 
21, 2017.  2 Mathematical Association of America, ﬁInGenIOus,ﬂ http://www.maa.org/programs/faculty-and-
departments/ingenious, accessed August 21, 2017. 
3 National Science Foundation, ﬁCS for All,ﬂ https://w
ww.nsf.gov/pubs/2017/nsf17525/nsf17525.htm, accessed 
August 21, 2017. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A ﬁpi
pwith ﬁleakaargued tha
tstudents 
mprograms 
wapproach tSOURCE: 4 Amehttp://com
m5 See tpelineﬂ metap
hageﬂ used to i
nt this metapho
rmay enter a deg
rwith multiple 
poward buildin
gLibrary of Vi
rpreparationcomputer 
spreparationteaching.  StatFest4 iMinoritiesundergraduoptions in 
focuses onconsulting Math Alliafrom histo
mathemat
idiversity amathemat
iresearch c
o(National Aerican Statistic
amunity.amstat
.the Math Allia
nhor has been a 
sndicate that so
mr should be re
pree program d
epotential route
sg programs th
arginia (2014) 
vn, professionascience cours
n they need t
os a conferenc in Statistics. 
uate students the field and 
n a different cg, academia, 
aance
5 is an orgrically under
rical sciences. 
and inclusion ics, mathema
tollaborations Alliance for Dal Association
,.org/cmis/eve
nnce website at 
A Watershedstandard meanme students st
eplaced by a ﬁw
aependent upon 
s for student s
uat attract diver
svia David Asai
,al developme
es, while pro
vo integrate coce hosted by t
hThe goal of thistorically 
ulearn from i
nategory of ca
and graduate pganization focrepresented bBased out of into mathem
atical and app
land communDoctoral Stud, Committee o
nnts/statfest, accehttps://mathal
l27 
BOX 4.1 d Instead of a 
s to consider t
hep out of this p
aatershedﬂ in w
htheir own bac
kuccess, such a 
mse students tha
n, Howard Hug
hnt, and ongo
ividing 
KŒ8 teomputer scie
nhe American 
the program 
iunderreprese
nndustry and a
creer trajector
yprograms (A
Scused on assiackgrounds i
nfPurdue Uni
vatics doctoral lied statistics,
nity within th
edies in the Man Minorities i
nessed August 
2liance.org/wel
cPipeline 
he flow of stu
dath and potent
ihich there are 
mkgrounds. For 
metaphor strucn a fixed pipel
ihes Medical I
ning support t
heachers with tnce and comp
uStatistical Asis to provide anted in statist
icademic leadey, such as go
vSA, 2017). 
sting mathemn pursuing a 
versity, the prol programs (i
n and biostatise broader ma
tathematical Scn Statistics, ﬁSt21, 2017. 
come/, access
edents through 
aially move to 
omultiple flow 
pinherently int
ectures a more 
oine metaphor. 
nstitute. 
hat they need 
the instructioutational thinssociation™s 
Can opportuni
tics to exploreers. Each spe
vernment, indmatics undergrdoctoral deg
rogram strive
sncluding pur
estics) while e
nthematical c
ociences, 2013tatFest 2017,ﬂ ed August 21, 
2a STEM curric
uothers. It has b
epathways by 
werdisciplinary 
dopen, collabor
ato teach rigornal materials 
nking into the
iCommittee o
nty for e potential caraker session dustry and 
raduate stude
ree in the s to improve 
e and applied ncouraging ommunity 
3).  2017. 
ulum, 
een 
which 
degree 
ative 
rous and ir n reer 
nts Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 
There are also a variety of programs and projects that 
aim to foster interaction between individuals with 
varying levels of science background. For instance,
 a Music Data Science Hackathon hosted by Data 
Science London and EMI Music brought together data sci
entists and music specialists in a competition to 
develop a program that would predict the next hit in
 music. Other programs are housed at the institution 
level, such as the Mobile News App Design Class at
 the University of Texas, Austin, which brings computer science and journalism students together with the task of designing a novel mobile application 
for news. These, and many other efforts in this 
area, can inform emerging data science education 
programs and attract students from non-science disciplin
es to potentially pursue a path in data science. 
This chapter discusses some recruitment and retenti
on strategies, institutional partnerships and KŒ12 
outreach, and the role of evaluation and assessment.  
RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION STRATEGIES 
The focus on recruitment and retention extends beyond the obvious choices for data science 
majors and minors; other academically diverse stude
nt populations would benefit from the addition of 
data science to the curriculum. For example, it ma
y be necessary to do targeted outreach to recruit 
students who are interested in enrolling in data sci
ence courses but may not find course titles immediately 
relevant or appealing. It may also encourage such students to know that a lack of preparation in data 
science does not equate to a lack of ability; developi
ng multiple pathways to incorporate data science 
concepts into varied curricula vi
a specialized connector courses or other ﬁon rampsﬂ could address these 
students™ concerns about knowledge gaps and allow them to gain the 
level of expertise appropriate for 
their interests and career goals. Recruiting students fr
om diverse disciplines to data science courses could 
also improve retention in such courses due to the in
creased interest in and value added to the courses. 
Retention may also improve if the content of and 
the faculty for introductory data science courses are 
selected with the diverse backgrounds and interests 
of the student population in mind. Throughout this 
process, it is important to consider strategies to re
tain faculty members as well. Data science skills and
 expertise are highly sought-after 
in industry, and educators in these areas are strong candidates for 
industry employment 
(Kaminski and Geisler, 2012).  
 Challenges also persist in both recruiting a
nd retaining underrepresented minorities and women in 
the sciences more broadly. It is useful to consider
 whether data science™s diversity and inclusion issues 
are unique as compared to those of other disciplines as well as what can be learned from other STEM 

programs that address diversity and inclusion well. Hiri
ng a more diverse faculty may also help to attract 
a more diverse student population. 
Recruitment and retention continue to be challe
nging in the workplace. In a professional research 
environment, employers want to hire people with
 literacy in computing, data science, and a domain 
science, but it can be difficult to find individuals who fit this description (Agarwal, 2016). Instead, 

employers often hire data science-literate people w
ith domain expertise and provide more in-depth 
training in specific technical or professional skills. To increase diversity, inclusion, and data science 
literacy, employers could increase cross-disciplinar
y collaboration opportunities, create supportive team 
environments, counteract bias, and bu
ild mentor cohorts. Dedicated recr
uiting, inclusive recognition, and 
active support would also help.  
Finding 4.1: 
Data science has the potential to draw in 
a diverse set of students and build in broad 
participation from the onset, rather than trying to 
broaden participation late
r. However, strategies 
are needed to recruit and retain these students.  Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29 
INSTITUTIONAL PARTNERSHIPS 
Community colleges are well qualified to be highly
 effective providers of data science education 
while also serving as important partners for 4-year in
stitutions that are considering the emerging role of data science education. Community college programs can
 serve to (1) be an entry point to inspire and 
attract diverse student populations to data science; (2
) permit existing members of the workforce to retrain 
or obtain specific new skill sets to complement their education and experience; (3) create mechanisms by 
which students can certify specific or general skill set
s with certificates or associate™s degrees; (4) build 
foundational, translational, ethical, and professional sk
ills to support matricula
tion into 4-year college 
data science programs; and (5) provide opportunities 
for advanced high school students to begin data 
science training early. The majority of these purpo
ses support undergraduate edu
cation objectives, while also targeting the specific needs of industry. Instituti
onal, industry, and governme
nt partnerships are all important to the development of data science education that meets these objectives for community 

colleges.  Funding agencies can help support formal partners
hips with interested community colleges and 4-year institutions by providing funding mechanisms th
at allow for the development of new curricula as 
well as professional learning opportunities for faculty.  
Finding 4.2: 
Partnerships between 2- and 4-year inst
itutions provide a valuable opportunity to 
develop innovative curricula, reach more diverse 
student populations, and expand the reach of data science education.
  K-12 OBJECTIVES  Elementary, middle, and high schools play an impor
tant role in developing data science education 
and preparing students to thrive in a modern workfor
ce. With changes in federal legislation that call for students to be prepared to succeed in college and car
eers, states are looking to national content standards 
to provide a vision for K-12 education. These standard
s of practice include content areas that are relevant 
to data science education, such as science a
nd engineering (Next Generation Science Standards6) and mathematics and statistics (Common Core State Standards
7). Some of the practices called for in these 
standards include analyzing and interpreting data; 
using mathematics and computational thinking; and 
obtaining, evaluating, and communicating informatio
n. Embedded in these practices are such skills as 
being able to (1) identify significant features and patterns in data through tabulation, graphical 

interpretation, visualization, and statistical analysis
; (2) make and test predictions through constructing 
simulations and recognizing, expr
essing, and applying quantitative re
lationships; and (3) communicate 
orally or in writing using tables, diagrams, graphs
, and equations (NRC, 2012, pp. 49-53). Through the 
adoption of these national standards, data scientists may be positioned to play a role in curriculum 
development by working with curriculum designers to
 ensure alignment between the practices highlighted 
above and the requisite skills that are needed upon entry into data science programs.  
PUBLIC OUTREACH In addition to efforts that could be achieved 
in formal educational spaces, there are outreach 
efforts to students in more informal spaces, in
cluding year-long afterschool programs, summer camps, 
high school internship programs, competitions, and websites designed to foster motivation and interest in 
6 See the Next Generation Science Standards website at
 https://www.nextgenscience
.org/, accessed August 21, 
2017. 
7 See the Common Core State Standards website at h
ttp://www.corestandards.org/,
 accessed August 21, 2017. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 
data science and other STEM fields. Focused data sci
ence summer programs can be effective in attracting 
high school students to postsecondary STEM fields. For 
example, the Michigan Institute for Data Science 
(MIDAS) at the University of Michigan has been running a data 
science summer camp for the past 2 
years that uses art and sports activities to gently in
troduce teenagers to mathematics, computing, signal 
processing, and statistics. Such use of familiar ac
tivities to introduce data science makes it fun and 
sustains student interest in STEM. Such camps can 
also be used to reach a more diverse group of 
students. These programs may also be offered by organizati
ons, such as museums, that not only collaborate 
with the KŒ12 education system, but also seek to
 engage the broader community. For example, the 
Exploratorium
8 has a repository of online materials and 
activities as well as community-based programs 
designed to foster the development of the skills 
highlighted above. Other online resources, such as 
Data.gov, provide parents and teachers access to mate
rials to help advance children™s understanding of 
concepts associated with data science (Data.gov, 2013). 
EVALUATION AND ASSESSMENT 
Good data science practices can inform the eval
uation of programs targeted toward broad 
participation. It is useful for program evaluation 
to follow established best practices, including following an appropriate model for inclusion of metrics for participation in the overall goals of the program, clearly 
articulating these to all participants from the begi
nning of the program, establishing procedures for 
assessing these metrics on a regular basis, and specify
ing adaptation and modification procedures based 
on these formative and summative assessments.  
In establishing approaches for measuring success, th
e tools of experimental design and analysis 
can be incorporated when appropriate (using, for example, comparison of treatment and control, 
randomized trials, nationally normed instruments, e
xploitation of natural e
xperiments, appropriate 
descriptive analyses of observational data accounting fo
r confounding factors, etc.). It may be necessary 
to consider an overall data plan at the start of the program as part of the evaluation plan, which would 
account for Institutional Review Board requirements if the 
data might be used for research rather than just 
within institutional planning. 
Data sources useful for measuring diverse particip
ation might include transcripts that reveal who 
takes data science courses and who completes a data scie
nce degree. Such data can be used to make both 
programmatic and cross-institutional comparisons. In
stitutional constraints may encourage a return-on-
investment perspective as part of the evaluation, inco
rporating the impacts and costs of various targeted 
educational interventions to
 broaden participation. 
Finding 4.3: 
Data science programs would benefit from
 ongoing curricular evaluation, especially 
with respect to how well curricular objectives are being met and the degree of curricular 

integration. Taking a cue from its own domain, these 
data could be used to inform data science 
instruction and curriculum.
 8 See the Exploratorium website at https://www.expl
oratorium.edu/education, accessed August 21, 2017. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31 
5 Reflections Given the wide-ranging applications, potential imp
acts, and important implications for society, 
the committee began its reflections on the future of da
ta science with aspects of ethical conduct as part of a broader set of skills and capacities. 
HIPPOCRATIC OATH 
Emerging data science technologies and methodologies
 (1) blur differences between ﬁpublicﬂ and 
ﬁprivateﬂ data, (2) offer more widespread access to data
 and related tools, (3) influence and affect society 
at large, and (4) create greater opportunities for d
eeper insights through the use and integration of 
multiple data sources. As a result, data ethics take 
on an ever more prominent role in both data science 
curricula and data science practice.  
The Hippocratic Oath, which details the ideal conduct 
of physicians in terms of their treatment of 
patients and interactions with colleagues, has historically been affirmed by physicians to acknowledge 
their understanding of key ethical principles for th
eir profession (Box 5.1). Similarly, the Canadian 
ﬁCalling of an Engineerﬂ ceremony for engineering 
graduates helps establish shared moral and social 
responsibilities (NSPE, 2009). The pervasive impact of data
 science suggests that a similar oath would be 
beneficial for data scientists, whose work has a direct impact on individuals throughout society and on the 
advancement of the body of scientific knowledge. Data
 science students learn to solve complex problems 
in the world and use data to make decisions, while
 understanding limitations of data sets and methods.  
An oath of this sort may be helpful in formalizing 
the role of data ethics and to inspire future data scientists to practice with honor, ﬁdo[ing] no harmﬂ to 
the subjects involved in or affected by their work. 
This oath also formalizes the professional role of the data scientist, offering guidance on appropriate 
conduct to those entering the field and encourag
ing collaboration across diverse communities.  
What might a Hippocratic Oath for data science incl
ude? To explore this question, the committee 
developed the text in Box 5.2 as a preliminary form 
of a possible pledge for future data scientists. The 
proposed Data Science Oath highlights aspects of da
ta ethics and the value of incorporating societal 
impact as part of data science education.  
SUMMARY OF PRELIMINARY COMMITTEE FINDINGS AND OPEN QUESTIONS  
At the midpoint of its study, the committee finds 
that it is important that data science education 
incorporate real data, broad impact applications, 
commonly deployed methods, and ethical considerations, 
as well as provide support for work in teams. Other critical content areas include data description and 
curation, mathematical foundations, computational thinking, statistical thinking, data modeling, 
computing, reproducibility, and data ethics. Students 
would also benefit from developing deep analytic 
and communication skills so as to better work with la
rge, complex data sets and engage with diverse 
audiences about real-world problems that data scien
ce can help solve. All of these promote the  
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 
BOX 5.1 
Hippocratic Oath
 I swear to fulfill, to the best 
of my ability and judgment, this 
covenant: I will respect the hard-won scientif
ic gains of those physicians in 
whose steps I walk, and gladly share such knowledge as is mine 
with those who are to follow. 
I will apply, for the benefit of 
the sick, all measures which are 
required, avoiding those twin traps of overtreatment and 

therapeutic nihilism. 
I will remember that there is art to medicine as well as science, and 
that warmth, sympathy, and understanding may outweigh the 

surgeon™s knife or the chemist™s drug. 
I will not be ashamed to say ﬁI know not,ﬂ nor will I fail to call in 
my colleagues when the skills of another are needed for a 

patient™s recovery. 
I will respect the privacy of my pa
tients, for their problems are not 
disclosed to me that the world ma
y know. Most especially must I 
tread with care in matte
rs of life and death. If it is given me to 
save a life, all thanks. But it may al
so be within my power to take 
a life; this awesome responsibility
 must be faced with great 
humbleness and awareness of my own frailty. Above all, I must 
not play at God. 
I will remember that I do not treat a fever chart, a cancerous growth, 
but a sick human being, whose illness may affect the person™s 
family and economic stability. My responsibility includes these 
related problems, if I am to care adequately for the sick. 
I will prevent disease whenever I can
, for prevention is preferable to cure. 
I will remember that I remain a me
mber of society, with special 
obligations to all my fellow human beings, those sound of mind 
and body as well as the infirm. 
If I do not violate this oath, may I enjoy life and art, respected while 
I live and remembered with affection thereafter. May I always act 

so as to preserve the finest traditions of my calling and may I 
long experience the joy of healing those who seek my help. 
_________________________ 
SOURCE: L.C. Lasagna, 1964, Hippocratic Oath, Modern Version, 
Johns Hopkins Sheridan Libraries and University Museums, 
http://guides.library.jhu.edu/c.php?g=202502&p=1335759. 
BOX 5.2 
Data Science Oath 
I swear to fulfill, to the best 
of my ability and judgment, this 
covenant: 
I will respect the hard-won scientific 
gains of those data scientists in whose steps I walk and gladly share such knowledge as is mine 
with those who follow. 
I will apply, for the benefit of 
society, all measures which are 
required, avoiding those twin trap
s of data-fishing and analytic 
nihilism. 
I will remember that there is art to data science as well as science, 
and that consistency, candor a
nd compassion should outweigh the 
algorithm™s precision or the interventionists influence. 
I will not be ashamed to say, ﬁI know not,ﬂ nor will I fail to call in 
my colleagues when the skills of 
another are needed for solving a 
problem. 
I will respect the privacy of my da
ta subjects, for their problems are 
not disclosed to me that the world may know, so I will tread with 
care in matters of privacy and securi
ty. If it is given to me to save 
life with my analyses, all thanks. But it may also be within my 
power to do harm and this responsibility must be faced with 
humbleness and awareness of my own limitations. 
I will remember that my data are not just numbers without meaning 
or context, but represent real people and situations and that my 
work may lead to unintended so
cietal consequences, such as inequality, poverty, and disparitie
s due to algorithmic bias. My 
responsibility must consider potential consequences of my 
extraction of meaning from data and ensure my analyses help 
make better decisions. 
I will do personalization where appr
opriate, but I will always look 
for a path to fair treatment and non-discrimination. 
I will remember that I remain a me
mber of society, with special 
obligations to all my fellow huma
n beings, those who need help 
and those who don™t. 
If I do not violate this oath, ma
y I enjoy vitality and virtuosity, 
respected for my contributions and remembered for my 
leadership thereafter. May I alwa
ys act to preserve the finest 
traditions of my calling and may I long experience the joy of 
helping those who seek my help.
development of data acumen. Highly trained a
nd flexible faculty, innovative cross-disciplinary 
pedagogical approaches, and diverse participation would enhance learning experiences. Such programs™ 
successes can then be evaluated and assessed using the 
very tools of experimental design and analysis 
common in the field of data science. 
The findings from the preceding chapters are re
stated below along with key questions on which 
the committee would like to gather public input.   
Finding 2.1: 
A critical component of data science educati
on is to guide students to develop data 
acumen. This requires exposure to key concepts in data science, real-world data and problems 
that can reinforce the limitations of tools, a
nd ethical considerations that permeate many 
applications. Key concepts related to deve
loping data acumen include the following:  
Mathematical foundations,
Com
putational thinking,Statistical thinking,Data management,Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33 
Data description and curation,
Data modelin
g,Ethical problem solving,
Communication and reproducibility,
 andDomain-specific considerations.
The necessary levels of exposure to each area w
ill vary based on the overall objectives and duration 
of the data science program as well as the goals for the students. 
Questions 
Which key components should be included in 
data science curriculum, both now and in
 thefuture? How could these components be prioritized or best conveyed for differing types of data scienceprograms? How can opportunities to enhance data acumen
 (i.e., the ability to make good judgments anddecisions with data) be integrated into data science educational programs? 
How can data acumen be 
measured or evaluated?Finding 2.2: It is important for data science education to incorporate real data, broad im
pactapplications, and commonly deployed
 methods.Questions How can partnerships between industry and e
ducational programs be encouraged?Could a focus on real problems serve as a 
means to attracting more diverse students?How can students gain access to real-wo
rld data sets?Finding 2.3: Incorporating ethics into an undergraduate data science program provides student
swith valuable skills that can be applied to complex, human-centered questions ac
ross disciplines.Questions How can ethical considerations be best incor
porated throughout th
e data science curriculum?How can students be taught to apply ethical decision making throughout the prob
lem-solvingprocess?Finding 2.4: Strong oral and written communication skills and the ability to work
 well inmultidisciplinary teams are critical 
to students™ success in data science.
Questions 
How can communication and teamwork be fostered in data science programs?What type of multidisciplinary teams serve as effectiv
e models for the real world? Will thesegroupings be different in the future?Finding 3.1: 
Data science curricula are enhanced by br
inging together faculty from
 differentdisciplines, utilizing diverse pedagogical appro
aches, and building 
upon existing educationalprograms.Questions What are known good practices for fostering collaboration 
between departments and existingprograms? What new directions and opportunities exist for new curricular initiatives?Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 
What pedagogical approaches are particularly relevant to data science, both now and in
 thefuture?Finding 3.2: Structured faculty training, meaningful incentives, and available time and fundi
ng tosupport curriculum development are all crucial to 
preparing faculty 
for data science education.Questions What types of training would be beneficial to faculty?
How could incentives be restructured to enc
ourage more faculty development in data science?Finding 3.3: Data science programs often adapt to the 
existing infrastructure and organizationalstructure of an academic institution, but infrastructur
e innovations by the ins
titution (e.g., in dataprovision, data and code access, and data documenta
tion) can help data science programs be more
collaborative and multidisciplinary.
Questions 
What are current infrastructure obstacles and how can they be rethought going 
forward?How could organizational structures be modifie
d and/or incentives added to
 encourage datascience collaboration and innovation?
Finding 3.4: 
To keep up with the quickly evolving fiel
d of data science and recruit students withmore diverse backgrounds, educational approaches in 
data science need to be flexible in terms ofwhat concepts, skills, tools, and me
thods are taught; how students are recruited; and howdepartments and programs collaborate to provide
 a full data science experience to students.Questions How can data science programs build in flexib
ility and adaptabili
ty so they can be mostresponsive to changes in the field?  How can flexibility encourage more diverse students?Finding 4.1: Data science has the potential to draw in 
a diverse set of students and build in broa
dparticipation from the onset, rather than trying to 
broaden participation late
r. However, strate
giesare needed to recruit and retain these students.Questions How can broad participation, diversity, and inclus
ion be ingrained in dat
a science programs?What strategies to recruit and retain diverse students can data science programs deploy, andwhat examples can inform these efforts?Finding 4.2: Partnerships between 2- and 4-year inst
itutions provide a valuable opportunity to
develop innovative curricula, reach more diverse 
student populations, and expand the reach ofdata science education.
Questions 
How can partnerships between 2- and 4-year institutions be facilit
ated?How do the skills and concepts taught at a 2-year institution vary based on stude
nts™ goals?What aspects of data science education are appropriate and feasible to develop at
 2-yearinstitutions?Finding 4.3: Data science programs would benefit from
 ongoing curricular evaluation, especially
with respect to how well curricular objectives are being me
t and the degree of curricularEnvisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35 
integration. Taking a cue from its own domain, these 
data could be used to inform data science 
instruction and curriculum. 
 Questions 
What evaluation and assessment objectives are currently being used in data science programs,and how will these differ in the future? 
What best practices in evaluation and assessm
ent can inform data science programs?What data are available to evaluate the eff
ectiveness of different da
ta science approaches?What standard evaluation approaches should be adopted?
INPUT NEEDED 
The committee seeks input from the growing data
 science community and the public on the 
following topics:  
Additional content for its study, including but not limited to case studies from in
stitutionsproviding data science education, innovative ways to bring research
ers together, bestpractices for program eval
uation, and ideas for future topical webinars;The proposed Data Science Oath outlined at
 the beginning of this ch
apter; andThe questions posed in th
e previous section.Please visit the following webpage to provid
e input: http://www.nas.edu/EnvisioningDS. Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37 
References Agarwal, D. 2016. ﬁData Science Diversity from the 
Perspective of a National Laboratory,ﬂ presentation 
at the National Academies™ Data Science Education Workshop, Washington, D.C., December 12.  
ASA (American Statistical Association). 2014. ﬁCurri
culum Guidelines for Undergraduate Programs in 
Statistical Sciences.ﬂ http://www.amstat.org/asa/files/pdfs/EDU-guidelines2014-11-15.pdf. 
ASA. 2017. ﬁStatFest 2017.ﬂ http://community.amstat.org/cmis/events/statfest. Accessed June 28, 2017. 
Berk, R., H. Heidari, S. Jabbari, M. Kearns, and A. Roth. 2017. Fairness in Criminal Justice Risk 
Assessments: The State of the Art. 
University of Pennsylvania Departments of Statistics, 
Criminology, and Computer and Info
rmation Science. Philadelphia, Pa. 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1703.09207.pdf. 
BHEW (Business-Higher Education Forum). 2017. 
Investing in America™s Data Science and Analytics 
Talent: The Case for Action. http://www.pwc.com/us/dsa-skills. Accessed August 21, 2017. 
Boyd, D. 2010. ﬁMaking Sense of Privacy and Publicity.ﬂ SXSW, Austin, Tex., March 13. 

Butler, D. 2013. When Google got flu wrong. 
Nature 494: 155-156.  
Center for Theory of Change. 2016. ﬁWhat is Theo
ry of Change?ﬂ http://www.
theoryofchange.org/what-
is-theory-of-change/.  
Cetinkaya-Rundel, M. 2017. ﬁTeaching Data Science 
and Statistical Computation to Undergraduates.ﬂ 
United States Conference on Teaching Statistics, State College, Pa., May 20. 
https://www.causeweb.org/cause/uscots/uscots17/keynote/3.  
Chen, H., R.H.L. Chiang, and V.C. Storey. 2012. Bu
siness intelligence and analytics: From big data to 
big impact. 
MIS Quarterly 36(4): 1165-1188. 
Codella, N.C.F., Q.B. Nguyen, S. Pankanti, D. Gutm
an, B. Helba, A. Halpern, and J.R. Smith. 2017. 
Deep learning ensembles for melanoma recognition in dermoscopy images. 
IBM Journal of 
Research and Development 61(4/5).  
Columbia University. 2013. ﬁUniversity Writing: Readings in Data Sciences.ﬂ 
https://www.college.columbia.edu/core/node/3290/.  
Columbus, L. 2017. ﬁIBM Predicts Demand Fo
r Data Scientists Will Soar 28% By 2020.ﬂ 
Forbes, May 
13.  Culler, D. 2016. ﬁData Science at the Heart of a 
21st Century University,ﬂ 
presentation to the National 
Academies™ Committee on Envisioning the Data
 Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective, Washington, D.C., December 12.  
Danyllo, W.A., V.B. Alisson, N.D. Alexandre, LM.J
. Moacir, B.P. Jansepetrus, and R.F. Oliveira. 2013. 
ﬁIdentifying Relevant Users and Groups in the Context of Credit Analysis Based on Data from 
Twitter.ﬂ Paper presented at the 2013 IEEE Third International Conference on Cloud and Green 
Computing, September/October, Karlsruhe, Germany. 
Data.gov. 2013. ﬁData in the Classroom.ﬂ https://www.data.gov/education/classroom/.  
De Veaux, R., M. Agarwal, M. Averett, B. Baumer, A. Bray, T. Bressoud, L. Bryant, et al. 2017. 
Curriculum guidelines for undergradua
te programs in data science. 
Annual Review of Statistics 
and Its Applications 
4: 15-30.
 Groves, R.M. 2011. Three eras of survey research. 
Public Opinion Quarterly
 75(5): 861-871. 
Gutlerner, J.L., and D. Van Vactor. 2013. Catalyzing curriculum evolution in graduate science education. 
Cell 153(4): 731-736. 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 
Handelsman, J., R. Ebert-May, P. Beichner, A. Bruns,
 R. Chang, J. DeHaan, S. Gentile, J. Lauffer, J. Stewart, S.M. Tilghman, and W.B. Wood. 2004. Scientific teaching. 
Science 304: 521-522. 
Handelsman, J., S. Miller, and C. Pfund. 2007. 
Scientific Teaching
. New York: W.H. Freeman. 
Hicks, S., and R. Irizarry. 2017. A guide to teaching data science. 
American Statistician http://dx.doi.org/10.10
80/00031305.2017.1356747.  
Hoey, J.J. 2008. Tools and assessme
nt methods specific to graduate education. Pp. 149-167 in 
Designing Better Engineering Education Through Assessment 
(J.E. Spurlin, S.A. Rajala, and J.P. Lavelle, 
eds.). Sterling, Va: Stylus. 
Hvistendahl, M. 2016. ﬁCan ‚predictive po
licing™ prevent crime before it happens?ﬂ
 Science, October 5. http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/09/can-predi
ctive-policing-prevent-crime-it-happens. 
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2009. Race, Ethnicity, and Language Data: Standardization for Health Care 
Quality Improvement. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.  
Jefferson, T. 1803. ﬁJefferson™s Instructions for Me
riwether Lewis.ﬂ In the Thomas Jefferson Papers, 
Library of Congress. https://www.loc.gov/exhibits/lewisandclark/transcript57.html.  
Johnstown Area Heritage Association. 2013. ﬁDi
scovery Center: Larger than Life, Part 1.ﬂ 
http://www.jaha.org/edu/discovery_
center/work/folk_hero.html. 
 Jordan, M. 2013. On statistics, computation and scalability. 
Bernoulli 19(4): 1378-1390. 
Kaminski, D., and C. Geisler. 2012. Survival analysis
 of faculty retention in science and engineering by 
gender. Science 335(6070): 864-866. 
Kitchin, R. 2014. The real-time city? Big data and smart urbanism. 
GeoJournal 79: 1-14. 
Kuh, G.D. 2008.
 High-Impact Educational Practices: What 
They Are, Who Has Access to Them, and Why They Matter. http://secure.aacu.org/imis/aacur.  
Lasagna, L.C. 1964. 
Hippocratic Oath, Modern Version. The Johns Hopkins Sheridan Libraries and 
University Museums. http://guides.library.jhu.edu/c.php?g=202502&p=1335759.  
Lazar, N.A., J. Reeves, and C. Franklin. 2012. A 
capstone course for undergraduate statistics majors. The American Statistician 65(3): 183-189.  
Legler, J. 2017. ﬁID 280: Comparative Public Health: the US and the World.ﬂ St. Olaf College. 
http://stolaf.studioabroad.com/_customtags/
ct_FileRetrieve.cfm?F
ile_ID=05027172754F73020D020306070B1C04080C00
14757800006E06030E7A057773730271030775047172. Accessed June 28, 2017.  
Library of Virginia. 2014. ﬁWatershed.ﬂ http
://www.lva.virginia.gov/exhibits/mapping/map_images 
/satellite.jpg.  Meisler, D. 2017. ﬁGoogle, U-M to build digital tools for Flint water crisis.ﬂ 
MDST Projects, January 25.  
Miller, S., and D. Hughes. 2017. 
The Quant Crunch: How the Demands
 for Data Science Skills is Disrupting the Job Market. 
https://www-01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi-bin/ssialias?htmlfid 
=IML14576USEN&. Accessed June 21, 2017. MSDSE (Moore-Sloan Data Science Environmen
ts). 2017. ﬁThemes.ﬂ http://msdse.org/themes/. 
Accessed August 21, 2017. 
National Alliance for Doctoral Studies in the Math
ematical Sciences. 2013. ﬁMath Alliance Goals.ﬂ https://mathalliance.org/goals/.  
NRC (National Research Council). 2012. 
A Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, 
Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. 
NRC. 2014. Training Students to Extract Value from Big Data
: Summary of a Workshop
. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. 
NSF (National Science Foundation). 2017. ﬁResear
ch Experience for Undergraduates (REU).ﬂ 
https://www.nsf.gov/crssprgm/reu/. Accessed June 21, 2017. 
NSPE (National Society of Professional E
ngineers). 2009. ﬁCalled to Order.ﬂ 
https://www.nspe.org/resources/pe-magazine/
called-order. Accesse
d August 21, 2017. O™Neil, C. 2016 
Weapons of Math Destruction: How Bi
g Data Increases Inequality and Threatens 
Democracy.
 New York: Crown Publishers.
 Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39 
Pratt, M.K. 2016. ﬁBig Data™s Big Role in Hu
manitarian Aid.ﬂ Computer World, February 8. 
http://www.computerworld.com/article/3027117/bi
g-data/big-datas-big-role-in-humanitarian-
aid.html.  
Purdue University. 2013. ﬁStatistics Living-L
earning Community.ﬂ http://llc.stat.purdue.edu/.  
SUNY (State University of New York System). 2012. ﬁGuide for Undergraduate Teaching 
Assistantships.ﬂ http://system.suny.edu/me
dia/suny/content-assets/documents/faculty-
senate/UndergraduateTAGuideFinalversion.pdf. 
University of California, Berkeley. 2017. ﬁU
C Berkeley CS 169 Software Engineering.ﬂ 
http://cs169.saas-class.org/faq. Accessed June 21, 2017. 
University of Chicago. 2017. ﬁLearning Opportunities,
 Center for Data Science and Public Policy.ﬂ 
http://dsapp.uchicago.edu/research-areas/learni
ng-opportunities/. Accessed June 22, 2017. 
VCU (Virginia Commonwealth University). 2017. ﬁU
ndergraduate Fellowships for Community Engaged 
and Translational Research.ﬂ http://www.research
.vcu.edu/ugresources/ce_cctr_fellowship.htm. 
Accessed June 28, 2017. 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univer
sity. 2007. ﬁCapstone Courses.ﬂ http://www.cs.vt.edu 
/undergraduate/capstones.  
Zacharakis, A.L., and D.A. Shepherd. 2001. The natu
re of information and overconfidence on venture 
capitalists™ decision making. Journal of Business Venturing
 16(4): 311-332.  
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43 
A Biographies of the Committee LAURA HAAS, Co-Chair, joined the University of
 Massachusetts, Amherst, in August 2017 as dean of 
the College of Information and Computer Sciences, 
after a long career at IBM, where she was accorded the title IBM fellow in recognition of her impact. At the time of her retirement from IBM, she was 
director of IBM Research™s Accelerated Discove
ry Lab (2011Œ2017), after serving as director of 
computer science at IBM™s Al
maden Research Center from 2005 to 2011. She had worldwide 
responsibility for IBM Research™s exploratory 
science program from 2009 through 2013. From 2001Œ
2005, she led the Information Integration Solutions
 architecture and development teams in IBM™s 
Software Group. Previously, Dr. Haas was a research st
aff member and manager at Almaden. She is best 
known for her work on the Starburst query processor,
 from which DB2 LUW was developed, on Garlic, a 
system which allowed integration of heterogeneous da
ta sources, and on Clio, the first semi-automatic 
tool for heterogeneous schema mapping. She has 
received several IBM awards for Outstanding 
Innovation and Technical Achievement, an IBM Corporate Award for information integration technology, 
the Anita Borg Institute Technical Leadership Award, and the Association for Computing Machinery 
(ACM) Special Interest Group on Management of Da
ta Edgar F. Codd Innovation Award. Dr. Haas was 
vice president of the Very Large Data Bases Endow
ment board of trustees from 2004Œ2009 and served on 
the board of the Computing Research Associati
on from 2007Œ2016 (vice chair 2009Œ2015). She currently 
serves on the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board of the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine (2013Œ2019). She is an 
ACM fellow, a member of the National Academy of 
Engineering (NAE), and a fellow of the Am
erican Academy of Arts and Sciences. 
ALFRED O. HERO III, 
Co-Chair, is the John H. Holland Disti
nguished University Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science a
nd R. Jamison and Betty Williams Professor of 
Engineering at the University of Michigan. He 
received the B.S. (summa cum laude) from Boston 
University (1980) and Ph.D. from Princeton University 
(1984), both in electrical engineering. His primary 
appointment is in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, and he also has 

appointments, by courtesy, in the Department of
 Biomedical Engineering and the Department of 
Statistics. In 2008 he was awarded the Digiteo Chaire
 d™Excellence, sponsored by Digiteo Research Park 
in Paris, located at the Ecole Superieure d™Electricite, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. He is an Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) fellow, and 
several of his research articles have received best 
paper awards. Dr. Hero was awarded the University of Michigan Distinguished Faculty Achievement 
Award (2011). He received the IEEE Signal Processi
ng Society Meritorious Service Award (1998) and 
the IEEE Third Millennium Medal (2000). He was president of the IEEE Signal Processing Society 

(2006Œ2008) and was on the board of directors of th
e IEEE (2009Œ2011) where he served as director of 
Division IX (Signals and Applications). Dr. Hero™s 
recent research interests have been in detection, 
classification, pattern analysis, and adaptive sampling fo
r spatiotemporal data. Of particular interest are 
applications to network security, multimodal sensing 
and tracking, biomedical imaging, and genomic 
signal processing. ANI ADHIKARI is a senior lecturer in statistics at the University of California, Berkeley, and she has 
received the Distinguished Teaching Award at Berkeley and the Dean™s Award for Distinguished 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 
Teaching at Stanford University. While her research in
terests are centered on applications of statistics in 
the natural sciences, her primary focus has always 
been on teaching and mentoring students. She teaches 
courses at all levels and has a particular affinity
 for teaching statistics to students who have little 
mathematical preparation. She received her undergraduat
e degree from the Indian Statistical Institute and 
her Ph.D. in statistics from the University of California, Berkeley. 
DAVID CULLER received his B.A. from the University of
 California, Berkeley in 1980, and an M.S. and 
Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT) in 1985 and 1989, respectively. He joined 
the electrical engineering and computer science (EECS) faculty in 1989, is the founding director of Intel 
Research, University of California, Berkeley, a
nd was associate chair (2010Œ2012) and chair (2012ŒJune 
2014) of the EECS Department. He won the Okawa Pri
ze in 2013. He is a member of the NAE, an ACM 
fellow, and an IEEE fellow. He has been named one of Scientific American™s Top 50 Researchers and the 
creator of one of MIT Technology Review
™s ﬁ10 Technologies that Will Change the World.ﬂ He was 
awarded the National Science Foundation (NSF) Presi
dential Young Investigator and the Presidential 

Faculty Fellowship. His research addresses networks 
of small, embedded wireless devices; planetary-
scale internet services; parallel computer archit
ecture; parallel program
ming languages; and high-
performance communication. It includes TinyOS, Berkeley
 Motes, PlanetLab, Networks of Workstations, 
Internet services, Active Messages, Split-C, and the Threaded Abstract Machine. 
DAVID DONOHO is an Anne T. and Robert M. Bass Professor of Humanities and Sciences and 
professor of statistics at Stanford University. Dr. 
Donoho is a mathematician 
who has made fundamental 
contributions to theoretical and computational statistics, as well as to signal processing and harmonic 

analysis. His algorithms have contributed significantly to the understanding of the maximum entropy 

principle, of the structure of robust procedures, a
nd of sparse data description. His theoretical research 
interests have focused on the mathematics of statistical
 inference and on theoretical questions arising in 
applying harmonic analysis to vari
ous applied problems. His applied research interests have ranged from 
data visualization to various problems in scientific signal processing, image processing, and inverse 

problems. He is a member of the National Academ
y of Sciences. Dr. Donoho received an A.B. from 
Princeton University and a Ph.D. from Harvard University. 
E. THOMAS EWING is an associate dean for graduate 
studies, research, and diversity in the College of 
Liberal Arts and Human Sciences and a professor in the Department of History. His education included a 
B.A. from Williams College and a Ph.D. in history 
from the University of Michigan. He teaches courses 
in Russian, European, Middle Eastern, and world history; gender/women™s history; and historical 

methods. His publications include, as author, 
Separate Schools: Gender, Policy, and Practice in the 
Postwar Soviet Union (2010) and The Teachers of Stalinism. Policy, Practice, and Power in Soviet 
Schools in the 1930s
 (2002); as editor, Revolution and Pedagogy: Transnational Perspectives on the 
Social Foundations of Education 
(2005); and as co-editor, with David Hicks, 
Education and the Great 
Depression: Lessons from a Global History
 (2006). His articles on Stalinist education have been 
published in 
Gender & History
, American Educational Research Journal
, Women™s History Review
, History of Education Quarterly
, Russian Review, and The Journal of Women™s History
. He has received 
funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Spencer Foundation, and the National 

Council for Eurasian and East European Research. 
LOUIS J. GROSS is a James R. Cox and Alvin and Sally Beaman Distinguished Professor of Ecology 
and Evolutionary Biology and Mathematics and direct
or of the Institute for Environmental Modeling at 
the University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK). He is
 also director of the National Institute for 
Mathematical and Biological Synthesis, an NSF-fund
ed center to foster research and education at the 
interface between math and biology. He completed a 
B.S. in mathematics at Drexel University and a 
Ph.D. in applied mathematics at Cornell University
, and has been a faculty member at UTK since 1979. 
His research focuses on applications of mathema
tics and computational methods in many areas of 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45 
ecology, including disease ecology, 
landscape ecology, spatial control for natural resource management, 
photosynthetic dynamics, and the deve
lopment of quantitative curricula for life science undergraduates. 
He led the effort at UT to develop an across-
trophic level modeling framework to assess the biotic 
impacts of alternative water planning for the Evergl
ades of Florida. He has co-directed several courses 
and workshops in mathematical ecology at the Interna
tional Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, 
Italy, and he has served as program chair of the Ecolog
ical Society of America, president of the Society 
for Mathematical Biology, president of the UTK Facu
lty Senate, and treasurer for the American Institute 
of Biological Sciences. He is the 2006 Distinguished
 Scientist awardee of the American Institute of 
Biological Sciences and is a fellow of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science and of 
the Society for Mathematical Biology. He has served as chair of the National Academies Committee on 
Education in Biocomplexity Research, as a member of th
e Board on Life Sciences, and as a liaison to the 
Standing Committee on Emerging Science for Environmental Health Decisions.  
 NICHOLAS HORTON
 is a professor of statistics at Amherst Coll
ege. As an applied biostatistician, Dr. 
Horton™s work is based squarely with
in the mathematical sciences but span
s other fields in order to ensure that biomedical research is conducted on a sound footi
ng. He has published more than 160 papers in the 
statistics and biomedical literature and 4 books on stat
istical computing and data science. He has taught a 
variety of courses in statistics and related fields
, including introductory statistics, data science, 
probability, theoretical statistics, regression, and desi
gn of experiments. He is
 passionate about improving 
quantitative and computational literacy for students w
ith a variety of backgrounds as well as engagement 
and mastery of higher-level concepts and capacities to
 think with data. Dr. Horton received the American 
Statistical Association (ASA) Waller Award for Distinguished Teaching, the Mathematical Association of 
America Hogg Award for Excellence in Teaching, th
e Mu Sigma Rho Statistics Education Award, and 
the ASA Founders Award. He was a co-principal investigator of the NSF-funded Project MOSAIC, 
serves as the chair of the Committee of Presidents of St
atistical Societies, is a fellow of the ASA, and was 
a research fellow at the Bureau of Labor Statisti
cs. Dr. Horton earned his A.B. from Harvard College and 
his Sc.D. in biostatistics from the Harvar
d T.H. Chan School of Public Health.
   JULIA LANE is a professor at the Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP), and at New York 
University™s (NYU™s) Wagner Graduate School of Pu
blic Service. She also serves as a provostial fellow for innovation analytics and senior fellow at NYU™s G
ovLab. As part of the CUSP team, Dr. Lane works 
with the research team to build the CUSP Data User
 Facility. Dr. Lane is an economist who is the co-
founder of the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynami
c (LEHD) partnership with the Census Bureau. LEHD data has been used to analyze commuting patterns for transportation planning, and the study of 
workforce turnover, pensions, and low-wage work. Dr
. Lane has authored over 65 refereed articles and 
edited or authored 7 books. She has been working 
with a number of national governments to document 
the results of their science investments. Her work ha
s been featured in several publications, including 
Science and Nature. Work Dr. Lane started at the NSF (as senior program director of the Science of 
Science and Innovation Policy Program) to quantify the resu
lts of federal stimulus spending is the basis of 
the new Institute for Research on Innovation and Science 
at the University of Michigan. The data will be 
used to describe the structure of the research workforce, the nature and evolution of research 
collaborations, and the diffusion of sponsored research results. Dr. Lane 
has had leadership positions in a number of policy and data science initiatives at her 
other previous appointments, which include senior 
managing economist at the American Institutes for Research; senior vice president and director, 

Economics Department at NORC/University of Chica
go; various consultancy roles at the World Bank; 
and assistant, associate, and full professor at Ameri
can University. Dr. Lane received her Ph.D. in 
economics and master™s in statistics from the University of Missouri. 

 ANDREW MCCALLUM is a professor and director of the Center for Data Science, as well as the 
Information Extraction and Synthesis Laboratory, in th
e College of Information and Computer Science at 
the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. He has 
published over 250 papers in many areas of artificial 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 
intelligence, including natural language processing, machine learning, and reinforcement learning; his 
work has received over 45,000 citations. He obtained 
his Ph.D. from the University of Rochester in 1995 
with Dana Ballard and a postdoctoral fellowship 
from Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) with Tom 
Mitchell and Sebastian Thrun. In the early 2000s he
 was vice president of research and development at 
WhizBang Labs, a 170-person start-up company that u
sed machine learning for information extraction 
from the Web. He is an Association for the Advancem
ent of Artificial Intelligence fellow, the recipient of the UMass Chancellor™s Award for 
Research and Creative Activity, the UMass NSM Distinguished 
Research Award, the UMass Lilly Teaching Fellows
hip, and research awards from Google, IBM, 
Microsoft, and Yahoo. He was the general chair for the International Conference on Machine Learning 
2012 and is the current president of the Internationa
l Machine Learning Society, as well as member of the 
editorial board of the Journal of Machine Learning Research
. For the past 10 years, Dr. McCallum has 
been active in research on statistical machine learning 
applied to text, especially information extraction, 
entity resolution, social network analysis, structured 
prediction, semi-supervised learning, and deep neural 
networks for knowledge representation.  
 RICHARD MCCULLOUGH has a B.S. in chemistry from the Un
iversity of Texas, Dallas, and earned his 
M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in chemistry at Johns Hopkin
s University. He did his postdoctoral fellowship at 
Columbia University. Since 2012, Dr. McCullough has 
been the vice provost for research, working with 
the president and provost to encourage, cultivate, a
nd coordinate high-impact aca
demic research
 across all of Harvard University™s schools and affiliated institu
tions. The Office of the Vice Provost for Research 
(VPR) has broad responsibility and oversight for th
e development, review, and implementation of 
strategies, planning, and policies related to the orga
nization and execution of academic research across the 
entire university. Dr. McCullough leads a new office of
 Foundation and Corporate Development. He also 
assists in oversight of many of the interdisciplin
ary institutes, centers, and initiatives across Harvard. 
Under Vice Provost McCullough™s leadership, the Office 
of the VPR is particularly focused on removing 
barriers to collaboration, whether in university po
licies or financial or administrative systems. 
Additionally, the vice provost for research works with
 the president and provost to foster and encourage 
entrepreneurship among undergraduates,
 graduate students, and faculty members. He also helps to lead 
the development of the new innovation campus. Dr. 
McCullough is also a professor of materials science 
and engineering at Harvard and is a member of numer
ous professional societies and boards. Prior to being 
named vice provost for research at Harvard, he was 
the vice president for research at CMU, where he previously served as the dean of the Mellon College 
of Science and professor and head of the Department 
of Chemistry. Dr. McCullough has founded two companies: Plextronics, Inc., and Liquid X Printed 

Metals. 
 REBECCA NUGENT is a teaching professor in the De
partment of Statistics at CMU and has been 
teaching at CMU since she completed her Ph.D. in 
statistics from University of Washington in 2006. 
Prior to that, she received her B.A with majors in ma
thematics, statistics, and Spanish at Rice University 
and her M.S. in statistics at Stanford University. 
She recently was awarded top teaching honors with the 
ASA Waller Education Award; The William H. and Fr
ances S. Ryan Award for Meritorious Teaching; 
and Statistician of the Year by the ASA Pittsburgh Chap
ter. Nugent™s research interests lie in clustering, 
record linkage, educational data 
mining/psychometrics, public health, tech/innovation/entrepreneurship, 
and semantic organization. 
 LEE RAINIE is the director of internet, science, a
nd technology research at Pew Research Center. Under 
his leadership, the center has issued more than 500 reports based on 
its surveys that examine people™s 
online activities and the Internet™s role in their liv
es. He also directs the 
center™s new initiative on the intersection of science and society. The American Soci
ological Association gave Dr. Rainie its award for 
ﬁexcellence in the reporting on social issuesﬂ in 2014 
and described his work as the ﬁmost authoritative 
source of reliable data on the use and impact of the inte
rnet and mobile connectivity.ﬂ He is a co-author of 
Networked: The New Social Operating System 
and five books about the future of the Internet that are 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47 
drawn from the center™s research. He gives several dozen
 speeches a year to government officials, media 
leaders, scholars and students, technology executives, 
librarians, and nonprofit groups about the changing 
media ecosystem. He is also regularly interviewed by
 major news organizations about technology trends. 
Prior to launching Pew Research Center™s technolog
y research, Dr. Rainie was managing editor of 
U.S. News & World Report
. He is a graduate of Harvard University and has a master™s in political science from 
Long Island University. 
 ROB RUTENBAR received his Ph.D. from the Univers
ity of Michigan in 1984 and then joined the 
faculty at CMU. He spent 25 years in electrical and 
computer engineering at CMU, ultimately holding the 
Stephen J. Jatras (E™47) Chair. He was the founding director of the Center for Circuit and System 
Solutions (called ﬁC2S2ﬂ), a large consortium of 
U.S. schools supported by the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency and the U.S. semiconductor 
industry, focused on design problems at the end of 
Moore™s Law scaling. In 2010, he moved to the Univer
sity of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, where he is 
Abel Bliss Professor and head of Computer Scien
ce. At Illinois, he pioneered the novel ﬁCS + Xﬂ 
program, which combines a core computer science 
curriculum with a disciplinary ﬁXﬂ curriculum, 
leading to a Bachelor™s degree in ﬁXﬂ; student pi
pelines for CS + anthropology, astronomy, chemistry, 
linguistics, are now under way, with several more CS
 + X degrees under design. Hi
s research has focused 
in three broad areas: tools for integrated circuit d
esign, statistics of nanoscale chip designs, and custom 
architectures for machine learning and perception. In
 1998, he founded Neolinear
, Inc., to commercialize 
the first practical synthesis tools for non-digital IC
s, and served as Neolinear™s chief scientist until its 
acquisition by Cadence in 2004. In 2006, he fo
unded Voci Technologies, Inc., to commercialize 
enterprise-scale voice analytics. He has won numer
ous awards, including the IEEE CASS Industrial 
Pioneer Award and the Semiconductor Research Co
rporation Aristotle Award. His work has been 
featured in venues ranging from 
Slashdot to the Economist magazine. 
 KRISTIN M. TOLLE is the director of the Data 
Science Initiative in Microsoft Research Outreach, 
Redmond, Washington. Since joining Microsoft in 
2000, Dr. Tolle has acquired numerous patents and 
worked for several product teams including the Na
tural Language Group, Visual Studio, and the 
Microsoft Office Excel Team. Since joining Microsoft Research™s outreach program in 2006, she has run 

several major initiatives from biomedical computing 
and environmental science to more traditional 
computer and information science programs around natural 
user interactions and data curation. She also directed the development of the Microsoft Translator Hub and the Environmental Science Services 
Toolkit. Dr. Tolle is an editor, along with Tony He
y and Stewart Tansley, of one of the earliest books on 
data science, 
The Fourth Paradigm: Data Intensive Scientific Discovery
. Her current focus is developing 
an outreach program to engage with academics on data
 science in general and more specifically around 
using data to create meaningful and useful user 
experiences across devices plat
forms. Prior to joining 
Microsoft, Dr. Tolle was an Oak Ridge Science a
nd Engineering Research Fellow for the National 
Library of Medicine and a research associate at th
e University of Arizona Artificial Intelligence Lab 
managing the group on medical information retrieva
l and natural language processing. She earned her 
Ph.D. in management of information systems with 
a minor in computational linguistics. Dr. Tolle™s 
present research interests include global public health 
as related to climate change, mobile computing to 
enable field scientists and inform the public, sensors 
used to gather ecological and environmental data, 
and integration and interoperability of large heterogeneous environm
ental data sources. She collaborates with several major research groups in Microsof
t Research including eScience, computational science 
laboratory, computational ecology 
and environmental science, and the sensing and energy research group. 
 TALITHIA WILLIAMS takes sophisticated numerical
 concepts and makes them understandable and 
relatable to everyone. As illustrated in her popular TedTalk ﬁOwn Your Body™s Data,ﬂ she demystifies 
the mathematical process in amusing and insightful wa
ys, using statistics as a way of seeing the world in 
a new light and transforming our future through th
e bold new possibilities inherent in the science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fiel
ds. As an associate professor of mathematics at 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 
Harvey Mudd College, she has made it her life™s work 
to get peopleŠstudents, 
parents, educators, and community membersŠmore excited about the possibiliti
es inherent in a STEM education. In her present capacity as a faculty member, she exemplifies the role of teacher and scholar through outstanding 
research, with a passion for integrating and motivating 
the educational process with real-world statistical 
applications. Her educational background includes 
a bachelor™s degree in mathematics from Spelman 
College, masters™ degrees in both mathematics fro
m Howard University and statistics from Rice 
University, and a Ph.D. in statistics from Rice Univ
ersity. Her professional experiences include research 
appointments at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the National Security Agency, and NASA. Dr. Williams 

develops statistical models which emphasize the spatia
l and temporal structure of data and has partnered 
with the World Health Organization in developing a ca
taract model used to predict the cataract surgical 
rate for countries in Africa. Through her research and 
work in the community at large, she is helping 
change the collective mindset regarding STEM in gene
ral and math in particularŠrebranding the field of 
mathematics as anything but dry, technical, or male-dominated but instead a logical, productive career 

path that is crucial to the future of the country.  

 ANDREW ZIEFFLER is a senior lecturer and research
er in the Quantitative Methods in Education 
program within the Department of Educational Psycho
logy at the University of Minnesota. He teaches 
undergraduate- and graduate-level c
ourses in statistics and trains and supervises graduate students in statistics education. Prior to receiving his Ph.D., Dr. 
Zieffler taught mathematics and A.P. Statistics at 
ROCORI High School in Cold Spring, Minnesota. 
His scholarship primarily focuses on statistics 
education. Dr. Zieffler has authored/co-authored several papers and book chapte
rs related to statistics education and has been a co-princ
ipal investigator on many NSF-fu
nded statistics education research projects. Additionally, he has co-authored two textbook
s that serve as an introduction to modern statistical 
and computational methods for students in the educati
onal and behavioral sciences. Dr. Zieffler currently 
serves as co-editor of the journal 
Technology Innovations in Statistics Education
 and as a member of the 
Research Advisory Board for the Consortium fo
r the Advancement of U
ndergraduate Statistics Education.  

 Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49 
B Meetings and Presentations FIRST COMMITTEE MEETING Washington, D.C. 
December 12Œ13, 2016 
Lessons from Current Data Science Programs and Future Directions  
Rebecca Nugent, Carnegie Mellon University  
Rob Rutenbar, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
David Culler, University of California, Berkeley  
William Yslas Velez, University of Arizona  

Duncan Temple Lang, University of California, Davis  
Envisioning the Field of Data Science and Futu
re Directions and Implications to Society 
David Donoho, Stanford University 

Lee Rainie, Pew Research Center 
Expanding Diversity in Data Sc
ienceŠAmong Student Populations a
nd in Topic Areas Embraced by 
Data Science 
Bhramar Mukherjee, University of Michigan  
Deb Agarwal, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
Andrew Zieffler, University of Minnesota 
Questions that Should Be Asked to Envision th
e Future of Data Science for Undergraduates 
Tom Ewing, Virginia Tech 
Louis Gross, University of Tennessee, Knoxville  
Chris Mentzel, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation  

Patrick Perry, New York University  

John Abowd, U.S. Census Bureau  
SECOND COMMITTEE MEETING 
Webinar April 25, 2017 
Overview of the Study 
Michelle Schwalbe, National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
Alfred Hero, University of Michigan 
Laura Haas, IBM Almaden Research Center 
Louis Gross, University of Tennessee, Knoxville
 Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 
Facilitated Discussion 
Andy Burnett, Knowinnovation 
  WORKSHOP 
Washington, D.C. 
May 2-3, 2017 
 Opening Comments 
Study Co-Chairs: Laura Haas, IBM, and Alfred Hero, III, University of Michigan 
 Comments from the National Science Foundation 
Chaitan Baru, National Science Foundation  
 
Overview of the Workshop Andy Burnett, Knowinnovation 
  Workshop Themes 
 Skills and Knowledge for Fu
ture Data Scientists  
Rob Rutenbar, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
 Broadening Participation in 
Data Science Education  
Julia Lane, New York University 
 Future Delivery of Data Science Education 
Nick Horton, Amherst College 
  Table Discussions About Key Questions 

 Question Exploration Groups 
Small breakout groups to discuss all three questions 
 Feedback from Question Groups 
Present ideas and discuss questions with full group 
 Integrate Ideas into Three Thematic Areas 
Form three groups aligned with the thema
tic questions or possible new questions  
Feedback from Question Groups 
Share the integrated ideas with the full group 
 Plenary Discussion of Feedback 
Study Co-Chairs: Laura Haas, IBM, and Alfred Hero, III, University of Michigan 
 
New Questions and Ideas which Emerged Overnight 
Full group discussion led by Andy Burnett, Knowinnovation 
 Identify the Most Promising Ideas and Possible 
Findings for the Committee™s Interim Report 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51 
Small table groups 
 Backcast the Most Promising Ideas 
Small table groups discuss what steps would have to
 be taken in order to implement the most 
promising ideas 
  Participants  
 Ani AdhikariŠUniversity of California, Berkeley 
Stephanie AugustŠNational Science Foundation 

Chaitan BaruŠNational Science Foundation 
Quincy BrownŠAmerican Association for the Advancement of Science   

Andy BurnettŠKnowinnovation 
Eva CampoŠNational Science Foundation 
Linda CasolaŠNational Academies of Sc
iences, Engineering, and Medicine 
Alok ChoudharyŠNorthwestern University 

Catherine CramerŠNew York Hall of Science 

David CullerŠUniversity of California, Berkeley 
Renee DopplickŠAssociation 
for Computing Machinery 
Jon EisenbergŠNational Academies of Sc
iences, Engineering, and Medicine 
E. Thomas EwingŠVirginia Tech 

William FinzerŠConcord Consortium 

Greg GoinsŠNorth Carolina A&T State University 

Louis GrossŠUniversity of Tennessee, Knoxville 
Laura HaasŠIBM Alfred HeroŠUniversity of Michigan 

Nicholas HortonŠAmherst College 

Charles IsbellŠGeorgia Tech 

Ryan JonesŠMiddle Tennessee State University 
Nandini KannanŠNational Science Foundation 
Danny KaplanŠMacalester College 

Brian KotzŠMontgomery College 

Jay LabovŠNational Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 

Julia LaneŠNew York University 
Sharon Lane-GetazŠSt. Olaf College 
Jeff LeekŠJohns Hopkins University 
Andrew McCallumŠUniversity 
of Massachusetts Amherst 
Richard McCulloughŠHarvard University 

Mary Kehoe MoynihanŠCape Cod Community College 

Bhramar MukherjeeŠUniversity of Michigan 
Claudia NeuhauserŠUniversity of Minnesota 
Deborah NolanŠUniversity of California, Berkeley 

Rebecca NugentŠCarnegie Mellon University 
Dennis PearlŠPennsylvania State University 

Gabriel Perez-GizŠNational Science Foundation 

Lee RainieŠPew Research Center 
Patrick RileyŠGoogle Andee RubinŠTERC 

Rob RutenbarŠUniversity of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 

Michelle SchwalbeŠNational Academies of
 Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective: Interim ReportCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 
Amy StephensŠNational Academies of Sc
iences, Engineering, and Medicine 
Victoria StoddenŠUniversity of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 

Kristin TolleŠMicrosoft Ron WassersteinŠAmerican Statistical Association 
Ben WenderŠNational Academies of Scie
nces, Engineering, and Medicine 
Elena ZhelevaŠNational Science Foundation 

Andrew ZiefflerŠUniversity of Minnesota 

 