DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/24937Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation forAllocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study ofMolecular Dynamics: Eighth Round23 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-46749-0 | DOI 10.17226/24937Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for theStudy of Molecular Dynamics, Eighth Round; Board on Life Sciences; Board onChemical Sciences and Technology; Division on Earth and Life Studies; NationalAcademies of Sciences, Engineering, and MedicineReport of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EvaTimComm
i Reporluatiome forittee on Prort of thon for r the Soposal EvaStudy of Board onDivA  he CoAllocaStudy oEightaluation forMolecularBoard onn Chemica
lvision on EConsensu mmittation oof Moth Rou  r Allocatior Dynamic
s n Life Sciel Sciences 
arth and 
L  s Study R  tee onof Supoleculaund on of Supers, Eighth Rences 
and TechnLife StudiesReport of  n Proppercomar DynrcomputinRound nology s  osal mputinnamicsng Time forng s, r the Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 October 23, 2017  
Jodi Swidzinski Hezky, Ph.D. 
D. E. Shaw Research 

120 West 45th Street, 39th Floor 

New York, NY 10036 
 
Dear Dr. Hezky: 
 This letter describes the work and transmits the final report of the Committee on Proposal 
Evaluation for Allocation of S
upercomputing Time for the Study 
of Molecular Dynamics, Eighth 
Round. The committee evaluated submissions receiv
ed in response to a Request for Proposals (RFP) for Biomolecular Simulation Time on Ant
on 2, a supercomputer designed and built by D. 
E. Shaw Research (DESRES). Over the past 7 
years, DESRES has made an Anton or Anton 2 
system housed at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing 
Center (PSC) available to the non-commercial research community, based on the advice of prev
ious National Research Council committees. As 
in prior rounds, the goal of the eighth RFP for simulation time on Anton 2 is to continue to 
facilitate breakthrough research in the study of biomolecular systems by providing a massively 
parallel system specially designed for molecu
lar dynamics simulations. The program seeks to 
continue to support research that addresses important and high im
pact questions demonstrating a clear need for Anton™s special capabilities.  
The success of the program has led DESRES to make the Anton 2 machine housed at 
PSC available for approximately 15,800,000 molecular dynamic units (MDUs) over the period 

following November 2017, and DESRES asked 
the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine to once again facilitate the allocation of time to the non-commercial 
community. The work of the committee to evalua
te proposals for time allocations was supported 
by a contract between D. E. Shaw Research and the National Academy of Sciences and was performed under the auspices of the Nati
onal Academies™ Board on Life Sciences. 
To undertake this task, the National Academies convened a committee of experts to 
evaluate the proposals submitted in response to
 the RFP. The committee of 18 was chaired by 
Dr. William Goddard, Ferkel Professor of Chemistr
y, Materials Science, and Applied Physics at the California Institute of Technology. The committee members were selected for their expertise 

in molecular dynamics simulations and experien
ce in the subject areas represented in the 79 
proposals that were considered. The members comprised a cro
ss section of the biomolecular dynamics field in academia, industry, and govern
ment including both senior and junior 

investigators. During the application process, applicants had the opportun
ity to suggest experts they felt would be suitable committee members as 
well as provide names of
 experts they would not like to review their proposal. The Anton 2 RFP described the three criteria against which the committee was asked to 
evaluate proposals: 
  Scientific Merit, including the potential 
to advance understanding on an important problem or question in the field; potentia
l for breakthrough science resulting in new Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3discoveries and understanding; the impact th
at successful completion of the proposed 
research would have on knowledge, methods, a
nd current barriers in the field; and a scientifically and technologically feasible project with clear, well-developed, and 
appropriate goals, objectives, and approach to the proposed studies.   Justification for Requested Time Allocation, 
including a clear and well-justified need for time on Anton 2 rather than 
conventional supercomputers and a clear and convincing 
justification that the length and number 
of proposed simulation runs and node-hours 

requested are necessary and sufficient 
to achieve the scie
ntific objectives. 
  Investigator Qualifications and Past Accomplishments, including the appropriate 
experience and training to successfully cond
uct the proposed studies, evidence of 
knowledge and prior experience in molecula
r simulations, and past publications and 
demonstrated progress from pr
evious Anton allocations.  Proposals from investigators who 
had previously received an allocation of time on Anton 
or Anton 2 were required to include progress reports, which the committee drew on as 
supplemental material in its consideration of pr
oposals. As explained in the RFP, staff at PSC conducted an initial assessment of all proposal s
ubmissions for completeness and to determine 

whether they were technically feasible for simulation on Anton 2. Proposals that passed this 

screening were submitted to the committee for revi
ew. A member of the PSC staff was present as 
an observer throughout the review committee™s discussions to a
ddress any additional questions 
that arose on Anton™s technical capabilities or 
on how the computer will be made available to 
researchers during the period of the project.  The committee was asked to identify proposals th
at best met the select
ion criteria defined above. Anton 2 time allocations of 460,000 MDUs was the maximum amount of time available 

to a proposal. Principal investigators could also
 request a lesser time allocation. The committee 
was further asked to allocate at
 least 25% of the time to prin
cipal investigat
ors who had not previously received an Anton allocation. The judgments of the committee are based on which 
proposals best met the selection criteria desc
ribed above and on the estimates of required 
simulation time provided by the applicants. The 
committee was permitted to consider a modified 
time allocation if it concluded that the proposed re
search required a greater or lesser number of 
node-hours than initially requested by an applicant.  Initial reviews of the pr
oposals were provided by the 18 committee members. Each 
proposal was assigned a minimum of two primary 
reviewers who were asked to evaluate the proposal based on the RFP and guidelines described above. Review assignments were made so 
that proposals were not evaluated by reviewers 
from the applicant™s same institution or who had 
close collaborative relationships with an applicant. Care was taken to ensure that no proposal was assigned a reviewer that the applicant had identified as bei
ng an inappropriate reviewer.   The committee held its meeting in Washi
ngton, DC, on August 11, 2017. At the meeting, 
the two primary reviewers were asked to summari
ze their reviews for the committee, which was 
followed by discussion of the proposed resear
ch. As described in detail above, committee 
members considered the scientific merit, justification of the requested time, and the 

qualifications of the principal i
nvestigator and key personnel. Th
e committee considered the slate 
of proposals under consideration, came to a cons
ensus on which proposals it judged best met the 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4selection criteria, and, in some cases, decided to
 suggest a modified allocation of time on Anton 
2. Detailed comments for each of the 79 proposals are included in Appendix B. 
 The committee concluded that the proposals lis
ted below best met th
e selection criteria set forth in the RFP for Biomolecular Simulatio
n Time on Anton 2. Of these 60 proposals, 38 
proposals were selected for a modified a
llocation (identified below with an *).   
In numerical order by proposal submission number, the proposals judged by the committee as 

best meeting the selection criteria of the RFP are:
  
PSCA17004P Yinghao Wu, Albert Einstein College of Medicine; Computational Study of Binding Between Membrane Receptors and Multivalent Ligands in T-Cell Activation
 [New user identified for 100,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17006P Jerome Lacroix, Western University of Health Sciences; 
Chemical Activation of the Mechanosensitive Piezo1 Channel with Yoda1
 [New user identified for 230,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17007P Harol Weinstein, Weill Cornell 
Medical College, Cornell University;
 Molecular mechanisms of lipid scrambling by TMEM16 proteins
 [Returning user identified for 297,000 MDUs]* 

 
PSCA17008P Wonpil Im, 
Lehigh University; Effects of N-Glycan Composition on Binding of Igg1 to CD16A [Returning user identified for 307,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17009P Jeffery Klauda, University of Maryland; Antagonist and Glycosylation Effects 
on the Biological Function of the Serotonin Receptor [Returning user identified for 395,025 MDUs]* 
 PSCA17010P Michael Levine, Weill Corn
ell Medicine, Cornell University; Investigation of the Allosteric Modulation Intracellular Gating by the Primary Substrate Site and the Secondary Allosteric Site in th
e Human Serotonin Transporter hSERT [New user identified 
for 220,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17012P Sharon Loverde, CUNY College of Staten Island; 
Molecular Dynamics Simulations of the Interaction of Drug Amphiphiles with a Model Phospholipid Membrane
 [Returning user identified for 196,085 MDUs] 
 
PSCA17014P Marta Filizola, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai; Mechanistic Insights into the Binding and Action of Allo
steric Modulators of Opioid Receptors
 [Returning user identified for 460,000 MDUs] 
 
PSCA17015P Wonmuk Hwang, Te
xas A&M University; Atomistic Mechanism for the 
Stepping Motion of a Kinesin Dimer [Returning user identified for 460,000 MDUs]  
PSCA17016P Yuri Lyubchenko, University of Nebraska Medical Center; MD Simulations of Interactions and Misfolding of Amyloid Beta (A
) Proteins
 [Returning user identified for 230,000 MDUs]* Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 PSCA17017P Chun Wu, Rowan University; 
Probe Activation Mechanism of Membrane 
GPCR Receptors Using All-Atom Molecular 
Dynamics Simulation with Explicit 
Membrane [New user identified for 100,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17019P Themis Lazaridis, City College of New York; 
Structures and Pathways of 
Peptide-Stabilized Membrane Pores
 [Returning user identified for 140,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17021P Hans Larsson, University of Miami; 
Identifying Specific In
teractions Between 
Ion Channels, Lipids, and Lipid-Like Drug
 Candidates in Complex Cardiac Membranes
 [New user identified for 410,000 MDUs] 
 
PSCA17023P Benoit Roux, University of Chicago; Elucidating the Allosteric Coupling 
Mechanism Between the Cytoplasmic and the 
Transmembrane Domains of the Calcium SERCA Pump ATPase
 [Returning user identified for 460,000 MDUs]  
PSCA17025P Baron Chanda, University of Wisconsin; 
Non-Canonical Voltage-Sensor Pore 
Coupling in the Hyperpolarized Cyclic Nucleotide Gated Channel
 [New user identified for 
150,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17027P Richard Pastor, National Institutes of Health; Structure of Apolipoprotein A-I in 
Nascent and Mature High-Density Lipoproteins 
[Returning user identified for 230,000 MDUs]* 

 
PSCA17028P Peter Searson, Johns Hopkins University; Quantifying the Binding Affinity of 
the P-Glycoprotein Multidrug Efflux Pump Using Unbiased Long-Timescale Molecular 
Dynamics Simulations [New user identified for 230,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17029P Wenjun Zheng, Univer
sity at Buffalo, SUNY; Molecular Dynamics Simulation 
of the Heat Activated Gating of TRPV1 Channel
 [New user identified for 230,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17031P Devarajan Thirumalai, The University of Texas at Austin; 
The Recognition of DNA Promoter in Bacterial RNA Polymerase
 [Returning user identified for 100,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17032P Michael Feig, Michigan State University; Microsecond Diffusion of Proteins and RNA Near Chromosomal DNA [Returning user identified for 460,000 MDUs]  
PSCA17034P Zaida Luthey-Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; 
Transmembrane Signaling Mechanisms
 in a Bacterial Chemoreceptor
 [Returning user identified for 460,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17035P Jeff Wereszczynski, Illinois Institute of Technology; 
Understanding the Role of LPS Modification on Antimicrobial Peptide Interactions
 [Returning user identified for 230,000 MDUs]* 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6PSCA17036P David Cowburn, Albert Einstein College of Medicine; 
FG Repeat Domain Interactions of the Nuclear Pore by Simulation and Experiment
 [Returning user identified for 460,000 MDUs]  
PSCA17038P Jean-Pierre Leburton, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; 
Computational Study of Genetic and Epigenet
ic Sensing Using Multi-Layered 2D Solid-State Nanopores [New user identified for 242,640 MDUs]  
PSCA17041P Andrew Harris, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School; 
Permeation of Biological Molecules Through a Connexin Channel [New user identified for 100,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17042P Martin Gruebele, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign; 
Protein Folding in a Simulated Cytoplasm [Returning user identified for 460,000 MDUs]  
PSCA17043P Rommie Amaro, University
 of California, San Diego; Investigating Chemokine 
Receptor Dynamics and Druggability by Ensemble Based Approaches
 [Returning user identified for 260,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17044P Huan-Xiang Zhou, Florida State University; Study of Maltose-MBP Binding Kinetics Based on Markov State Modeling
 [New user identified for 230,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17045P Vladimir Yarov-Yarovoy, Un
iversity of California Davis; 
State-Dependent Drug Modulation of Sodium Channels [Returning user identified for 230,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17046P Gregory Voth, The University of Chicago; Functional Importance of 

Membrane Nanodomains in HIV Replication
 [Returning user identified for 150,968 MDUs]*  
PSCA17048P Eduardo Perozo, The University of Chicago; Mechanism of Conformational Transitions in the Voltage-Sensing Domain of Ci-VSP [Returning user identified for 460,000 
MDUs] 
 
PSCA17049P Alemayehu Gorfe, The University of 
Texas Health Science Center at Houston; Membrane Orientation Dynamics 
of Lipidated Small GTPases and Self-Assembly of K-Ras 
[Returning user identified for 267,912 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17050P Ron Dror, Stanford University; Determining How GPCRs Selectively Stimulate 
Intracellular Signaling Proteins [Returning user identified for 284,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17051P David P. Hoogerheide, National 
Institute of Standards and Technology; 
Molecular Mechanisms of the Voltage-Depende
nt Anion Channel Regulation by Tubulin Isotypes [Returning user identified for 360,000 MDUs]  
PSCA17052P Wenwei Zheng, Arizona State University; 
Investigating the Molecular 
Interactions Controlling the Liquid Droplet Formation by Intrinsically Disordered 
Proteins [New user identified for 50,549 MDUs]*  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7PSCA17053P Douglas Tobias, University of California, Irvine; Atomistic Modeling of Water Permeation in Aquaporin 0-Calmodulin Complexes
 [Returning user identified for 235,000 MDUs]  
PSCA17054P Edward Lyman, University of Delaware; 
Rationalizing Cholesterol-Dependent 
Function of the A2A Adenosine Receptor [Returning user identified for 441,301 MDUs] 
 
PSCA17056P J. Alredo Freites, University of California, Irvine; Molecular Modeling Studies 
of Eye Lens Proteins at Physiological Concentrations [Returning user identified for 230,000 
MDUs]* 

 
PSCA17057P Kendall N. Houk, University of California, Los Angeles; Understanding the Molecular Basis of Hapalindole and Fischeri
ndole Biogenesis Catalyzed by Stig Cyclases
 [Returning user identified for 210,000 MDUs] 
 
PSCA17058P Dimitrios Morikis, Univer
sity of California, Riverside; Large-Scale, Functional 
Conformational Transitions in Complement C3
 [Returning user identified for 460,000 MDUs] 
 
PSCA17059P Alexander Sobolevsky, Columbia University; 
Modeling of the Mechanisms of Ion Selectivity and the Protein Structure Dynamics of the Transient Receptor Potential 
Channels [New user identified for 100,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17061P Michael Grabe, University of California, San Francisco; 
Unraveling the 
Mechanism of Activation in K2P Channels [Returning user identified for 460,000 MDUs]  PSCA17062P Lucy Forrest, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health; Exploring the Conformational Space of Osmotic Stress-Sensing 
Domains in a Membrane Transport Protein
 [New user identified for 460,000 MDUs]  
PSCA17063P Eric May, University of Connecticut; Membrane Disruption by Non-Enveloped 
Viral Peptides: Understanding Aspects of Peptide Aggregation and Peptide-RNA Interactions
 [Returning user identified for 131,500 MDUs]*  
PSCA17064P Nikolai Smolin, L
oyola University Chicago; Regulatory Interactions Between 
SERCA and PLB Investigated by 
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
 [New user identified for 
150,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17067P Matthias Buck, Case Western Reserve University; Simulations of Plexin and 
Eph Transmembrane Receptors [Returning user identified for 100,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17069P Peter Freddolino, University of Michigan Medical School; 
Accurate Modeling of Transcription Factor-DNA Interactions Enabled by Extreme Molecular Dynamics Simulations [New user identified for 246,588 MDUs]  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8PSCA17072P Thomas Miller, Califo
rnia Institute of Technology; Understanding the 
Mechanism and Biological Origins of Force Indu
ced Restarting of Protein Synthesis in 
SecM-Stalled Ribosomes [Returning user identified for 450,000 MDUs]  PSCA17073P Shikha Nangia, Syracuse University; Role of S-Palmitoylation on the Blood-
Brain Barrier Tight Junction Interface [New user identified for 100,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17074P Diwakar Shukla, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; 
Mechanism of 
Sugar Transport in Rice via SWEET Family Transporters
 [Returning user identified for 150,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17075P Mahmoud Moradi, Un
iversity of Arkansas; Lipid-Dependent Alternating Access Mechanism in ABC Exporters [Returning user identified for 100,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17076P Janice Robertson, The University of Iowa; Identifying the Physical Driving Forces for CLC Dimerizati
on in Lipid Bilayers [New user identified for 120,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17077P Graham Fleming, Universi
ty of California, Berkeley; Microsecond Molecular 
Dynamics Simulations of the Transmembrane Proton Gradient Sensor Protein PsbS Required for Rapid Induction of Non-Photoc
hemical Quenching of Chlorophyll in Light Harvesting Plants [New user identified for 100,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17078P Susan Taylor, University of California San Diego; Investigating the Kinase Molecular Assemblies to Und
erstand Allostery and Target
 Kinase Protein-Protein 
Interactions as Cancer Therapy
 [Returning user identified for 368,000 MDUs]*  PSCA17079P David Agard, University of California, San Francisco; Conformational Dynamics of the Molecular Chaperone Heat Shock Protein 90 (HSP90)
 [Returning user identified for 230,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17080P Bernard Brooks, National Institutes of Health; The HCN1 Channel: Structural and Functional Modulation Due to Ligand Binding [New user identified for 230,000 MDUs]*  
PSCA17081P Sandrasegaram Gnanakaran, 
Los Alamos National Laboratory; 
Investigating the Dynamics of Membrane-Anchored RAS/RAF-RBD/RAF-CRD Ternary Complexes [New user identified for 100,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17084P HarishVashisth, University of New Hampshire; 
Toward a Full-Length Structure 
of the Insulin Receptor in Apo and Hormone-Bound Forms
 [Returning user identified for 230,000 MDUs]* 
 
PSCA17085P Igor Vorobyov, University of California, Davis; Molecular Determinants of State Dependent hERG Channel- Drug and Hormone Interactions
 [Returning user identified for 460,000 MDUs] 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9PSCA17087P Aleksei Aksimentiev, University
 of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign; 
Molecular 
Mechanism of Nucleosomal Stability Controlled by the DNA Sequence [Returning user identified for 300,000 MDUs]*  The time allocations for the 60 proposals identified by the committee as best meeting the 
selection criteria for time allocations 
total approximately 15,813,569 
MDUs. Approximately 
25% MDUs were allocated to proposals whose prin
cipal investigator have not received time on 
Anton during the past 5 years (identified as ﬁnew usersﬂ). Approximately 75% of the MDUs are 
allocated to proposals from investigators who 
have received allocations of time on Anton in 
previous rounds (identified as ﬁreturning usersﬂ).  In carrying out its task, the committee identif
ied as many promising proposals as possible 
given the constraints on the total available simu
lation time. The total simulation time requested 
by the submitted proposals was more than 31 milli
on MDUs. As a result, a number of interesting 

proposals were not able to be recommended 
in this round, entailing difficult decisions.  The committee would like to thank D. E. Shaw Research, the Pittsburgh Supercomputing 
Center, and all of the 2017 Anton 2 applicants for the opportunity to assist in identifying the proposals best meeting the selection criteria 
for time allocations on the Anton machine. The 
committee members were universally enthusiastic 
about the potential advances in the field that are facilitated by Anton 2 and are looking forward to seeing the important new results from the 
Anton users. 
 
Sincerely, 
William A. Goddard III 
Chair  cc:  Dr. Phillip Blood, Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center 
Dr. Gregory Symmes, National Academies of
 Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
 Dr. Frances Sharples, National Academies 
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine  
  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10APPENDICES 
  A. Table 1: Proposals Reviewed by the Committee*
 B. Individual Proposal Summary Evaluations*
 C. Proposal Evaluation Criteria D. Roster and Biographical Sket
ches of Committee Members
 E. Board on Life Sciences, Board on Chemical
 Sciences and Technology, and the National 
Academies 
 F. Acknowledgment of Report Reviewer
 G. Disclosure of Conflicts of Interest
  *These appendices are not available to the public.  
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
    Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11APPENDIX C 
 PROPOSAL EVALUATION CRITERIA  The committee used the points below to help guide
 its review of the proposals. The reviewers 
were asked to comment on the strengths and weaknesses of the proposals by considering the following:
   Level of scientific merit. 
This should be evaluated by considering: 
1. Potential to advance understanding of an important 
problem or question in the field; potential for 
breakthrough science resulting in 
new discoveries and understanding 
2. Impact that successful completion of the proposed research would have on the knowledge, 
methods, and current barriers in the field  
3. Project is scientifically and technologically feasible with clear, well-developed, and appropriate 
goals, objectives, and approach to the proposed studies 
  Justification for requested time allocation
. This should be evaluated by considering:
 1. Clear and well-justified need for time on Ant
on rather than convent
ional supercomputers 
2. Clear and convincing justification that the le
ngth and number of proposed simulation runs and 
node-hours requested are necessary and suffi
cient to achieve the scientific objectives 
  Investigator qualifications and past accomplishments. 
This should be evaluated by considering: 
1. Appropriate experience and training to 
successfully conduct the proposed studies 
2. Evidence of knowledge and prior experience with molecular simulations 
3. Past publications and demonstrated pr
ogress from previous Anton allocations 
   Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12APPENDIX D 
ROSTER AND BIOGRAPHICAL SK
ETCHES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
COMMITTEE ON PROPOSAL EVALUATIONS FOR ALLOCATION OF SUPERCOMPUTING 
TIME FOR THE STUDY OF MOLECULAR DYNAMICS, EIGHTH ROUND 
 Chair  WILLIAM A. GODDARD III,
 California Institute of Technology 
 Members 
 NILESH BANAVALI, 
Wadsworth Center of the New York State Department of Health 
JAMES BRIGGS, 
University of Houston
  MARIA BYKHOVSKAIA,
 Wayne State University 
VINCENZO CARNEVALE,
 Temple Materials Institute 
JIANHAN CHEN, 
University of Massachusetts 
MANOLIS DOXASTAKIS,
 University of Tennessee 
GIACOMO FIORIN,
 Temple Materials Institute 
JAMES C. GUMBART,
 Georgia Institute of Technology MARGARET JOHNSON,
 Johns Hopkins University 
IVAYLO IVANOV,
 Georgia State University 
ANDRZEJ KLOCZKOWSKI,
 Research Institute at Nationwide Children™s Hospital  
JIANING LI, 
University of Vermont 
DIANE LYNCH,
 University of North Carolina
 CHRISTOPHER ROWLEY,
 Memorial University 
MARKUS SEELIGER,
 Stony Brook University Medical School 
LEI SHI, National Institutes of Health 
CHUNG WONG,
 University of Missouri-St. Louis  
  Project Staff  ANDREA HODGSON,
 Project Director, Board on Life Sciences 
ELIZABETH BOYLE,
 Program Officer, Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology 
ANGELA KOLESNIKOVA,
 Senior Program Assistant, Board on Life Sciences 
KEEGAN SAWYER,
 Senior Program Officer
  KATIE BOWMAN,
 Senior Program Officer 
  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
CHAIR 
 William A. Goddard III, PhD, NAS, is the Charles and Mary Ferkel Professor of Chemistry and 
Applied Physics, and Director, Materials and Process 
Simulation Center at the California Institute of 
Technology. He obtained his B.S. from the University
 of California, Los Angeles, in 1960 and his Ph.D. 
from the California Institute of Technology, 19
65. The long-term objective of Professor Goddard™s 
research has been to describe the properties of chem
ical, biological, and materials systems directly from 
first principles (without the necessity of empirical data). To accomplish this the group has been 
developing new theory, new methods, and new softwa
re. The group™s approach builds from Quantum 
Mechanics (QM) through a hierarchy of more approxi
mate methods suitable for longer length and times 
scales as indicated in the figure including Mol
ecular Dynamics (MD), mesoscale dynamics, and 

macroscopic dynamics. His focus in biochemical system
s is on structure, ligand binding, and activation of 
GPCR membrane bound proteins. 
 MEMBERS 
Nilesh Banavali, PhD,
 is a Research Scientist at the Wadsworth Center of the New York State 
Department of Health and an Assistant Professor in th
e School of Public Health at the University at 
Albany, SUNY. The primary goal of his research is to 
use computational calculations and refined analysis 
techniques to optimally extract free energy landscap
es describing biologically relevant macromolecular 
conformational change. Dr. Banavali 
also develops techniques to facilitate validation of computational 
predictions with structural and biochemical data. He received his PhD from the University of Maryland in 

2001 for studies on nucleic acid force fields and base f
lipping with Alexander MacKerell, Jr. He pursued 
postdoctoral training at Weill Medical College of Corne
ll University and the University of Chicago with 
Benoît Roux on implicit and implicit/explicit solven
t models and free energy characterization of 
conformational change and allostery in macromolecules. 

 
James Briggs, PhD, 
is a Professor within the Biology and Biochemistry Department at the University of 
Houston and is also Associate Dean for Faculty Affa
irs. Dr. Briggs received his PhD in Chemistry from 
Purdue University. His research focuses on computa
tional studies of protein structure and function, inhibitor design, investigations of possible inhibitor resistance pathways, and development of methods for 

the above project areas. Targets for these studies in
clude those important in the treatment of AIDS, 
cancer, bacterial infections, and other disease states. 

 Maria Bykhovskaia, PhD, 
is a Professor at the Department of Neurology at Wayne State University 
(WSU). Dr. Bykhovskaia obtained her PhD in Biophysics from the Russian Academy of Science, and 
postdoctoral training in Neuroscience from the University of Virginia. She held a faculty appointment at 

Lehigh University in Pennsylvania, and then was 
a Chair of the Neuroscience Department in the 
Universidad Central del Caribe in Puerto Rico. She joined the WSU faculty in 2015. Her lab combines 
electrophysiology, live confocal imaging, electron microscopy, and computational modeling to 

investigate how presynaptic molecular machinery affects synaptic transmission and plasticity. Dr. 

Bykhovskaia maintains an active research program f
unded by the National Institutes of Health and the 
National Science Foundation. She has numerous publicati
ons in the area of presynaptic mechanisms and 
modeling of the transmitter release machinery.  
 Vincenzo Carnevale, PhD,
 is a Research Associate Professor at Temp
le University with a research focus 
on Statistical Physics & Computational Biology. He received his PhD in the field of Functional and 
Structural Genomics in the Statistical and Biological Physics Sector at the International School for 

Advanced Studies, Trieste, Italy. He received his 
bachelor™s and master™s degrees in Physics at the 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14University of Pisa, Italy. He developed interest 
in quantitate biology from 
a background in condensed 
matter physics with the goal of identifying the protein 
sequence features responsible for distinct biological 
function in different protein families. 
 Jianhan Chen, PhD, is a Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Department Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology at University of Massachusetts 
Amherst. The general focus of his research is on 
theoretical and computational studies of biomolecular structure, dynamics, and function. He and his team 

are particularly interested in modeling weakly stab
le peptides and proteins and understanding their roles 
in important biological processes, including regu
lation of transcription and translation, signal 
transduction, and disease-related protein misfolding. 
Furthermore, Dr. Chen™s research team applies 
computer modeling to determine the selectivity, tr
ansport, and gating mechanisms of designed anion 
selective channels. Dr. Chen has a 
PhD in Chemical and Material Physics from the University of 

California, Irvine.  Manolis Doxastakis, PhD, graduated from the National Technical University of Athens with a Diploma 
in Chemical Engineering in 1996. His diploma thesi
s focused on the synthesis and characterization of 
polylactic acid for biomedical applications. He then moved to the University of Patras (Greece) and 

received his MS and PhD in Materials Science and Ch
emical Engineering, respectively, in 2002. During 
his graduate studies, Dr. Doxastakis performed re
search in polymeric materials using a combined 
computational and experimental approach. He app
lied these methods in the Institute of Chemical 
Engineering and High Temperature Chemical Processe
s, Patras (Greece); the Institute of Electronic 
Structure and Laser, Heraklion (Greece); the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 

Organisation, Melbourne (Australia); and the Institut
 Laue-Langevin, Grenoble (France). In 2003, he 
moved to the University of WisconsinŒMadison as 
a postdoctoral researcher in the Chemical and 
Biological Engineering department where he remained 
for 3 years. In 2007, Dr. Doxastakis joined the 
University of Houston as an Assistant Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering forming a 

computational research group that studied interfacial
 phenomena in materials science and biophysics with 
custom highly efficient parallel algorithms. In 2014,
 he moved to Argonne National Laboratory and the 
Institute for Molecular Engineering working on 
a new framework for the characterization of 
nanomaterials in patterning applications, combining 
advanced X-ray scattering methods with molecular 
simulations. In Fall 2016, Dr. Doxastakis joined th
e University of Tennessee in Knoxville as an Associate 
Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering.
 Dr. Doxastakis™s research spans a broad spectrum 

of soft matter that covers polymer melts, blends, 
copolymers, as well as lipid membranes and protein 
assemblies. His articles are highlighted in the front cover of high impact journals and are consistently 

cited. Dr. Doxastakis has delivered more than 20 
invited lectures, chaired multiple sessions on multiscale 
modeling in national conferences and serves as the reviewer for more than 20 scientific journals. 

 Giacomo Fiorin, PhD,
 is an Associate Professor of Research at the Institute for Computational 
Molecular Science at Temple Univers
ity. He is a computational scientist with experience in the fields of 
molecular biophysics, soft matter systems, molecular dynamics, free-energy calculations, and high-
performance computing. Dr. Fiorin received an MS 
in Physics from the University of Padua, with a 
dissertation on the theory of proton emission from deformed nuclei, and a PhD in Statistical and 
Biological Physics from the International School for Advanced Studies in Trieste on the activation of 

calcium-signaling proteins by calmodulin. During hi
s postdoctoral training at the University of 
Pennsylvania and Temple University, he used MD si
mulations to characterize the molecular mechanisms 
of influenza infection and drug resistance, and to pred
ict the structure and permeability of the lipid matrix 
of mammalian skin. In the period 2011Œ2015, Dr. Fior
in was also the biostatistics instructor in the 
College of Science and Technology at Temple, training hundreds of undergraduate and graduate students 

of biology, pharmacy, health professions, and engineeri
ng. Since 2008, Dr. Fiorin is the lead developer of 
the Collective Variables module (Colvars), a software
 for free energy calculations and enhanced sampling 
distributed with the simulation and analysis programs NAMD, VMD, and LAMMPS. Since 2010, Dr. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15Fiorin authored numerous proposals that were awarded through the XSEDE, INCITE and PRAC 
supercomputing allocation programs, and is a reviewer
 for scientific journals and funding/supercomputing 
agencies. 
 James C. (JC) Gumbart, PhD, 
is an assistant professor of physics at the Georgia Institute of Technology 
in Atlanta, Georgia. He obtained his BS from Western Illinois University in 2003 and his PhD in Physics 
from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
 in 2009 under the mentorship of Klaus Schulten, 
focusing on the area of computational biophysics. 
After 2 years as a postdoctoral fellow at Argonne 
National Lab working with Benoit Roux, he started his lab at Georgia Tech in early 2013. His lab carries 
out molecular dynamics simulations aimed primarily at
 understanding the composition, construction, and 
function of the Gram-negative bacterial cell envelope. 
 
Margaret Johnson, PhD, joined the Biophysics faculty at Johns Hopkins University in 2013. She 

received her BS in Applied Math from Columbia 
University and her PhD in BioEngineering from 
University of California, Berkeley. She completed 
postdoctoral training in the Laboratory of Chemical 
Physics at the National Institutes of Health in Be
thesda, Maryland. Her research focuses on understanding 

how the individual interactions between thousands of diverse component
s in the cell generate order and 
collective function at the right time and the right place. She develops theoretical and computational 

approaches to study the evolution and mechanics of dynamic systems of interacting and assembling 
proteins. 
 
Ivaylo Ivanov, PhD,
 received his PhD in Chemistry from the Univ
ersity of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. 
In 2009 he moved to Georgia State University in
 Atlanta where he established an independent 
multidisciplinary research program at the interface 
of the computational and biological sciences. 
Specifically, his research address topical issues in
 the area of DNA replication and DNA repair. DNA 
replication is a major target for cancer therapies, wh
ile efficient repair antagoni
zes those same therapies. 
Understanding the inner workings of the replisomeŒ
the complex molecular machine that accomplishes 
replication of chromosomal DNAŒis undeniably among th
e great challenges in the biomedical sciences. 
Presently, the structures of many individual component
s of the replisome have been solved. How these components come together to form a functioning mole
cular machine is still unknown. Recent work in Dr. 
Ivanov™s group has focused on the function and interac
tions of important core replisomal proteins, e.g., 
DNA polymerases, Flap Endonuclease 1 (FEN1), DNA ligase (Lig1), and DNA clamps (PCNA and a 

related checkpoint protein, Rad9-Hus1-Rad1 (9-1-1
)). Understanding the coordinated assembly and 

function of these proteins in replication is an im
portant problem. However, no high-resolution structures 
exist for the functional complexes, and limited info
rmation is available on the structural basis for coordination of DNA replication and repair activities. Such gaps in 
understanding are largely due to the 
dynamic nature of these assemblies, which challenge 
conventional structural approaches. To overcome 

this problem, Dr. Ivanov™s group has employed hybrid
 methods, combining computational modeling with 

experimental validation by electron microscopy (EM)
 and small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). All three 
areas, computational modeling, EM, and SAXS are rapi
dly advancing. Computational methods bridge the 

gap from low-resolution SAXS and EM techniques to 
high-resolution models and allow determination of 
coordination controlling elements in biological assemb
lies. Work has appeared in prominent journals, 
e.g., the Journal of the American Chemical Society
, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
, Angewandte Chemie International Edition
, and Nucleic Acids Research
. Findings have been highlighted 
in press releases and have been featured by Faculty
 of 1000 and by the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing 
Facility (OLCF) at the Oak Ridge National Lab. Dr
. Ivanov™s group is also taking advantage of the 
petascale supercomputing facilities available throu
gh National Science Foundation™s XSEDE initiative 
and Department Of Energy™s Office of Science. In 2
010 he also led one of only 69 teams nationwide to 
receive an INCITE award (Innovative and Novel Computa
tional Impact on Theory and Experiment) at the 
Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility. 

 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16Andrzej Kloczkowski, PhD,
 is Principal Investigator in the Batt
elle Center for Mathematical Medicine 
of the Research Institute at Nationw
ide Children™s Hospital. He is a Pr
ofessor of Pediatrics at The Ohio State University College of Medicine. Dr. Kloczkowski™s National Institutes of HealthŒfunded research 
program focuses on computational structural biology
 and bioinformatics, including protein structure 
prediction from the amino acid sequence, predicti
on of biomacromolecular dynamics using elastic 
network models, development of coarse grained models
 and potentials for proteins and nucleic acids, and 
studies of protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid inte
grations. He is also interested in application of 
machine learning methods to various biomedical an
d clinical problems, and has ongoing collaboration 
with several experimental and clinical centers. 
 Jianing Li, PhD,
 recieved her PhD degree in Chemical Phys
ics from Columbia University in 2011 under 
the supervision of Professor Richard Friesner
. Her dissertation established novel computational 
approaches for structure-based drug discovery. Fr
om 2011 to summer 2014, Dr. Li was working as a 
postdoctoral researcher in the laborat
ory of Professor Gregory Voth at The University of Chicago, where 
her research focused on multiscale modeling and simula
tions of membrane proteins. In August 2014, Dr. 
Li started her independent research at the University of Vermont as an assistant professor in chemistry.
Dr.Li™s current research focuses on the innovation and app
lications of multiscale modeling to understand 
complex chemical systems, aiming to elucidate critical
 structure-mechanism-function relationships, and to 
provide rational guide to help drug 
discovery and materials design. Her research projects include studies 
of peptide and protein assemblies, protein-sugar inte
ractions, as well as organi
c, inorganic and hybrid 
materials, ranging from microscopic (~angstrom
, ~nanosecond) to mesoscopic scales (~millimeter, 
~millisecond). 

 
Diane Lynch, PhD, received her Bachelor™s/Master™s of
 Science in Chemistry from Texas A&M 
University in
 1979/1981, respectively. After leaving Texas 
she continued her education by pursuing a 
PhD in chemical physics from the California Institute of
 Technology (1986) in Pasadena, California, and 
upon graduation she was granted a directors funded postdoctoral appointment at Los Alamos
 National Laboratory in New Mexico. Upon completion of her 
postdoctoral studies, she joined the chemistry
 department at the University of Nevada, Reno as a Research Assistant Professor for 2 years. She
 spent the 
next 10 years in industry, including Thinking Machines Corporation, Mobil Central
 Research, and 
Pharmacopeia where her role was ma
inly in algorithm development and
 computer modeling. In the early 
2000™s, she joined the research group of P. Reggio at Kennesaw State
 University, Kennesaw, Georgia, 
and after that the University of
 North CarolinaŒGreensboro. Her
 role in the Reggio group has been 
primarily the application of Molecular Dynamics to the
 study of the cannabinoid receptors. These 
receptors are membrane bound proteins sensitive
 to their environment. Therefore, this requires the 
simulations of the fully hydrated all-atom
 phospholipid bilayer. As such, these simulations are compute 
intensive and thus the group has employed parallel architectures as well as newer hardware, such as 
graphics processing units (GPUs), in order to obtain results in a timely fashion.
  
Christopher Rowley, PhD, is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry at the Memorial 
University of Newfoundland. Dr. Rowley™s research inte
rests are in computational chemistry, statistical 
thermodynamics, medicinal chemistry, biophysical chemistry, protein folding, and multi-scale modeling. 

His research group uses application-driven method de
velopment to investigate issues of irreversible 
enzyme inhibition, ion solvation, and environmental pollutants. Dr. Rowley received his PhD in 

Chemistry from the University of Ottawa. 

 Markus Seeliger, PhD, 
Associate Professor for Pharmacological Sc
iences and Associate Faculty of the 
Laufer Center for Computational and Physical Biology at Stony Brook University. The research in my 
group circles around the questions, how can we help 
small molecule inhibitors become clinically 
successful drugs and what can we learn about the 
molecular regulation of drug targets through their 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17interaction with small molecule drugs. We combine 
X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance, 
and other biophysical methods with computational tools. 
 Lei Shi, PhD, is Chief of the Computational Chemistry 
and Molecular Biophysics Unit at the National 
Institute on Drug Abuse Intramural Research Program, 
National Institutes of Health (NIH). He has a PhD 
in Pharmacology from Columbia University and co
mpleted his postdoctoral training at the Columbia 
University Medical Center. Before joining NIH, he
 was an Assistant Professor at Weill Cornell Medical 
College. Dr. Shi™s research is focused on mechanisti
c studies of G-protein-coupled receptors and the 
neurotransmitter transporters, the key targets for 
pharmacotherapeutic
 developments for substance use 
and other neuropsychiatric disorders. 
 
Chung Wong, PhD, received his BSc (Hons.) degree from the Chinese University of Hong Kong and his 

PhD degree from the University of Chicago. He co
mpleted his postdoctoral work with Professor J. 
Andrew McCammon at the University of Houston. 
Dr. Wong has held academic and industrial positions 
at the University of Houston, Mount Sinai School of
 Medicine, SUGEN, Inc., University of California, 
San Diego, and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
before joining the faculty of the University of 

Missouri, St. Louis (UMSL) in 2004. He is currently
 affiliated with the Department of Chemistry and 
Biochemistry and the Biochemistry and Biotechnology
 Program at UMSL. He has performed molecular 
dynamics simulations on nu
merous proteins since the 1980s using 
various computer architectures. He was 
among the first group of scientists to use explicit-
solvent models with periodic boundary conditions, 
rather than simple distance-dependent dielectric func
tions, to simulate proteins with molecular dynamics 
simulations. His group has adapted molecular dynamics 
simulation to perform free energy calculations, 

Feynman path integral simulations, sensitivity analysis, and energy flow studies on proteins. His 

laboratory also uses molecular dynamics simulation ex
tensively to study drug-binding thermodynamics 

and kinetics.          Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18APPENDIX E BOARD ON LIFE SCIENCES, BOARD ON CHEMICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY, 
AND THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES 
BOARD ON LIFE SCIENCES 
Chair  
JAMES P. COLLINS, Arizona State University 
 Members 

 
A. ALONSO AGUIRRE, 
George Mason University ENRIQUETA C. BOND,
 Burroughs Wellcome Fund 
ROGER D. CONE,
 University of Michigan 
NANCY D. CONNELL,
 Rutgers New Jersey Medical School 
JOSEPH R. ECKER, 
Salk Institute for Biological Studies 
SCOTT V. EDWARDS, 
Harvard University SARAH C.R. ELGIN,
 Washington University, St. Louis 
ROBERT J. FULL, 
University of California, Berkeley 
 ELIZABETH HEITMAN,
 Vanderbilt University Medical Center 
JUDITH KIMBLE,
 University of WisconsinŒMadison  
MARY E. MAXON,
 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
JILL P. MESIROV, University of California, San Diego 

KAREN E. NELSON,
 J. Craig Venter Institute 
CLAIRE POMEROY, 
Albert and Mary Lasker Foundation 
MARY E. POWER,
 University of California, Berkeley 
LANA SKIRBOLL,
 Sanofi 
JANIS WEEKS, University of Oregon  Staff 
 FRANCES SHARPLES, 
Director 
JO HUSBANDS,
 Senior Scholar JAY LABOV,
 Senior Scholar LIDA ANESTIDOU,
 Senior Program Officer 
KATIE BOWMAN,
 Senior Program Officer 
KEEGAN SAWYER,
 Senior Program Officer 

AUDREY THEVENON, 
Program Officer 
ANDREA HODGSON,
 Associate Program Officer 
BETHELHEM MEKASHA,
 Financial Associate 
JENNA OGILVIE, 
Research Associate 
ANGELA KOLESNIKOVA, 
Senior Program Assistant 
AANIKA SENN, 
Senior Program Assistant 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19BOARD ON CHEMICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY 
  Co-Chairs 
 DAVID BEM,
 PPG Industries  
JOAN BRENNECKE,
 NAE, Notre Dame University 
 Members 
 MARK BARTEAU,
 NAE, University of Michigan 
MICHELLE V. BUCHANAN,
 Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
JENNIFER SINCLAIR CURTIS,
 University of California, Davis 
RICHARD EISENBERG,
 NAS, University of Rochester 
SAMUEL H. GELLMAN,
 NAS, University of WisconsinŒMadison  
SHARON C. GLOTZER,
 NAS, University of Michigan 
MIRIAM E. JOHN,
 Sandia National Laboratories (Ret.) FRANCES S. LIGLER,
 NAE, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill and North Carolina State 
University JOSEPH B. POWELL,
 Shell  PETER J. ROSSKY, NAS, Rice University 
TIMOTHY SWAGER, NAS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology  
 Staff 
 TERESA FRYBERGER,
 Director 
MARILEE SHELTON-DAVENPORT,
 Senior Program Officer 
CAMLY TRAN,
 Program Officer ANNA SBEREGAEVA,
 Associate Program Officer 
JESSICA WOLFRAM, Senior Program Assistant 
JARRETT NGUYEN,
 Program Assistant 
SHUBHA BANSKOTA,
 Financial Associate SUZANNE THILENIUS, 
Administrative Assistant 
       Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20     The National Academy of Sciences 
was established in 1863 by an Act of Congress, signed by 
President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmenta
l institution to advise the nation on issues 
related to science and technology. Members are elected by their peers for outstanding 
contributions to research. Dr. 
Marcia McNutt is president. 
 The National Academy of Engineering 
was established in 1964 under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences to bring the prac
tices of engineering to advising the nation. 
Members are elected by their peers for extraordinary contributions to engineering. Dr. C. D. 
Mote, Jr., is president. 

 
The National Academy of Medicine
 (formerly the Institute of Medicine) was established in 
1970 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences to advise the nation on medical 

and health issues. Members are elected by th
eir peers for distinguished contributions to 
medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau is president. 

 
The three Academies work together as the 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine
 to provide independent, objective analysis and advice to the nation and 
conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform public policy decisions. The 
National Academies also encourage education and research, recognize outstanding 

contributions to knowledge, and increase public understanding in matters of science, 

engineering, and medicine.  
 Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine at 

www.nationalacademies.org
.   


Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21    Consensus Study Reports 
published by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine document the evidence-based consensus on the study™s statement of task by an 
authoring committee of experts. Reports typi
cally include findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations based on information gath
ered by the committee and the committee™s deliberations. Each report has been subjecte
d to a rigorous and independent peer-review 
process and it represents the position of the 
National Academies on the statement of task. 
 
Proceedings
 published by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop, symposium, or 

other event convened by the National Academie
s. The statements and opinions contained in 
proceedings are those of the participants and 
are not endorsed by ot
her participants, the 
planning committee, or the National Academies. 
 For information about other products and acti
vities of the National Academies, please visit www.nationalacademies.org/about/whatwedo.
    Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22APPENDIX F  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF REPORT REVIEWER 
  ThisConsensus
Study
Report
wasreviewedindraftform
byanindividual
chosenforhisdiverse
perspectiveand
technicalexpertise.The
purpose
ofthisindependent
review
istoprovidecandid
and
critical
comments
thatwillassisttheNationalAcademies
ofSciences,
Engineering,
andMedicine
inmakingeachpublishedreportassoundaspossibleandtoensurethatitmeets
theinstitutional
standardsforquality,objectivity,
evidence,
andresponsivenesstothestudycharge.
The
reviewcomments
anddraftmanuscript
remain
confidential
toprotect
the
integrityofthedeliberative
process.Wethank
thefollowingindividual
forhisreviewofthis
report:RobertL.Jernigan,IowaState
University
Althoughthereviewerlisted
aboveprovided
manyconstructivecomments
andsuggestions,hewasnotaskedtoendorsetheconclusions
orrecommendations
ofthisreport.Inaddition,
hewasresponsibleformakingcertain
thatanindependent
examinationofthisreportwascarriedout
inaccordancewiththestandardsoftheNationalAcademies
and
thatallreview
comments
were
carefully
considered.Responsibilityforthefinalcontentrestsentirelywiththeauthoring
committeeand
theNationalAcademies.
     Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Eighth RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23APPENDIX G   DISCLOSURE OF CONFLICTS OF INTEREST  
  The conflict-of-interest policies of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine generally prohibit an individual from participating in a matter if the individual has a 
conflict of interest with respect to the matter.  
When the committee that authored this 
Consensus Study Report was established, a 
determination of whether there was a conflict of interest with respect to any of the proposals to be 
reviewed by the committee was made for each committee member given the individual™s 

circumstances and the task being undertaken by the committee. A determination that an individual 
has a conflict of interest is not an assessment of that individual™s actual behavior or character or 
ability to act objectively despite the conflicting interest.  
The following members of the committee were determined to have a conflict of interest with 
respect to one or more of the proposals to be reviewed by the committee because of the nature of 

their relationship with the lead investigator or a
nother member of the research team that submitted 
the proposal. These committee members were recused from any involvement in the review of the 

proposals with respect to which they had a conflict. 
 Proposal Number Committee Member(s) Recused 
17007P Lei Shi 
17008P Nilesh Banavali 

17009P Giacomo Fiorin 
17010P Lei Shi 
17021P Giacomo Fiorin 

17023P Nilesh Banavali, Giacom
o Fiorin, Christopher Rowley 17025P Vincenzo Carnevale 
17027P Lei Shi 

17028P Margaret Johnson 
17030P Giacomo Fiorin, Lei Shi 
17043P Christopher Rowley 

17046P Jianing Li 
17054P Margaret Johnson, Jianing Li 
17055P Margaret Johnson 

17062P Vincenzo Carnevale, Lei Shi  
17069P William A. Goddard 
17071P Markus Seeliger 

17072P William A. Goddard 
17076P Nilesh Banavali, Giacomo Fiorin 
17078P Markus Seeliger  

17080P Lei Shi 
 