DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/24949Additional Observations on Foundational CybersecurityResearch: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions:An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of a ClassifiedReport10 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-46813-8 | DOI 10.17226/24949Committee on Future Research Goals and Directions for Foundational Sciences inCybersecurity; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division onEngineering and Physical Sciences; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,and MedicineAdditional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of a...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Additional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex   Unclassified Abbreviated Vers
ion of a Classified Report 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 Committee on Future Research Goals and Directions
 for Foundational Sciences in Cybersecurity 
 Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 
 Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
  
  A Consensus Study Report of   
   
  
  Additional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS          500 Fi
fth Street, NW           Washington, DC 20001 
 This project was supported by the National Security
 Agency with assistance from the Office of the 
Director of National Intelligence under award num
ber 2014-14041100003-003 and assistance from the 
National Science Foundation under award number CNS-
1400278. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or 
recommendations expressed in this publication do not n
ecessarily reflect the views of any organization or 
agency that provided support for this project. 

 
Digital Object Identifier: https://doi.org/10.17226/ 24949 
 Copyright 2017 by the National Academ
y of Sciences. All rights reserved.  
Printed in the United States of America 

 National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine. 2017. 
Additional Observations on 
Foundational Cybersecurity Resea
rch: Improving Science, Engineeri
ng, and Institutions: An AnnexŠ
Abbreviated Version of a Classified Report
. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. doi: 
https://doi.org/10.17226/ 24949. 

    Additional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     The National Academy of Sciences 
was established in 1863 by an Act of Congress, signed by 
President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmenta
l institution to advise the nation on issues 
related to science and technology. Members 
are elected by their peers for outstanding 
contributions to research. Dr. 
Marcia McNutt is president. 
 The National Academy of Engineering 
was established in 1964 under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences to bring the prac
tices of engineering to advising the nation. 
Members are elected by their peers for extraordin
ary contributions to en
gineering. Dr. C. D. 
Mote, Jr., is president. 

 
The National Academy of Medicine
 (formerly the Institute of Medicine) was established in 
1970 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences to advise the nation on medical 
and health issues. Members are elected by th
eir peers for distinguished contributions to 
medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau is president. 

 
The three Academies work together as the 
National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine
 to provide independent, objective an
alysis and advice to the nation and 
conduct other activities to solve complex prob
lems and inform public policy decisions. The 
National Academies also encourage education and research, recognize outstanding 

contributions to knowledge, and increase public understanding in matters of science, 
engineering, and medicine.  
 
Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine at 

www.nationalacademies.org
.     Additional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.      Reports document the evidence-based consensus 
of an authoring committee of experts. 
Reports typically include findings, conclusion
s, and recommendations based on information 
gathered by the committee and committee delibera
tions. Reports are peer reviewed and are 
approved by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 
 
Proceedings 
chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop, symposium, or other 
convening event. The statements and opinions
 contained in proceedin
gs are those of the 
participants and have not been endorsed by other participants, the planning committee, or 

the National Academies of Scienc
es, Engineering, and Medicine. 
 For information about other products and activi
ties of the National Academies, please visit 
nationalacademies.org/whatwedo.
Additional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.v COMMITTEE ON FUTURE RESEARCH GOALS AND DIRECTIONS FOR FOUNDATIONAL 
SCIENCES IN CYBERSECURITY 
 BARUCH FISCHHOFF, NAS
1/NAM,2 Carnegie Mellon University, 
Co-Chair 
PETER WEINBERGER, Google, Inc., Co-Chair JANDRIA S. ALEXANDER, The Aerospace Corporation 

ANNIE ANTON, Georgia Institute of Technology 

STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, NAE,
3 Columbia University SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 
RONALD L. GRAHAM, NAS, University of California, San Diego 
CARL E. LANDWEHR, Independent Consultant 

STEVEN B. LIPNER, NAE, Software Assurance Forum for Excellence in Code 
ROY A. MAXION, Carnegie Mellon University 

GREG MORRISETT, Cornell University BRIAN SNOW, Independent Consultant 
PHIL VENABLES, Goldman Sachs 
STEVEN J. WALLACH, NAE, Micron Technology 
  Staff 
 LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director and Senior Program Officer 

 
 
   
 
 
   
 
                                                       
1 Member, National Academy of Sciences. 
2 Member, National Academy of Medicine. 
3 Member, National Academy of Engineering. 
Additional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vi COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD 
 FARNAM JAHANIAN, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Chair ANDRÉ BARRASO, Google, Inc. 
STEVE M. BELLOVIN, NAE,1 Columbia University 
ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC 

DAVID CULLER, NAE, University of California, Berkeley 

EDWARD FRANK, Cloud Parity, Inc. 

LAURA HAAS, NAE, University of Massachusetts, Amherst 
MARK HOROWITZ, NAE, Stanford University 
ERIC HORVITZ, NAE, Microsoft 

VIJAY KUMAR, NAE, University of Pennsylvania 

BETH MYNATT, Georgia Tech 

CRAIG PARTRIDGE, Raytheon BBN Technologies 
DANIELA RUS, NAE, MIT  
FRED B. SCHNEIDER, NAE, Cornell University 

MARGO SELTZER, Harvard University 

JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia 

MOSHE VARDI, NAS
2/NAE, Rice 
KATHERINE YELICK, NAE, University of California, Berkeley 
 Staff  JON EISENBERG, Director  

LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director  
 SHENAE BRADLEY, Administrative Assistant 

EMILY GRUMBLING, Program Officer 

RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager  

KATIRIA ORTIZ, Research Associate 
  For more information on CSTB, see its website at http://www.cstb.org, write to CSTB at 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and 
Medicine, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 
20001, call (202) 334-2605, or e-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu. 
                                                        
1 Member, National Academy of Engineering. 
2 Member, National Academy of Sciences. 
Additional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii   
   Acknowledgment of Reviewers 
 
 This Consensus Study Report was reviewed in draf
t form by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise. The purpose of 
this independent review 
is to provide candid and 
critical comments that will assist the National Academ
ies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in making each published report as sound as possible and to
 ensure that it meets the institutional standards for quality, objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness 
to the study charge. The review comments and draft 
manuscript remain confidential to protect th
e integrity of the deliberative process.  
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:  
 Robert Brammer, Brammer Technology, LLC, 
Fred Chang, NAE,
1 Southern Methodist University, 
Richard Danzig, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, and 

Fred B. Schneider, NAE, Cornell University. 

 
Although the reviewers listed he
re provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they 
were not asked to endorse the conclusions or reco
mmendations of this report nor did they see the final 
draft before its release. The review of this repor
t was overseen by Anita Jones, NAE, University of 
Virginia. She was responsible for making certain th
at an independent examination of this report was 
carried out in accordance with the standards of th
e National Academies and that all review comments 
were carefully considered. Responsibility for the fina
l content rests entirely with the authoring committee 
and the National Academies. 
                                                      
1 Member, National Academy of Engineering. 
Additional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. Additional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1 Unclassified Abbreviated Vers
ion of a Classified Report 
 At the request of the Special Cyber Operations
 Research and Engineering (SCORE) Interagency 
Working Group and sponsored with assistance from th
e National Science Foundation and from the Office 
of the Director of National Intelligence, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
1 appointed an expert committee, the Committee on Futu
re Research Goals and Directions for Foundational 
Sciences in Cybersecurity, to explore future resear
ch goals and directions for cybersecurity. The 
statement of task for the study was as follows: 

 An ad hoc National Research Council committee will conduct a multi-phased sequential study to 
consider future research goals an
d directions for foundational science in cybersecurity, to include 
relevant efforts in economics and behavioral scie
nce as well as more ﬁtraditionalﬂ cybersecurity 
topics. It will also consider how investments in foundational work support mission needs in the 
long term. The committee will review current uncla
ssified and classified cybersecurity research 
strategies, plans, and programs as well as requirem
ents in both domains.  It will consider major 
challenge problems, explore proposed new directions, identify gaps in the current portfolio, 
consider the complementary roles of research in 
unclassified and classified settings, and consider 
how foundational work in an unclassified setting can be translated to meet national security 

objectives. Phase 1 will involve preliminary data 
gathering and analysis by the committee but no 
report will be issued. In Phase 2, the committee will undertake additional data-gathering, analysis 
and deliberations. In Phase 3, th
e committee would extend its data
-gathering and analysis from 
Phase 2.  The study will result in two reports: (1) a public report at the conclusion of Phase 2 
providing a high-level roadmap for foundational cybersecurity research based only on public 
domain information and (2) an additional, brief public report and a non-public classified annex as 

necessary reflecting the commi
ttee™s work in Phase 3.  
 This abbreviated report annex is a result of Phase 3. The Office of the Director of National Intelligence has determined that the annex prepared 
by the committee is classified in its entirety under 
Executive Order 13526 and therefore cannot be made av
ailable to the public. Prepared by the committee, 
this abbreviated annex provides background information on the full annex. The committee gathered 
additional input for this phase through a limited set 
of briefings that took place in May 2017.  The 
committee appreciates the insights and perspectives pr
ovided by the experts from the Department of 
Homeland Security, the National Security Agency, 
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, 
Cyber Pack Ventures, and ThreatConnect who 
presented briefings and shared perspectives. 
The annex does not reprise the main points of the study that were published in the results of Phase 2.  The committee hopes readers will read that unclassified report.2  These reports represent the 
cooperative effort of many people. The committee th
anks the individuals who came to speak with us 
during the course of the study. Although scheduling mean
t that not all members were able to participate 
during Phase 3 activities, their work and insights during Phase 2 helped
 inform efforts in Phase 3. 
                                                       
1 Effective July 1, 2015, the institution is called th
e National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine. References in this report to the National Res
earch Council are used in an
 historic context identifying 
programs prior to July 1. 
2 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2017, 
Foundational Cybersecurity Research: 
Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions
, Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 
https://doi.org/10.17226/24676. 
Additional Observations on Foundational Cybersecurity Research: Improving Science, Engineering, and Institutions: An Annex: Unclassified Abbreviated Version of ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    
 