DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/25010Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for DecisionMakers118 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-47153-4 | DOI 10.17226/25010Committee on Law Enforcement and Intelligence Access to Plaintext Information;Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineering andPhysical Sciences; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and MedicineDecrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Law Enforcement and Intelligence Access 
 to Plaintext Information Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
 Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
A Consensus Study Report of
Decrypting theENCRYPTION DEBATEA Framework for Decision MakersDecrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
This activity was supported by award number 2015-3078 from the William and 
Flora Hewlett Foundation, award number 15-109219-000-HRS from the John D. 
and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, and award number CNS-1555610 from 
the National Science Foundation. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recom
-mendations expressed in this publication do not necessarily re˚ect the views of 
any organization or agency that provided support for the project. 
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-47153-4
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-47153-2
Digital Object Identi˜er: https://doi.org/10.17226/25010
Additional copies of this publication are available for sale from the National 
Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 
624-6242 or (202) 334-3313; http://www.nap.edu. 
Copyright 2018 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 
2018. Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision Makers
.  Washington, 
DC: The National Academies Press. doi: https://doi.org/10.17266/25010. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences
 was established in 1863 by an Act of 
 
Congress, signed by President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution to advise 
the nation on issues related to science and technology. Members are elected 
by their peers for outstanding contributions to research. Dr. Marcia McNutt is 
president.The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964 under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences to bring the practices of engineering to ad
-vising the nation. Members are elected by their peers for extraordinary contribu
-tions to engineering. Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president.
The National Academy of Medicine
 (formerly the Institute of Medicine) was 
established in 1970 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences to 
advise the nation on medical and health issues. Members are elected by their 
peers for distinguished contributions to medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau 
is president.The three Academies work together as the 
National Academies of Sciences, 
 Engi neering, and Medicine
 to provide independent, objective analysis and  advice 
to the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform 
public policy decisions. The National Academies also encourage education and 
research, recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and increase public 
understanding in matters of science, engineering, and medicine. 
Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
 
Medicine at www.nationalacademies.org
. Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Consensus Study Reports
 published by the National Academies of Sciences, 
 
Engineering, and Medicine document the evidence-based consensus on the 
study™s statement of task by an authoring committee of experts. Reports typi
-
gathered by the committee and the committee™s deliberations. Each report 
has been subjected to a rigorous and independent peer-review process and it 
represents the position of the National Academies on the statement of task.
Proceedings published by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop, symposium, 
or other event convened by the National Academies. The statements and 
 opinions 
contained in proceedings are those of the participants and are not endorsed by 
other participants, the planning committee, or the National Academies.
For information about other products and activities of the National Academies, 
please visit www.nationalacademies.org/about/whatwedo. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON LAW ENFORCEMENT AND INTELLIGENCE 
ACCESS TO PLAINTEXT INFORMATION
FRED H. CATE, Indiana University, 
Chair
 DAN BONEH, NAE,
1 Stanford University 
FREDERICK R. CHANG, NAE, Southern Methodist University 
SCOTT CHARNEY, Microsoft Corp. 
SHAFRIRA GOLDWASSER, NAS
2/NAE, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology 
DAVID A. HOFFMAN, Intel Corporation 
SENY KAMARA, Brown University 
DAVID KRIS, Culper Partners, LLC 
SUSAN LANDAU, Tufts University 
STEVEN B. LIPNER, NAE, SAFECode 
RICHARD LITTLEHALE, Tennessee Bureau of Investigation 
KATE MARTIN, Center for American Progress 
HARVEY RISHIKOF, Cybersecurity Legal Task Force, American Bar 
Association 
PETER J. WEINBERGER, Google, Inc. 
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Study Director and Senior Director, Computer 
Science and Telecommunications Board 
KATIRIA ORTIZ, Associate Program Of˜cer 
SHENAE BRADLEY, Administrative Assistant 
JANKI PATEL, Senior Program Assistant 
1 
Member, National Academy of Engineering.
2 
Member, National Academy of Sciences.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
FARNAM JAHANIAN, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Chair
 LUIZ ANDRE BARROSO, Google, Inc. 
STEVEN BELLOVIN, Columbia University 
ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC 
EDWARD FRANK, Cloud Parity, Inc. 
LAURA HAAS, University of Massachusetts, Amherst 
MARK HOROWITZ, Stanford University 
ERIC HORVITZ, Microsoft Research 
VIJAY KUMAR, Univ. of Pennsylvania 
BETH MYNATT, Georgia Institute of Technology 
CRAIG PARTRIDGE, Raytheon BBN Technologies 
DANIELA RUS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
FRED SCHNEIDER, Cornell University 
MARGO SELTZER, Harvard University 
MOSCHE VARDI, Rice University 
KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley 
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Senior Director 
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director 
SHENAE BRADLEY, Administrative Assistant 
EMILY GRUMBLING, Program Of˜cer 
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
KATIRIA ORTIZ, Associate Program Of˜cer 
JANKI PATEL, Senior Program Assistant 
For more information on CSTB, see its Web site at http://www.cstb.org, 
write to CSTB at National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and 
Medicine, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001, 
 call (202) 334-2605, or email the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This Consensus Study Report was reviewed in draft form by indi
-viduals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. The 
purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical com
-ments that will assist the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine in making each published report as sound as possible and 
to ensure that it meets the institutional standards for quality, objectivity, 
evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments 
and draft manuscript remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the 
deliberative process. 
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this 
report: 
Kevin Bankston, Open Technology Institute,
Alvaro Bedoya, Georgetown University Law School,
James Emerson, iThreat Cyber Group,
Edward W. Felten, NAE,
1 Princeton University,
Eric Grosse, EHG Flight, LLC,
Joseph Lorenzo Hall, Center for Democracy and Technology,
Susan Hennessey, Brookings Institution,
John C. (ﬁChrisﬂ) Inglis, U.S. Naval Academy,
Kenn Kern, New York County District Attorney™s Of˜ce,
1 Member, National Academy of Engineering.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSButler W. Lampson, NAS
2/NAE, Microsoft Corporation,
Josiah Landers, Rockland County, New York, District Attorney™s Of˜ce,
Bruce W. McConnell, EastWest Institute,
Deirdre K. Mulligan, University of California, Berkeley,
Ronald L. Rivest, NAS/NAE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Peter Swire, Georgia Institute of Technology, and
Marcus C. Thomas, Subsentio, LLC. 
Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclu
-sions or recommendations of this report nor did they see the ˜nal draft 
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Robert F. 
Sproull, NAE, University of Massachusetts, Amherst. He was responsible 
for making certain that an independent examination of this report was 
carried out in accordance with the standards of the National Academies 
and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility 
for the ˜nal content rests entirely with the authoring committee and the 
National Academies. 
2 
Member, National Academy of Sciences.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
Preface
Government access to the plaintext of encrypted communications 
and stored data presents dif˜cult, important, and controversial issues 
that reveal con˚icting values within the government and society at large. 
The debate over efforts to ensure that access is very polarized. Critics of 
government access, even as they acknowledge the importance of effective 
law enforcement, cite legal and practical objections, including risks to 
security, privacy and civil liberties, and U.S. commercial interests. Gov
-ernment of˜cials acknowledge the value of encryption to protect privacy 
and con˜dential information but also express the need to be able to access 
information relevant to investigations when properly authorized. 
To address these issues (Box P.1), the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine appointed the Committee on Law Enforce
-ment and Intelligence Access to Plaintext Information (biosketches in 
Appendix A). It met four times in person to receive brie˜ngs from govern
-ment, industry, and academic experts (listed in Appendix B) and also used 
these meetings, supplemented by conference calls and email discussion, 
to deliberate and develop this report. 
To better inform the policy debate and future decision making, this 
report reviews how encryption is used, including its applications to cyber
-security; its role in protecting privacy and civil liberties; the needs of law 
enforcement and the intelligence community for information; technical 
and policy options for accessing plaintext; and the international landscape. 
Because the concerns expressed by law enforcement of˜cials at the 
federal, state, and local levels have been more clearcut and less nuanced 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE
than the views offered by U.S. intelligence of˜cials, who in contrast to 
law enforcement representatives have not vigorously advocated in pub
-lic for exceptional access, this report not only gives greater attention to 
law enforcement needs but also discusses national security needs. The 
last chapter of the report provides a framework for evaluating policy or 
technical approaches for government access to plaintext. The committee 
intends that developing and debating answers to these questions will help 
illuminate the underlying issues and trade-offs and help guide future 
decisions about government access to plaintext. 
Moreover, while it suspects there will always be disagreements over 
how to address the challenges presented by encryption, it is the commit
-tee™s hope that this report will facilitate a frank conversation, involving all 
parties, about those challenges and alternative approaches to addressing 
them. The process of creating this report at times was challenging and 
required members of the committee to develop a deeper understanding 
of perspectives with which they did not always agree. But the process 
was also illuminating, and the committee hopes that the common vocabu-lary and broad context provided by this report, as well as the analytical 
framework, will make future conversations easier, more productive, and 
more likely. 
The committee would like to acknowledge the William and Flora 
Hewlett Foundation, the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Founda
-tion, and the National Science Foundation for their generous support for 
this project and in particular Eli Sugarman (Hewlett Foundation), Eric 
Sears (MacArthur Foundation), and Jeremy Epstein (National Science 
BOX P.1
 Statement of Task
A National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine study will 
examine the tradeoffs associated with mechanisms to provide authorized gov
-ernment agencies with access to the plaintext version of encrypted information. 
The study will describe the context in which decisions about such mechanisms 
would be made and identify and characterize possible mechanisms and alternative 
means of obtaining information sought by the government for law enforcement or 

-acterize risks so that they could be weighed against the potential law enforcement 


analysis of options and trade-offs.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 xiFoundation) for their encouragement and support. It also thanks the 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine staff who 
supported this project: study director Jon Eisenberg, associate program 
of˜cer Katiria Ortiz, and administrative assistant Shenae Bradley. 
Fred H. Cate, 
Chair
Committee on Law Enforcement and 
Intelligence Access to Plaintext Information 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Contents
SUMMARY 
 11 INTRODUCTION 
 5 Government Options, 9
 Scope and Context for Access, 12
 Evaluation Framework, 12
2 ENCRYPTION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
 14
 What Is Encryption?, 15
 Designing Encryption, 18
 Applications of Encryption, 20
  
Protecting Stored Files, 20
  
Full Disk Encryption, 21
  
Device Locking, 22
  
Virtual Private Networks, 22
  
Secure Web Browsing, 23
  
Secure Messaging, 24
  
Protecting Con˜dentiality in Cloud or Third-Party 
 Computing, 25
 Encryption and the Expanding Cyber Threat, 25
  
Cyber Threats, 27
  
The Role of Encryption and Other Forms of Cryptography 
 in Cybersecurity, 29
  
The Limits of Encryption for Cybersecurity, 31
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv CONTENTS3  
THE ROLE OF ENCRYPTION IN PROTECTING PRIVACY 
 32
 AND CIVIL LIBERTIES 
 4  
INFORMATION NEEDS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AND 
 36
 THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY 
  Goals of Law Enforcement Of˜cials and Intelligence 
 Analysts, 36
 The Volume and Diversity of Information Relevant to Law 
Enforcement and the Intelligence Community, 37
 Encryption as an Impediment to Investigations, 40
 The Practical Utility of Alternatives to Exceptional Access, 45
5 OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 
 49
 Options for Accessing Plaintext, 49
 Legal Tools for Obtaining Plaintext within the Current 
 Legislative Framework, 50
  
Compelled Disclosure of Biometric Identi˜ers or 
 Passcodes, 50
  
Compelled Assistance by Third Parties and Related 
 Issues, 52
  
Legal Aspects of Lawful Hacking, 55
 Technological Approaches for Accessing Plaintext, 
 Limitations, and Alternatives, 56
  
Approaches to Exceptional Plaintext Access, 56
  
Future Cryptographic Technologies, 66
  
Ways to Bypass a Plaintext Access Mandate, 67
  
Alternatives to Exceptional Access, 70
 Enhanced Financial and Technical Support, 73
 Legislation Mandating Access, 76
6 INTERNATIONAL DIMENSIONS 
 78
 Effects of U.S. Actions on Other Countries and the 
 International Market for U.S. Goods and Services, 80
 Global Norms, 81
7  
A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING APPROACHES TO 
 83
 ACCESS PLAINTEXT 
APPENDIXES
A Biographies of Committee Members 
 95
B Briefers to the Committee 
 103
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary
Encryption protects information stored on smartphones, laptops, and 
other devicesŠin some cases by default. Encrypted communications are 
provided by widely used computing devices and servicesŠsuch as smart
-phones, laptops, and messaging applicationsŠthat are used by hundreds 
of millions of users. Individuals, organizations, and governments rely 
on encryption to counter threats from a wide range of actors, including 
unsophisticated and sophisticated criminals, foreign intelligence agen
-cies, and repressive governments. Encryption on its own does not solve 
the challenge of providing effective security for data and systems, but it 
is an important tool. 
At the same time, encryption is relied on by criminals to avoid inves
-tigation and prosecution, including criminals who may unknowingly 
bene˜t from default settings as well as those who deliberately use encryp
-tion. Thus, encryption complicates law enforcement and intelligence 
investigations. When communications are encrypted ﬁend to end,ﬂ inter
-cepted messages cannot be understood. When a smartphone is locked 
and encrypted, the contents cannot be read if the phone is seized by 
investigators. 
Yet even while the use of encryption is increasing, so is the amount 
of unencrypted stored data and communications and metadata. This is 
a result of the growth in the use of smartphones, social networks, text 
messag ing, and other computing and electronic communications over the 
past decade. The result of the rise in both the amount of data and the use 
of encryption is that as the amount of data increases rapidly, there is both 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
more data than ever of relevance to investigations and more data than 
ever that is inaccessible to investigators. 
With increasing use of encryption, often by default, law enforce
-ment and some intelligence of˜cials have increasingly called for a reliable 
and suf˜ciently rapid and scalable way to access plaintextŠdecrypted 
data and messagesŠso that they can protect the public and ful˜ll their 
public safety and national security missions. In particular, law enforce
-ment of˜cials point to (1) the widespread and increasing use of encryp
-tion by default in widely used products and services, (2) the myriad 
national security threats posed by terrorist groups and foreign rivals, 
(3) the increasing importance of digital evidence as human activity and 
crime have become increasingly digital, and (4) the limited effectiveness 
of alternative sources of digital evidence. 
Critics have objected on a number of legal and practical grounds, 
arguing that regulations to ensure government access to plaintext likely 
would (1) be ineffective, (2) pose unacceptable risks to cybersecurity, 
(3) pose unacceptable risks to privacy and civil liberties, (4) disadvantage 
U.S. providers of products and services, and (5) hamper innovation in 
encryption technologies. In addition, critics argue that mandating means 
for ensuring government access to plaintext may be less necessary in light 
of the wider availability of dataŠand especially metadataŠgenerally, 
and the alternative means currently available for government of˜cials to 
obtain access to encrypted data. 
There are a wide variety of legal and technical options available to 
governments that seek access to plaintext for law enforcement and intel
-ligence investigations. These include the following: 
Ł Take no legislative action to regulate the use of encryption, 
Ł Provide law enforcement with additional resources to access 
plaintext, 
Ł Enact legislation that requires that device vendors or service pro
-viders provide government access to plaintext without specifying the 
technical means of doing so, and 
Ł Enact legislation requiring a particular technical approach.
These are discussed in detail in Chapter 5. 
Some computer scientists have reacted with concern to renewed pro
-posals to regulate the use of encryption, citing the security risks. Several 
attempts have also been made in recent years to develop technical mecha
-nisms to provide the government with exceptional access to encrypted 
data on locked devices and to encrypted communications that would 
minimize these risks. Three were presented to the Committee on Law 
Enforcement and Intelligence Access to Plaintext Information during its 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3work (Box 5.1). The committee was not charged with reviewing speci˜c 
proposals, but it did use these speci˜c proposals to help develop and test 
its framework for evaluating suggested approaches. 
The committee offers a framework (in the form of a set of questions) 
to ask about any path forward on encryption policy. The objective of this 
framework is not only to help policymakers determine whether a par
-ticular approach is optimal or desirable, but also to help ensure that any 
approach that policymakers might pursue is implemented in a way that 
maximizes its effectiveness while minimizing harmful side effects. The 
questions are as follows: 
1.
 To what extent will the proposed approach be effective in permit
-ting law enforcement and/or the intelligence community to access plain
-text at or near the scale, timeliness, and reliability that proponents seek? 
2.
 To what extent will the proposed approach affect the security of 
the type of data or device to which access would be required, as well as 
cybersecurity more broadly? 
3.
 To what extent will the proposed approach affect the privacy, civil 
liberties, and human rights of targeted individuals and others? 
4.
 To what extent will the proposed approach affect commerce, eco
-nomic competitiveness, and innovation? 
5.
 To what extent will ˜nancial costs be imposed by the proposed 
approach, and who will bear them? 
6.
 To what extent is the proposed approach consistent with existing 
law and other government priorities? 
7.
 To what extent will the international context affect the pro
-posed approach, and what will be the impact of the proposed approach 
internationally? 
8.
 To what extent will the proposed approach be subject to effective 
ongoing evaluation and oversight? 
In addressing these questions, policymakers will have to contend with 
incomplete data about the impact of encryption on investigations as well 
as incomplete data about the deliberate use of encryption by criminals. It is 
also dif˜cult to quantify key factors such as the additional security risks of 
adding exceptional access to encryption systems. There are also a number 
of cases where one can only speculate about future behaviors that have 
bearing on the implications of government regulation of encryption. These 
include the fraction of criminals that would use noncompliant, unbreak
-able encryption if the government were to require vendors to provide 
exceptional access and the fraction of foreign cus
 
tomers that would eschew 
U.S. products if exceptional access were required. 
Policymakers will also have to contend with the trade-offs associated 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
with encryption and government access that underlie these questions. 
One of the fundamental trade-offs is that adding an exceptional access 
capability to encryption schemes necessarily weakens their security to 
some degree, while the absence of an exceptional access mechanism nec
-essarily hampers government investigations to some degree. How much 
security is reduced and whether the resulting level of security remains 
acceptable depend on the speci˜c technical and operational details of the 
exceptional access mechanism and on the requirements and perspectives 
of users. The impact on society when an investigation is hindered or 
thwarted will depend on the scope and scale of the associated crime 
or national security threat. 
There are no easy answers to and many uncertainties in responding 
to these questions. However, developing and debating answers to these 
questions will help illuminate the underlying issues and trade-offs and 
help inform the debate over government access to plaintext. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51Introduction
Until the Internet era, the use of encryption was con˜ned to sensitive 
government and commercial communications. With the growth of the 
Internet, encryption came into much wider use to protect credit card and 
other online transactional information. Only in the past decade, however, 
has encryption been widely used for ordinary communications and stored 
data. As laptops and smartphones developed the potential to contain 
large amounts of sensitive information and grew in popularity, and as 
states adopted data breach noti˜cation laws
1 that provided a safe harbor 
in cases where lost personal data had been encrypted, full-disk encryption 
was introduced. The use of such technologies increased after criminals 
began using the information stolen from individuals™ devices as a way to 
commit fraud. 
The wider deployment of encryption mechanisms used with encryp
-tion keys that are held only by users has altered the calculation for govern
-ments that seek access to encrypted communications. Previously, law 
enforcement and intelligence agencies were able to rely on court orders 
and subpoenas to providers (third parties) to seek access to communica
-tions directly from providers. However, where providers do not hold 
encryption keys, this access path is no longer available to the govern ment. 
This trend toward deployment of encryption under end-user control was 
1 
National Conference of State Legislatures, 2017, ﬁSecurity Breach Noti˜cation Laws,ﬂ 
April 12, http://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-information-technology/
security-breach-noti˜cation-laws.aspx. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
further fueled by the growing concern about government surveillance 
following disclosures by Edward Snowden about U.S. surveillance pro
-grams. Vendors reacted quickly to expand encryption of data and commu
-nications by default to help distance themselves from those government 
programs. 
Today, encryption protects information stored on or in transit between 
smartphones, laptops, and other devices and information stored on enter
-prise servers and in the cloud. Encryption is relied on to protect the data 
and computer systems of individuals and organizations from criminals 
and repressive governments. The public™s use of encryption can prevent 
crimes such as the theft of information, thus helping make society more 
secure and safe. Encryption is also used by individuals, nonstate actors, 
and governmentsŠincluding that of the United StatesŠto prevent collec
-tion of information by government intelligence agencies. Finally, encryp
-tion enables various types of economic activity that would otherwise not 
be possible. Looking ahead, encryption will be important for applications 
that involve analyzing large volumes of shared, sensitive data. 
Encrypted communications are built in to major computing platforms 
at both the hardware and software levels and into an array of widely used 
messaging applications. Absent government controls, increased integra
-tion and enhanced usability of encryption seems like a foregone conclu
-sion. In some cases, encryption is included and enabled by default. When 
encryption capabilities are introduced into a major platform or widely 
used application, they can very rapidly end up being used by many hun
-dreds of millions of users. 
Encryption is also relied on by criminals to avoid investigation and 
prosecution, including criminals who may bene˜t from default settings 
as well as those who deliberately use encryption. One consequence of 
this widespread use is that encryption is increasingly identi˜ed as an 
impediment to investigations by law enforcement and to foreign intelli
-gence information collection by U.S. intelligence agencies (see the section 
ﬁEncryption as an Impediment to Investigationsﬂ in Chapter 4). 
Encryption is not the only technical barrier that government inves
-tigators face when seeking access to plaintext. Even when investigators 
do not encounter encryption, they may confront other technical barriers. 
Plaintext and metadata cannot be accessed without an understanding of 
the multiple protocols, formats, and compression algorithms used by the 
software applications that transmit and store the information, elements 
that are not always well documented and that are subject to frequent 
change. This may also hamper investigations, especially if the investigat
-ing agency does not have robust technical capabilities or the cooperation 
of the vendor or service provider. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION 7The U.S. government has long placed export restrictions
2 on products 
incorporating encryption. In the early 1990s, U.S. government agencies 
strongly pressed for the deposit of encryption keys with government 
agencies or speci˜ed third parties, a proposal that was ultimately aban
-doned after an extended debate over a number of issues, including the 
importance of spreading encryption, the technical challenges in providing 
for key recovery, and whether the proposal would ultimately be accepted 
by Congress and the public. With the increased need for encryption to 
secure electronic commercial data and concerns about the impact on the 
global competitiveness of U.S. industry, export restrictions on cryptogra
-phy were relaxed in the late 1990s, ultimately paving the way for broader 
use of encryption in products sold domestically as well as internationally.
3 More recently, prominent members of the law enforcement commu
-nity have said that encryption is restricting access to stored data or mes
-sage plaintext, even when they have a court order authorizing access. 
Notably, law enforcement reports a growing number of smartphones 
encountered during investigations that they cannot unlock (see the sec
-tion ﬁEncryption as an Impediment to Investigationsﬂ in Chapter 4). They 
argue that even as the volume of digital information expands, important 
parts of the digital world are ﬁgoing darkﬂ as more stored data and com
-munications are encrypted by default and as information relevant to 
investigations is increasingly in digital form. In a 2014 speech, Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Director James Comey described the broad 
challenge of new technology including encryption by default facing law 
enforcement: 
Those charged with protecting our people aren™t always able to access 
the evidence we need to prosecute crime and prevent terrorism even 
with lawful authority. We have the legal authority to intercept and access 
communications and information pursuant to court order, but we often 
lack the technical ability to do so.
4 2  
Nonmilitary cryptography exports from the United States are controlled by the Depart
-ment of
 Commerce. The current regulations are complex but, generally speaking, require 
registration, noti˜cation, or review for products using encryption exceeding speci˜ed key 
lengths and require a license for export to certain countries.
3 
The export regulations, which were intended to keep sensitive technologies out of the 
hands of foreign
 adversaries, also had the side-effect of making things more complicated for 
U.S. vendors who preferred to sell a single version worldwide or to have as few different 
versions as possible, and make it more complicated for U.S. end users to acquire domestic 
software versions that supported a longer key length.
4  J.B. Comey, 2014, ﬁGoing Dark: Are Technology, Privacy, and Public Safety on a Collision
 Course?: Remarks at the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.,ﬂ Federal Bureau of Investi
-gation, October 14, https://www.fbi.gov/news/speeches/going-dark-are-
 technology-privacy-and-public-safety-on-a-collision-course. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Since then, law enforcement of˜cials at the federal, state, and local 
levels have expressed the need for a reliable and scalable way to access 
plaintext. Some members of the U.S. intelligence community have con
-curred that parts of the digital world are getting ﬁdimmerﬂ although not 
necessarily ﬁdark.ﬂ 
By contrast, some, including a number of former senior members of 
the intelligence agenciesŠand a few former members of law enforcement,
5 counter that the growing use of information technology and sophisticated 
collection and analysis capabilities has created a plethora of capabilities 
for conducting investigations. The gains include ﬁlocation information, 
information about contacts and confederates, and an array of new data
-bases that create digital dossiers about individuals™ lives.ﬂ
6 Moreover, a 
variety of technical and business pressures may make considerably more 
data available to law enforcement in unencrypted form than was avail
-able a decade ago. Former National Security Agency (NSA) Director Mike 
McConnell observed that despite the abandonment of the 1990s effort to 
require exceptional access, the agency™s ability to collect signals intelli
-gence is better than at any point in history.
7 Both perspectives share a common element: as the amount of data 
increases rapidly, there is both more data than ever of relevance to inves
-tigations and more data than ever that is inaccessible to investigators. 
Individuals and organizations have also objected to the introduction 
of government access mechanisms on a number of legal and practical 
grounds. Their primary arguments are that any regime by which provid
-ers of products and services featuring encryption are required to provide 
a way for ensuring government access to plaintext likely would (1) be 
ineffective, (2) pose unacceptable risks to cybersecurity, (3) pose unaccept
-able risks to privacy and civil liberties, (4) disadvantage U.S. providers of 
products and services, and (5) hamper innovation in encryption technolo
-gies. Some also observe that it has never been the case that obtaining a 
warrant would guarantee access to the evidence sought; evidence could 
be hidden or destroyed before a warrant is even issued or the desired 
information might not have been captured in the ˜rst place. 
The computer science community has also reacted to renewed pro
-posals to regulate the use of encryption. A group of experts in computer 
science, cryptography, and cybersecurity, many of whom had authored a 
5 M. McConnell, M. Chertoff, and W. Lynn, 2015, ﬁWhy the fear over ubiquitous data 
encryption is
 overblown,ﬂ 
Washington Post
, July 28. 
6 P. Swire, 2015, ﬁThe golden age of surveillance,ﬂ 
Slate
, July, http://www.slate.com/
articles/technology/future_tense/2015/07/encryption_back_doors_aren_t_necessary_we_
re_already_in_a_golden_age_of.html. 
7 E. Nakashima, 2015, ﬁFormer national security of˜cials urge government to embrace rise 
of encryption,ﬂ 
Washington Post
, December
 15.
 Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION 91997 study on this topic, issued a report in 2015 that concluded the follow
-ing: ﬁthe damage that could be caused by law enforcement exceptional 
access requirements would be even greater today than it would have been 
20 years ago,ﬂ ﬁnew law enforcement requirements are likely to introduce 
unanticipated, hard to detect security ˚aws,ﬂ and ﬁany proposals that alter 
the security dynamics online should be approached with caution.ﬂ
8 At the same time, some members in the technical community have begun explor-ing possible technical approaches to meeting government exceptional 
access requirements for communications and data stored on devices and 
seeking ways to reduce the security risks of schemes that provide excep
-tional access. Box 5.1 provides some examples. Box 1.1 provides examples 
of the diverse interests and perspectives in the encryption debate. 
This report reviews how encryption is used and its applications in 
cybersecurity (Chapter 2), its role in protecting privacy and civil liberties 
(Chapter 3), the needs of law enforcement and the intelligence community 
for information (Chapter 4), options for accessing plaintext (Chapter 5), 
and the international landscape (Chapter 6). Chapter 7 provides a frame
-work for evaluating policy or technical approaches for access to plaintext. 
The following sections of Chapter 1, by way of introduction to the report, 
brie˚y (1) summarize options for providing access to plaintext and pos
-sible alternative sources of information, (2) discuss the different contexts 
in which access could be required, and (3) provide examples of technical 
approaches of the sort to which the framework could be applied. Finally, 
the chapter previews the high-level questions in the evaluation frame
-work that is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7. 
GOVERNMENT OPTIONS
There are a wide variety of legal and technical options available to 
governments that seek access to plaintext for law enforcement and intel
-ligence investigations. These can be classi˜ed
9 broadly as follows: 
Ł Take no legislative action to regulate the use of encryption
. Law enforce
-ment and intelligence agencies would have to cope with a world in which 
8 H. Abelson, R. Anderson, S.M. Bellovin, J. Benaloh, M. Blaze, W. Dif˜e, J. Gilmore, et al., 
2015, ﬁKeys under doormats: Mandating insecurity by requiring government access to all
 data and communications,ﬂ 
Journal of Cybersecurity
 1(1):69-79. 
9 There are a variety of useful taxonomies. For example, a scheme developed by Kerr and 
Schneier describes ﬁsix kinds of workarounds: ˜nd the key, guess the key, compel the key, ex
-ploit a ˚aw in the encryption software, access plaintext while the device is in use, and locate 
another plaintext copy.ﬂ See O.S. Kerr and B. Schneier, 2017, ﬁEncryption Workarounds,ﬂ 
GWU Law School Public Law Research Paper No. 2017-22, GWU Legal Studies Research 
Paper No. 2017-22, available at SSRN,  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2938033.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
BOX 1.1 
 Interests and Perspectives in the Encryption DebateProtecting individuals, communities, organizations, governments, and compa
-nies who rely on encryption to safeguard their information and computer systems from hostile parties including criminal and state actors and helping society reduce 
the volume and impact of cyber-enabled crimes. 
Protecting the civil liberties and human rights, including privacy, due process, 
and free expression and association rights of people who use computing and com
-munications technology. 
Protecting government, business, and private travelers, who rely on encryption 
to protect their mobile devices from intrusion when traveling in other countries. Protecting the market share of U.S. vendors in countries whose governments 
or citizens are suspicious of the U.S. government. 
Protecting public safety where access to encrypted communications or data 

disrupt ongoing criminal or terrorist activity. 
Protecting national security where access to encrypted communications or data 
on encrypted devices is sought for foreign intelligence collection. 
Protecting continued innovation in encryption technologies and applications. 
communications are encrypted, and devices and the data stored on them, 
are inaccessible. At the same time, some content would remain available 
where applications and business models require access to plaintext. The 
universe of information for potential use in investigations will likely also 
continue to expand, and new forms of content and metadata may become 
available. In addition, there are speci˜c actions that could be taken within 
the current legal framework governing the use of encryption, including 
the following: 
 Š Train law enforcement to employ tactics likely to mitigate the 
impact of encryption, such as seizing a phone while it is unlocked or 
surveilling a target to observe a passcode. These techniques can be used 
in some cases to obtain access. 
 Š Pursue law enforcement and legal options to obtain or compel 
the cooperation of the investigation targets. Some options, such as com
-pelling a target to provide a biometric to unlock a phone are currently the 
subject of ongoing litigation in the United States.
Ł Provide additional resources to access plaintext
. The technological 
capabilities of U.S. law enforcement have not kept up with the rapid 
changes in technology. The U.S. government could provide additional 
resources for law enforcement and/or intelligence agencies to improve 
their capabilities for accessing and using digital information. These 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION 11resources could be used to develop tools and train personnel to enable 
better use of the unencrypted digital information that is available to law 
enforcement and for ﬁlawful hackingﬂ to obtain plaintext in some circum
-stances by obtaining legal authorization and breaching controls on access 
at the points information is transmitted, received, stored, or processed. In 
addition, governments could invest in research and development on new 
ways of providing access to plaintext that may raise fewer objectionsŠ
even if they provide more limited access to plaintext. This option could, 
of course, be pursued regardless of whether other legislative action is 
taken. 
Ł Enact legislation that requires that device vendors or service providers 
provide government access to plaintext without specifying the technical means of 
doing so
. The government could enact legislation de˜ning an objective for 
accessing plaintext; the mandate could be described in a variety of ways 
depending on different types of problems. For example, a mandate might 
require that vendors be able to comply with warrants seeking access to 
the plaintext of the information their products and services are used to 
encrypt but leave it to industry to design the technical solution. 
Ł Enact legislation requiring a particular technical approach
. The govern
-ment could enact legislation requiring a particular technical approach or 
regulation to select a technical approach. For example, a law or regula
-tion could require the vendor to implement hardware-based device-level 
key escrow for access to stored data or require vendor or third-party key 
escrow for access to communications.
There are also potential options that do not involve regulation of 
encryption, per se, that the committee does not explore in this report 
because they did not seem likely to be effective or politically viable. For 
example, it has been proposed, by analogy to ˜rearm sentence enhance
-ments, that criminal penalties could be increased when encryption is used 
in the course of a crime. Enhanced penalties can be important if you are 
trying to deter the use of a particular tactic (e.g., since the use of a ˜rearm 
increases the risk to public safety, stiffer penalties apply). Unlike guns, 
however, which the criminal must af˜rmatively decide to use when com
-mitting an offense, encryption is widely embedded in commercial prod
-ucts and services, is often enabled by default, and may not even be in the 
direct control of the end user. Put another way, a criminal would have to 
af˜rmatively decide to avoid encryption to reduce the risk of an enhanced 
penalty, a most unlikely outcome. One could also consider making it a 
crime to offer encryption products for criminal purposes. However, such 
cases are likely already covered by existing aiding and abetting laws, 
and it seems easy to circumvent such statutes simply by marketing the 
product for another purpose. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
SCOPE AND CONTEXT FOR ACCESS
Several of the options above contemplate government regulation of 
service providers and vendors. Such measures could be brought to bear 
in a variety of ways and circumstances and applied narrowly or broadly. 
The following are some of the relevant dimensions of this context: 
Ł Scope
. Regulation might be very broad, encompassing both enter
-prise and personal stored data and communications, or more narrowŠfor 
example, covering only access to the contents of smartphones or commu
-nications using consumer messaging applications. 
Ł Type of data
. Regulations might apply to encrypted data stored in 
devices, such as smartphones or laptops; data stored by cloud services; 
and/or the content of network communications. 
Ł Type of user
. Regulation might apply to all (or a subset of) com
-mercial entities or private citizens. Notably, some regulated entities (e.g., 
banks) already have legal obligations to provide data, and enterprises 
need recovery methods for business continuity. By contrast, private cit
-izens do not generally have such regulatory requirements; they may 
nevertheless opt for a capability to recover their data. The situation is 
blurred when people use personal devices in business settings and further 
complicated because the same devices and services are often used in both 
personal and business settings. 
Ł Application layer
. Regulations might apply only to encryption pro
-vided by a device™s operating system, which would provide access to 
information not otherwise encrypted, but they would not enable access 
to data separately encrypted by individual applications. Alternatively, 
regulations might be applied to applications that run on a device or the 
services to which the applications connect. 
Ł Different crimes or intelligence priorities
. For example, individuals 
might be compelled to reveal a passcode only if needed for the investiga
-tion of serious crimes, which could be argued to limit the impact on civil 
liberties.
EVALUATION FRAMEWORK
Chapter 7 provides an evaluation framework in the form of ques
-tions that the committee believes must be addressed in any proposal to 
provide government access to plaintext. The objective of this framework 
is not only to help policymakers determine whether a particular approach 
is optimal or desirable, but also to help ensure that any approach that 
policymakers might pursue is implemented in a way that maximizes its 
effectiveness while minimizing harmful side effects. The questions are as 
follows: 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION 131.
 To what extent will the proposed approach be effective in permit
-ting law enforcement and/or the intelligence community to access plain
-text at or near the scale, timeliness, and reliability that proponents seek? 
2.
 To what extent will the proposed approach affect the security of 
the type of data or device to which access would be required, as well as 
cybersecurity more broadly? 
3.
 To what extent will the proposed approach affect the privacy, civil 
liberties, and human rights of targeted individuals and others? 
4.
 To what extent will the proposed approach affect commerce, eco
-nomic competitiveness, and innovation? 
5.
 To what extent will ˜nancial costs be imposed by the proposed 
approach, and who will bear them? 
6.
 To what extent is the proposed approach consistent with existing 
law and other government priorities? 
7.
 To what extent will the international context affect the pro
-posed approach, and what will be the impact of the proposed approach 
internationally? 
8.
 To what extent will the proposed approach be subject to effective 
ongoing evaluation and oversight? 
The reader may ˜nd it helpful to keep these questions in mind when 
reading the examples and analysis in subsequent chapters of this report. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
For most of recorded history, encryption has been used to protect the 
secrecy of communications between a sender and a receiver. Govern
 
ments 
have historically been heavy users of encryption. The Caesar cipher goes 
back to the Roman Empire. Ciphers were used by both sides in the Ameri
-can Revolutionary War. Histories of World War II dwell at length on the 
contribution of defeating German and Japanese encryption systems to 
the Allied victory. At the same time, the Allies also relied on encryption 
systems, some of which were defeated by Axis codebreakers. Govern
-ments™ reliance on encrypted communications continues to the present day. 
In recent years, encryption has become far more widely available on 
a wide range of consumer and business products and services. Increas
-ingly, encryption is available by defaultŠoften without the user even 
being aware of itŠand the keys for decrypting data are held by individual 
users. As a result, more data is routinely encrypted today than ever before. 
Today, encryption protects the communications of individuals and 
organizations from unsophisticated and sophisticated criminals and 
repressive governments. It assures the security of electronic commerce 
transactions over the InternetŠfor example making it possible to transmit 
credit card numbers. It protects information stored on smartphones, lap
-tops, and other devices. Encrypted communication capabilities are built 
into major computing platforms and in an array of messaging applica
-tions that are used by hundreds of millions of users. 
Computer and communications systems use cryptography for three 
broad purposesŠto protect the con˜dentiality of information (i.e., encryp
-2Encryption and Its Applications
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENCRYPTION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
 15tion), to protect the integrity of information, and to authenticate the origi
-nator or sender of information. Applications that require the secrecy of 
large volumes of information use symmetric cryptography. Asymmetric 
(public key) cryptography is frequently used to securely disseminate keys 
that are used in symmetric cryptography. For example, cryptography 
enables the secure distribution of regular software updates, including 
security patches, over a network and is used to verify the identity of 
individuals and organizations. This report focuses largely on the ˜rst 
application, encryption protecting con˜dentiality. However, it touches 
on another use of cryptography: schemes to provide exceptional access 
to information stored on smartphones or laptops that are locked with a 
passcode may involve modi˜cations to the cryptography that implements the locking mechanism. 
The increased availability and use of encryptionŠmost notably to 
protect access to data stored on smartphones and to keep Internet mes
-sages con˜dentialŠmeans that it is increasingly encountered in investiga
-tions by law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
1 This chapter provides a basic introduction to encryption and its uses. 
It provides context for subsequent discussions of mechanisms that would 
afford government access and associated technical and operational risks. 
It begins with a description of the different kinds of encryption that are 
important today and with an overview of the ways that encryption sys
-tems are created. It then provides an overview of some of the ways that 
modern computer and communications systems use encryption to pro
-vide a secure experience to their end users. This is followed by a descrip
-tion of the issues and challenges of managing the cryptographic keys that 
encryption systems rely on. The chapter concludes with a discussion of 
the threats that modern encryption systems face and attempt to defeat. 
WHAT IS ENCRYPTION?
Encryption schemes transform a plaintext message (or stored data) 
into a ciphertext in such a way that the ciphertext reveals little or no 
information about the original plaintext. Encryption schemes have the 
following three components: a key generation algorithm, an encryption 
algorithm, and a decryption algorithm. The encryption algorithm takes 
plaintext and an encryption key as input and returns a ciphertext. The 
decryption algorithm takes as input a ciphertext and a decryption key 
and returns the plaintext. 
1 See the section ﬁEncryption as an Impediment to Investigationsﬂ in Chapter 4
 for a dis
-cussion of data on how often encryption is encountered in investigations and its impacts.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
In a symmetric scheme, the encryption and decryption keys are the 
same and must be kept secret. Without the secret key, there is no practical 
way to decrypt the data. 
One can visualize the symmetric encryption process as putting plain
-text data in a box and then locking the box using a secret key. The box can 
be opened only using the same secret key. Provided that one uses a suit
-able algorithm, a properly engineered implementation, and a suf˜ciently 
long key, the encryption is unbreakable (Box 2.1). 
A physical box can be forced open with tools. By contrast, breaking 
encryption requires trying each possible key until the correct one is found; 
this can take an extremely long time. Knowing (including guessing or 
stealing) the key is the only practical way to retrieve the data unless one 
can circumvent the encryption by obtaining the information before it is 
encrypted or after it is decrypted (unless a ˚aw in the encryption software 
or cryptographic algorithm can be found and exploited). 
In an asymmetric or public-key encryption scheme, the encryption 
and decryption keys are different, and only the decryption key must be 
kept secret. The encryptor uses one key, called a public key, while the 
decryptor uses a different key, called a private key. As the name suggests, 
the public key is public and enables anyone to encrypt messages. Only the 
corresponding private key can decrypt the resulting ciphertexts. 
One can visualize the public-key encryption process as placing the 
data in a box that locks as soon as one closes the lid. Anyone can create 
such a box and lock it, but only someone in possession of the secret key 
can unlock the box. As with symmetric encryption, knowing the key is 
the only practical way to retrieve the data, unless one can steal the key 
or obtain the information before it is encrypted or after it is decrypted. 
Under some circumstances, encryption schemes may provide for 
authorized third-party access to encrypted information. Following a 1996 
National Research Council report on encryption, this report uses the 
phrase exceptional access to 
Stress that the situation is not one that was included within the intended 
bounds of the original transaction, but is an unusual subsequent event. 
Exceptional access refers to situations in which an authorized party 
needs and can obtain the plaintext of encrypted data (for storage or com-munications). The word ﬁexceptionalﬂ is used in contrast to the word 
ﬁroutineﬂ and connotes something unusual about the circumstances 
 
under which access is required. Government exceptional access refers to 
the case in which government has a need for access to information under 
speci˜c circumstances authorized by law.
2 2 National Research Council, 1996, 
Cryptography™s Role in Securing the Information Society
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., p. 80.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENCRYPTION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
 17BOX 2.1 How Strong Is ﬁStrong?ﬂ 
 Defining Encryption for This ReportThe term ﬁstrong encryptionﬂ sometimes arises in the context of the policy 
debate around government access to plaintext. Its use goes back to the days 
when the U.S. government limited the wide availability of some encryption products 
by setting a limit on the key size of exportable algorithms. In those days, strong 
 
encryption algorithms were those that exceeded the government limit by a reason
-able margin (40 bit exportable; 56 bit strong). 
Today, it is used more generally to denote an encryption scheme with one or 

to defeat it. Sometimes, ﬁstrong encryptionﬂ is used in the current debate simply as 
a short-hand for encryption that it is not affordable or practicable for government 
investigators to defeat, at least not at scale. 

-ate choice of cryptographic algorithms and protocols, a well-engineered imple-

provide technical mechanisms for government exceptional access, while others 
would consider schemes that include properly engineered access mechanisms 
to be ﬁstrong.ﬂ 
Given the different view on what it means for encryption to be ﬁstrongﬂ and 
given the existence of widely accepted standards for encryption technology, this 

uses the term ﬁencryption,ﬂ it means encrypting data in a way that makes it im-

recommendations of the European Union Agency for Network and Information 
Security,
1 the National Institute of Standards and Technology,
2 or the National 
Security Agency.
31 European Union Agency for Network and Information Security, 2014, 
Algorithms, Key 
Size and Parameters Report 2014
, November 21, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/
algorithms-key-size-and-parameters-report-2014. 2 E. Barker, 2016, 
Recommendation for Key Management: Part 1
, General NIST Special 
Publication 800-57, Part 1 Revision 4, National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. 
Department of Commerce, January, http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.
SP.800-57pt1r4.pdf. 
3 National Security Agency, 2015, 
Commercial National Security Algorithm Suite
, August 19, https://www.iad.gov/iad/programs/iad-initiatives/cnsa-suite.cfm.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Exceptional access also applies in a business context, where an 
employer can access information encrypted by an employee, and in 
an end-user context, such as data recovery after an encryption key is lost. 
DESIGNING ENCRYPTION
The design and standardization of secure encryption algorithms is 
a challenging task. Although there are encryption algorithms that are 
perfectly secure in the sense that they are unbreakable,
3 these schemes 
are rarely deployed in the real world because they are not practical. Even 
though the encryption schemes that are deployed in practice are not 
perfectly secure, their security is supported by a rigorous design process 
backed by a mathematically sound framework that allows cryptographers 
to carefully study and analyze their strengths and weaknesses. 
The process of reviewing and assessing the security of symmetric 
encryption schemes with the aim of endorsing a scheme as a standard for 
broad use in the United States and in much of the world generally occurs 
through a world-wide competition to which experts in symmetric encryp
-tion submit their designs. The algorithms are then cryptanalyzed (i.e., 
experts study their properties and attempt to defeat them) for years, and 
the most resilient one is chosen. For example, the widely used Advanced 
Encryption Standard (AES) and Secure Hash Algorithm-3 (SHA-3) crypto
-graphic standards were evaluated and standardized through competi
-tions organized by the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST).
4 In the end, con˜dence in the security of these encryption schemes 
relies in part on their design and in part on the fact that they withstood 
years of cryptanalytic effort. Wide adoption of resulting algorithms, such 
as occurred with AES, results in increased security for all. 
Encryption and other security functions are performed by crypto
-graphic protocols, which describe how cryptographic algorithms are used 
to perform the tasks necessary to carry out that function. For example, a 
protocol for con˜dential communications must describe how a sender 
and receiver authenticate each other, how they agree on or establish 
encryption keys, and how the messages they exchange are encrypted and 
transported across the network. 
The challenge of designing practical and secure encryption is magni
-˜ed by the fact that encryption algorithms and protocols are notoriously 
fragile. Even a small and seemingly innocuous change in their design 
3 One-time pad encryption cannot be broken but requires that a random and unique key 
as long as the message be
 generated and shared with the receiver.
4 Country-speci˜c cryptography, such as that developed for use in China and Russia, does 
not follow such an open
 process.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENCRYPTION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
 19can break them completely.
5 Moreover, bugs in the software that imple
-ments the algorithms can go undetected for years.
6 If a new encryption 
scheme were to be developed for the purpose of supporting third-party 
access, it would require similar attention to design and engineering and 
a comparable amount of scrutiny if it were to be trusted as much as cur
-rent schemes.
7 Cryptography is a very active research ˜eld in which new techniques 
continue to be developed, standardized, and deployed. For example, the 
most widely used symmetric encryption method, AES, was standardized 
in the year 2001. A common way to use AES, called AES-Galois/
 
Counter 
Mode, was developed in 2005. A new method for encrypting credit card 
data, called format-preserving encryption, was standardized in 2013. 
Public-key ciphers designed to withstand quantum computers (whichŠ
if realized at large scaleŠwould provide powerful new capabilities to 
attackers seeking to break encryption) are only now being developed 
and are expected to be standardized in the mid-2020s.
8 Since 2008, new 
encryption methods have been invented that enable encrypted data to 
be processed without decryption. Such techniquesŠif their performance 
can be improved so that they are practicalŠcould reduce, for example, 
the risk of using cloud computing to process con˜dential data and would 
also have implications for government access. One potential consequence 
of this continuing innovation to consider is whether government policies 
requiring the use of particular technologies may impede future advances. 
For example, innovation in the United States might well be inhibited if 
only a single method of encryption or class of encryption methods were 
allowed domestically. 
5 For example, the addition of a compression feature for Transport Layer Security (TLS)
packets introduced a
 signi˜cant vulnerability by opening up a powerful side-channel 
 
attack. See J. Kelsey, 2002, ﬁCompression and information leakage of plaintext,ﬂ pp. 263-
276 in 
 Revised Papers from the 9th International Workshop on Fast Software Encryption, FSE 
™02
, Springer-Verlag, London, U.K., http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=647937.741226. This 
vulnerability is the basis of the Compression Ratio Info-leak Made Easy (CRIME) exploit 
against secret Web cookies over connections that use data compression, allowing an attacker 
to hijack an authenticated session.
6 For example, a study of encryption keys used for Web traf˜c revealed vulnerabilities 
from poorly
 implemented key-generation algorithms. See A. Lenstra, J.P. Hughes, M. Augier, 
J.W. Bos, T. Kleinjung, and C. Wachter, 2012, ﬁRon was wrong, Whit is right,ﬂ 
IACR Technical 
Report
, https://eprint.iacr.org/2012/064.pdf.
7 This point was made in a 1996 National Research Council report, but the recommenda
-tion to implement and test
 an exceptional access system at scale was never carried out. 
See National Research Council, 1996, 
Cryptography™s Role in Securing the Information Society
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
8 National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2017, ﬁPost-Quantum Crypto Project: 
Workshops/Timeline,ﬂ
 April
 24, http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/ST/post-quantum-crypto/
workshops.html.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Real-world systems use a multitude of keys for many different pur
-poses. Some are used to encrypt messages, some are used to encrypt other 
keys, and others are used to authenticate messages or users. Most often, 
encryption is used in the design of secure systems as a way to reduce the 
amount of information that needs protecting by other means. By encrypt
-ing data, it is possible to render components of a system incapable of 
compromising the data they process, thus reducing the portion of the 
system that requires deep security analysis. 
It is critical to properly manage and secure keys. They must be securely 
created, stored, distributed, certi˜ed, backed up, updated, revoked, and 
deleted. Keys often have a ˜nite lifetime, determined by their speci˜c usage 
and their risk of exposure. For example, keys used to encrypt 
 messages that 
are only retained for a short period of time (ﬁephemeralﬂ messages) tend to 
have brief lifetimes. Other keys that are used to generate other keys tend 
to have longer lifetimes (often many years) and require especially strong 
protection. It is a best practice to delete all copies of a key when it is no 
longer needed. 
APPLICATIONS OF ENCRYPTION
Computer applications, software, and hardware all integrate encryp
-tion to accomplish objectives that users value. A single laptop or smart
-phone today, for instance, commonly deploys encryption in multiple 
different ways, including in the hardware, the ˜rmware that connects the 
hardware and the operating system, and a large portion of the software 
that runs on the device. The pervasiveness of encryption is relevant to 
public debates about exceptional access, because only certain uses of 
cryptography in a laptop or smartphone enable encryption of users™ data 
of potential interest to law enforcement or intelligence agencies. Thus 
a mandate for exceptional access would have to be targeted to speci˜c 
uses of cryptography where the speci˜cs vary according to the device. 
This section provides some highly simpli˜ed examples of some of these 
applications and the ways that they depend on encryption; the focus is 
on giving a sense of the role of encryption rather than full details of its 
implementation. 
Protecting Stored Files
Applications that protect a single ˜le or a few ˜les almost always use 
symmetric encryption to protect the ˜le content. The key for the sym
-metric encryption system may be entered into the program by the user, 
derived from a user-supplied password, entered from a hardware token, 
protected by an asymmetric encryption system in which the symmetric 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENCRYPTION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
 21encryption key is encrypted under a public key and decrypted when the 
corresponding private key is provided, or some combination of these. For 
example, in the Encrypting File System that is integrated into Microsoft 
Windows, the user™s private key is decrypted by the operating system 
when the user logs in. 
A related use of encryption is to functionally ﬁeraseﬂ data. If data is 
encrypted and the key is destroyed, the data becomes inaccessible as if it 
were erased. In fact, deleting the key is even better than deleting the data 
because deleting the key renders all copies of the data inaccessible (even 
backups) and obviates the need to wipe storage media. 
Full Disk Encryption
Many modern operating systems support full disk9 encryption, which 
protects both user data and system programs from disclosure. As with the 
˜le encryption scenario outlined above, the ˜les themselves are protected 
using symmetric encryption. Additional protective measures combining 
operating system software and computer hardware protect the system 
˜les from modi˜cation (so that modi˜ed program ˜les cannot, for exam
-ple, access encrypted data and transfer it to an unauthorized user once it 
has been decrypted). 
Full disk encryption systems are complex. The underlying hardware 
or ˜rmware must include a mechanism that veri˜es a digital signature 
on the ˜rst ˜rmware and software components to run after the system is 
booted, thus ensuring that they have not been maliciously modi˜ed. After 
this validation has been completed, and after the user has authenticated 
to the system with a passcode, token, or both, the hardware provides 
access to a secret (asymmetric) key that the software then uses to decrypt 
a stored symmetric key that is in turn used to decrypt the contents of the 
disk. 
Full disk encryption systems must meet a variety of real-world 
requirements. It must be possible to securely update signed ˜rmware 
and software components in case errors are found. It must also be pos
-sible to change user passcodesŠideally without having to decrypt and 
re-encrypt the entire content of the disk. Full disk encryption systems are 
usually con˜gured so the secret key protecting the disk encryption key 
is erased (and the decrypted contents of disk made unavailable) if too 
many invalid passcodes are entered (see the next section). If a mechanism 
for entering a recovery key (which should be physically protected in a 
physically separate location) is provided, it allows users to regain access 
9 In this report ﬁdiskﬂ is used to include the solid-state drives implemented with ˚ash 
memory chips that are used
 as mass storage in smartphones and many laptops.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
to their data in the event the key erasure feature is triggered or if a major 
hardware or software failure occurs. Meeting each of these requirements 
adds complexity to the full disk encryption system.
10
Device Locking
Mobile devices and the data they contain are frequently protected by 
locking
11 mechanisms that ensure, by default, that phone data is encrypted 
whenever the screen is locked and that only the user can unlock the phone 
and its contents. For phones, this combination of cryptographic passcode 
protection and full disk encryption was introduced as the default setting 
in Apple™s iOS 9 and Android™s Marshmallow system, although not all 
vendors of Android phones implement this encryption.
12
The key needed to unlock the phone is a combination of the user™s 
passcode and the phone™s hardware key. Each time an incorrect passcode 
is entered, the phone delays the next attempt. After a limited number of 
incorrect attempts, the key is erased, making the data inaccessible. Users can 
also con˜gure their phones to use a biometric, such as a ˜ngerprint or face, 
instead of a passcode; after a limited number of failed recognition attempts 
or a limited period of time, the phone reverts to the passcode unlock mecha
-nism. These measures deter phone theft and protect users™ data but also can 
make it extremely dif˜cult for law enforcement to access data that may be 
relevant to an investigation if the data is stored only on the locked device. 
Virtual Private Networks
A virtual private network (VPN) is a way of creating an encrypted 
connection between a remote user and a site. By enabling remote users to 
seamlessly connect to the organization™s networks, VPNs provide a con
-venient way for organizations to operate across multiple locations. Thus a 
traveling employee can safely access his or her work network from a hotel 
room anywhere in the world. VPNs operate by using symmetric cryptog
-raphy to encrypt packets of data to be transmitted between central and 
remote locations, and then embedding the encrypted packets in ﬁouterﬂ 
packets that are routed over the Internet. The encrypted packets include 
10
 In fact, the description provided here is simpli˜ed with respect to the number and rela
-tionships of the
 cryptographic keys and validations actually required.
11 ﬁLockingﬂ has been used in various ways with respect to phones. Here ﬁlockingﬂ simply 
means that users must
 enter a passcode or otherwise authenticate themselves before the 
device will function.
12
Apple provides updates for all iPhones. Although Google develops the Android operat
-ing system, updates are
 handled by the manufacturers that use it. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENCRYPTION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
 23routing and other information that enables themŠonce decryptedŠto 
reach their destination within the organization™s network. 
VPN systems include mechanisms that allow each end of the connec
-tion to authenticate to the other, either using asymmetric cryptography 
or symmetric cryptography with a shared key at each end of the connec
-tion. Keys may be derived from a user-entered password, from a code 
generated by a hardware token, or both. Authentication is important 
and authentication mechanisms must be designed carefully to prevent 
a ﬁman in the middleﬂ from masquerading as the ﬁother userﬂ to both 
endpoints of the communication and intercepting and decrypting all of 
the encrypted traf˜c. 
Secure Web Browsing
Each time a user visits an e-commerce website or a Web-based email 
server13 such as Gmail or Hotmail, he or she does so through an encrypted 
connection. A protocol called TLS provides the encrypted connection. It 
uses authentication protocols based on asymmetric cryptography and 
signed certi˜cates to verify that the server is the one whose name the user 
typed into the browser. It then uses public key encryption to negotiate a 
symmetric key for the browsing session and uses that symmetric key to 
encrypt the session traf˜c. Almost all Web browsers and servers support 
TLS or one of its predecessors, and many web servers have the public-key 
certi˜cates necessary to support encrypted sessions. 
The history of the protocols used for secure Web browsing provides a 
compelling illustration of how dif˜cult it is to develop encryption proto
-cols and the care that must be taken when adding capabilities to accom
-modate government requirements. In the early days of the Internet, gov
-ernment restrictions limited the strength of symmetric encryption that 
could be implemented by browsers and servers sold outside the United 
States. Although those restrictions have been removed, to ensure back
-ward compatibility weak encryption remains as an option (and not by 
default) in many products. Although the weak encryption is not typically 
on by default, it is possible for an attacker to force browsers and servers 
that implement some protocol versions to ﬁfall backﬂ to older and weaker 
13
 Note that web-based email services are not the same as ﬁe-mail encryption.ﬂ Although 
the user™s connection to
 the web-based email server is protected by secure browsing, the 
email message is available to the server in unencrypted form, in contrast to the email en
-cryption scenario where the message is only unencrypted on the sender™s and recipient™s 
local devices.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
encryption suites.
14
 Additionally, TLS and its predecessors are very com
-plex, and bugs in implementations (and in the protocols themselves for 
earlier versions) have resulted in widespread weaknesses. 
Operators of Internet services and suppliers of browsers and servers 
are aware of these limitations and continue to work to eliminate them 
by introducing new security features, conducting continuing analyses 
and attempts at formal veri˜cation of the TLS protocols, and searching 
for and removing weaknesses. 
Secure Messaging
Secure messaging applications use end-to-end encryption protocols to 
prevent third parties as well as the messaging service provider from hav
-ing access to the plaintext of messages. The Signal protocol, designed by 
Open Whisper Systems, is used in several widely used messaging appli
-cations including Signal, WhatsApp, secret conversations in 
 Facebook 
Messenger, the ﬁincognito modeﬂ of Google Allo, and Skype. When a 
user registers for a messaging service, the app sends a public identity key, 
public session set-up key, and a batch of public one-time session set-up 
keys to the messaging service™s server and retains the corresponding set of 
private keys. To communicate with another user, the initiating app estab
-lishes an encrypted session. To do so, the initiator™s app requests a set of 
public keys for the recipient from a public-key server. Both the initiator 
and recipient use each other™s public keys to generate a master secret key 
for the session. Each message is then encrypted using symmetric encryp
-tion with a unique message key computed based on the master secret 
key. This message key is ephemeral: it cannot be reconstructed from the 
current session state after the message has been transmitted or received.
15
 As a result of this approach, known as forward secrecy and commonly 
used to protect communications, it is not possible to decrypt multiple 
past communications by ˜nding or breaking a single key. That is, even if 
encryption keys from a user™s smartphone are compromised, they cannot 
be used to go back in time to decrypt previously transmitted messages. 
14 B. Beurdouche, K. Bhargavan, A. Delignat-Lavaud, C. Fournet, M. Kohlweiss, A. Pironti, 
P.-Y. Strub, and J.K. Zinzindohoue 2015, ﬁA messy state of the union: Taming the compos
-ite state machines of TLS,ﬂ
 pp. 535-552 in 
2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
, doi:10.1109/SP.2015.39. 
15
 WhatsApp, 2017, ﬁWhatsApp Encryption Overview,ﬂ July
 6, 
https://www.whatsapp.
com/security/WhatsApp-Security-Whitepaper.pdf.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENCRYPTION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
 25Protecting Con˜dentiality in Cloud or Third-Party Computing
Cloud computing and storage are changing how organizations use 
and manage their data and, of particular relevance here, the data of their 
customers. Familiar examples of consumer services that store data in the 
cloud include e-mail services such as Google™s Gmail and ˜le storage and 
sharing services such as Dropbox. Cloud services are also used to back up 
and restore data on smartphones or laptops. Encryption is generally used 
to protect the con˜dentiality of that data. Depending on how the service 
is architected and the business model of the service provider, the provider 
may or may not have access to the keys needed to decrypt the data. 
New and emerging techniques enable better protection of this data 
and will complicate future efforts by investigators to access data in some 
situations. For example, one indication of future technology trends toward 
greater protection of data in the cloud can be seen in the growing trend 
of cloud providers to support virtual machines where encrypted data is 
decrypted only at the time the data is actually used.
16
 In the long term, 
emerging techniques for computing on data without decrypting it, such 
as homomorphic encryption, will further protect data in the cloud and 
complicate efforts to access it. Because these techniques are likely to be 
more costly to use than other forms of encryption, it is expected that they 
will be usedŠif and when they are adoptedŠwith especially sensitive 
types of data such as medical information. 
ENCRYPTION AND THE EXPANDING CYBER THREAT
The United States faces a signi˜cant and growing cybersecurity threat. 
Indeed, it has topped the list of global threats in the 
Worldwide Threat Assess
-ment of the US Intelligence Community since 2013. The 2017 threat assessment 
states: 
Cyber threats are already challenging public trust and con˜dence in 
global institutions, governance, and norms, while imposing costs on the 
US and global economies. Cyber threats also pose an increasing risk to 
public health, safety, and prosperity as cyber technologies are integrated 
with critical infrastructure in key sectors.
17
 16
 This service uses new cryptography and trusted execution technologies that have been 
added to microprocessors.
 See Microsoft Corporation, 2017, ﬁ(Cloud) Tip of the Day: Intro
-ducing Azure con˜dential computing,ﬂ October
 3, https://blogs.technet.microsoft.com/tip_
of_the_day/2017/10/03/cloud-tip-of-the-day-introducing-azure-con˜dential-computing/.
17 Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence, 2017, ﬁStatement for the Record: Worldwide 
Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community,ﬂ May
 11,
 https://www.dni.gov/˜les/
documents/Newsroom/Testimonies/SSCI%20Unclassi˜ed%20SFR%20-%20Final.pdf.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
As more than a decade of high-pro˜le attacks has shown, it is prov
-ing increasingly dif˜cult to secure data or the computerized systems that 
control the nation™s ˜nancial services, communications, health care, elec
-tions, utilities, factories, supply chains, and transportation sectors. Attacks 
are being made against individuals, governments, universities, research 
organizations, and civil society groups. As digital infrastructure becomes 
more pervasive and interconnected, both its accessibility to attackers 
around the world and the consequences of successful attacks are growing. 
The threat environment continues to worsen, as evidenced by the attacks 
described below. In many cases, encryption is an importantŠand some
-times 
 
necessaryŠtool in responding to this challenge. 
In considering the role of encryption in combating cyber threats, one 
important consideration is when and how much encryption can help 
counter a threat. Not all cyber threats can necessarily be prevented by 
encryption; see the discussion at the end of the following section. Another 
important consideration is how much additional risk is introduced by 
exceptional access mechanisms and whether that added risk is acceptable 
in the context of particular applications and threats and when weighed 
against the bene˜ts. The section ﬁTechnological Approaches for Accessing 
Plaintext, Limitations, and Alternativesﬂ in Chapter 5 discusses several 
possible technical mechanisms for exceptional access and some of the 
associated risks. 
Another important consideration is the context in which a regulation 
to provide government exceptional access would apply. For example, a 
regulation that applies to mass-market messaging applications would 
not directly affect the use of encryption to protect credit card numbers 
in e-
 
commerce applications. On the other hand, if smartphones are used 
to provide authentication codes in a multifactor authentication scheme, 
a requirement for exceptional access to unlock smartphones adds some 
degree of risk that the authentication codes could be obtained from a lost 
or stolen phone. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENCRYPTION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
 27Cyber Threats
Network-enabled cyber threats ˜rst appeared in the mid-1980s.
18 These were the opening wedge in what became an increasingly serious 
series of attacks. In the 1990s, attackers took advantage of poorly secured 
systems and the vulnerable security architectures in computer products, 
mostly to demonstrate weaknesses and gain public recognition.
19
 As the 
use of computers and the Internet grew, attacks became increasingly 
sophisticated and the targets more and more valuable. Criminal hackers 
jumped into the trade. Another change came with state-sponsored attacks. 
Digitization and the growth of interconnected networks created a ripe 
environment for espionage. 
The number of places that contain potentially sensitive information 
continues to grow. The ﬁbig dataﬂ revolution has resulted in a great deal 
more information about individuals being collected, stored, and analyzed. 
Consequently, data has become an increasing target and encryption and 
other applications of cryptography have become importantŠand some
-times essentialŠtools for protecting data. 
Beginning around 2005, industry and government began encounter
-ing advanced persistent threat (APT) agentsŠhackers who would mount 
repeated attacks against the same target over a period of a number of 
months or longer. Often the attack came through ﬁspear phishingﬂ emails 
that appeared to originate from legitimate sources and were tailored to 
speci˜c targets. These were used to fool the recipient into providing access 
credentials for targeted systems (such a technique was used to hack e-mail 
during the 2016 U.S. presidential election). Many companies and govern
-ment agencies around the worldŠincluding the U.K. Parliament, Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory, and Northrup GrummanŠhave fallen prey 
18
 An investigation over a missing 75 cents at the Lawrence Berkeley National Labora
-tory eventually revealed a
 German hacker stealing U.S. Department of Defense documents 
that he was selling to the KGB (C. Stoll, 2005, 
The Cuckoo™s Egg: Tracking a Spy through the 
Maze of Computer Espionage
, Simon & Schuster, New York). Several years later, in what was 
essentially an experiment that escaped the laboratory, the Morris Worm brought down the 
nascent ARPANet when an incorrect parameter caused the worm to proliferate far faster and 
more broadly than intended (see, e.g., H. Orman, 2003, ﬁThe Morris worm: A ˜fteen-year 
perspective,ﬂ 
IEEE Security and Privacy
 99(5):35-43). 
19
 One example of this, there are many, is that the Melissa and ILOVEYOU viruses were 
in e-mail attachments
 but were able to access Microsoft users™ address books and thus mail 
themselves on to new victims.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
to this form of attack. Even RSA Security, a leading provider of security 
tools, was victimized by an APT attack.
20
Many nations are experiencing cyber threats, but the United States is 
particularly threatened. In 2010, former NSA Director Mike McConnell 
noted, ﬁThe United States is ˜ghting a cyber-war today, and we are losing. 
. . . As the most wired nation on Earth, we offer the most targets of signi˜
-cance, yet our cyber-defenses are woefully lacking.ﬂ
21 Since then, reported 
intelligence attacks on the United States have been growing in severity: 
Ł In a 2015 attack attributed to Chinese actors, hackers gained access 
to 80 million customer records at Anthem, the second largest health 
insurer in the United States.
22
 Ł In 2015, suspected Chinese hackers illegally accessed Of˜ce of 
 
Personnel Management computers and stole more than 21.5 million 
records including ˜ngerprints of government employees and contractors 
holding security clearances. The stolen data included family, ˜nancial, 
travel, and health information about the people with access to the nation™s 
secrets.
23
 Ł Russian intelligence agencies stole emails from the Democratic 
National Committee servers in 2015 and the account of the Demo
-cratic presidential candidate™s campaign chair in 2016.
24
 Recent years have also seen the emergence of cyberattacks intended 
to have physical impacts, such as attacks on industrial control systems 
and public utilities. 
Some threats have abated in recent years, while others have grown 
20
 An attacker sent e-mails with the subject ﬁ2011 Recruitment Planﬂ to a number of RSA 
 
Security employees over
 2 days. One employee opened the attached Excel spreadsheet, 
which installed malware that used a previously unknown bugŠa zero-day vulnerabilityŠ 
in Adobe Flash software. Using this, the attacker was able to access passwords to other 
accounts. See RSA Fraud Action Research Labs, 2011, ﬁAnatomy of an Attack,ﬂ April
 1, 
https://blogs.rsa.com/anatomy-of-an-attack/. 
21
 M. McConnell, 2010, ﬁMike McConnell on how to win the cyber-war we™re losing,ﬂ 
Washington Post
 28:B01. 
22
 D. Harwell and E. Nakashima, 2015, ﬁChina suspected in major hacking of health 
 insurer,ﬂ
 Washington Post
, February
 5. 
23
 J.H. Davis, 2015, ﬁHacking of government computers exposed 21.5 million people,ﬂ 
New York
 Times
, July
 9. 
24
 Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence, 2017, 
A Background to ﬁAssessing Russian 
Activities and Intentions in Recent US Electionsﬂ: The Analytic Process and Cyber Incident Attribu
-tion
, Intelligence Community Assessment ICA 2017-01D, January
 6, https://www.dni.gov/
˜les/documents/ICA_2017_01.pdf.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENCRYPTION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
 29more severe. Some nations, including North Korea
25
 and Russia, have 
viewed cyberattacks as an effective way to achieve national objectives 
without resorting to kinetic weapons. In 2013, Russia embarked on a plan 
to ﬁ[˜ght] a war without ˜ghting a war,ﬂ and cyberattacks provided an 
excellent tool for doing so.
26
 The activities in the 2016 U.S. presidential 
election are one example of this strategy. 
None of the attacks listed above would have been prevented by 
encryption, although it may have made them more dif˜cult to carry out. 
Some appear to have been conducted by using ﬁphishingﬂ emails to entice 
authorized users to give up their authentication credentials and then 
using the stolen credentials to gain privileges necessary to access, decrypt, 
and ex˜ltrate the targeted data. Others resulted from devices being pro
-tected only by unchanged default passwords. Several of the attacks point 
to the need for greater use of secure two-factor authentication. One widely 
used approach uses smartphones. Doing so securely depends on device 
locking, as described above. 
Encryption can reduce the risk or consequence of attacks in several 
ways. It greatly reduces the risks when data is stolen or accidentally 
leaked or stored on a device such as a phone or laptop that is lost or 
stolen. It forces an adversary seeking to ex˜ltrate data to not only steal 
the device but also gain access to the keys used to encrypt it. Encryption 
thus forces adversaries to launch different kinds of attacks, making such 
attacks more dif˜cult and costly to execute. In addition, the appropriate 
use of encryption may make it more dif˜cult for an adversary to make use 
of the information it has taken. The next section provides details of the 
role of encryption in creating secure systems. 
The Role of Encryption and Other Forms of 
Cryptography in Cybersecurity
In the face of this widespread and escalating threat, cryptography is 
an important tool for protecting data and systems, including reducing 
the volume and impact of cyber-enabled crime. Cryptography is used in 
a number of ways, but four are most critical. 
First, encryption is used to protect stored data against disclosure. 
(Encryption does not protect against all threatsŠmalware running on a 
phone or malware running with the privileges of authorized users of an 
encrypted database can see the unencrypted data.) This explains why 
25
 North Korea obtained con˜dential information of Sony Pictures Entertainment, a U.S.-
based company, in 2014.
 President Obama characterized the incident as a national security 
threat.
26
 C.K. Bartles, 2016, ﬁGetting Gerasimov right,ﬂ 
Military Review
 96(1):30. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
the majority of the 48 states that have enacted data breach noti˜cation 
laws do not require noti˜cation if the lost or stolen data is encrypted: 
modern encryption renders the data effectively meaningless provided 
that the encryption keys are not compromised and there are no exploit
-able ˚aws in the encryption system. The security of encrypted data also 
explains why vendors such as Google and Apple have moved to default 
device encryption on mobile phones. As long as user passwords are suf
-˜ciently strong, lost and stolen devices do not reveal the data inside them. 
Second, encryption is a crucial tool for protecting data in transmis
-sion. This is critically important for online banking, purchases, contracts, 
and telemedicine applications, where it is important not only that the 
data is not intercepted, but also that it is not altered. Encryption makes 
it possible to protect the data being transmittedŠand to create simple 
mathematical ﬁsealsﬂ than can alert either the sender or receiver (or an 
auditor or a court) if the data has been tampered with. The increasing shift 
from unencrypted to encrypted Web protocols is an example of moving 
to Internet connections that are secure by default. Encryption can protect 
communications from ﬁman in the middle attacksﬂ and prevent intrusions 
into organizational networks. 
Third, cryptography provides a widely used tool for authenticating 
individuals and institutions: Using public-key cryptography, it is possible 
for one party to authenticate the identity of another. A sender ﬁAliceﬂ cre
-ates a message digitally signed with her private key. If the receiver ﬁBobﬂ 
is able to decrypt this message using Alice™s public key, he knows that the 
sender possesses Alice™s private key. 
Fourth, cryptography used to lock devices is an important enabler of 
multifactor authentication that uses smartphones. Multifactor authentica
-tion, which is the best available technology for defending against phish
-ing attacks that seek to entice a user into giving up his or her password 
to a spoofed website makes use of several separate pieces of evidence for 
authentication. In a widely used scenario, the user provides a password 
to the website and also veri˜es intent to access the site by approving an 
authentication request on his/her smartphone or by entering into the 
website a numeric code that the website sends to the smartphone. The 
interaction between website and smartphone may be protected using 
cryptography, and each authentication attempt involves unique values 
that can be used only once. Encryption is critical to prevent an attacker 
from acting as a ﬁman in the middleﬂ between user and/or smartphone 
and server, intercepting the authentication data, and capturing control of 
the user™s session. 
Another approach, which is becoming more widespread, is to use 
apps running on smartphones as trusted authenticators for accessing 
online services. Their security depends on keeping an unauthorized user 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENCRYPTION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
 31from being able to unlock the smartphone and access the authenticator 
app. Thus, any weakness introduced into the mechanism for unlocking 
smartphones can increase the risk that the authentication mechanism 
could be compromised. 
Encryption is similarly important for maintaining the security of those 
biometric authentication mechanisms that rely on transmitting biometric 
information over the network. 
The Limits of Encryption for Cybersecurity
Cryptography itself is a challenging science. Furthermore, correctly 
implementing and properly managing encryption systems is very dif˜
-cult. For example, there have been many instances where the techniques 
used to construct public-private key pairs have been found to have had 
serious ˚aws.
27
 Moreover, with the exception of specialized, emerging techniques 
for computing with encrypted data, for data to be used, it must at some 
point be decrypted into plaintext. At that moment, it is vulnerable to 
theft. Also, because encryption keys are usually long and complex, users 
often store them and then protect them with passwords, which are much 
more vulnerable because they must be something a human can remember 
and type. 
Nonetheless encryption and other uses of cryptography remain an 
essential tool for enhancing cybersecurity against escalating cyber threats. 
They are critical parts of a system that includes multifactor authentica
-tion, biometric identi˜ers, and other security tools. Like all of those other 
tools, it remains vulnerable to errors by users and developersŠrisks that 
of course also apply to efforts to build systems that provide third-party 
access.
27
 See, for example, A. Lenstra, J.P. Hughes, M. Augier, J.W. Bos, T. Kleinjung, and C. 
Wachter, 2012, ﬁRon was wrong, Whit is right,ﬂ 
IACR Technical Report
, https://eprint.iacr.
org/2012/064.pdf, and N. Heninger, Z. Durumeric, E. Wustrow, and J.A. Halderman, 2012, 
ﬁMining your Ps and Qs: Detection of widespread weak keys in network devices,ﬂ pp. 204-
220 in Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium
, https://www.usenix.org/system/
˜les/tech-schedule/sec12_proceedings.pdf.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
The availability of encryption has come to be recognized as intrinsi
-cally bound with rights to privacy, free speech, freedom of association, 
and freedom of religion, collectively referred to as civil liberties or human 
rights. Law enforcement agencies are charged with respecting civil liber
-ties, even while working to provide safety and security, which allows 
individuals to exercise constitutionally protected freedoms. 
Government of˜cials concerned about the effects of encryption fre
-quently warn that encryption will disable the government from acting 
in circumstances where it would be in the public interest to do so. At the 
same time, opponents of government restrictions on encryption warn 
about the harmful effects of such restrictions on commerce and on funda
-mental rights of privacy, speech, and free association, including in repres
-sive regimes. The committee does not seek to resolve these competing 
claims. It does note, however, that legal and constitutional constraints 
frequently prevent the United States and many other governments from 
acting, even when there are competing public interests, and also that 
rights likewise are not usually absolute. 
In the United States, as the Supreme Court has explained, privacy, free 
speech, freedom of association, and freedom of religion are essential to a 
functioning democracy, and there is often a convergence of First Amend
-ment rights, Fourth Amendment protections against unreasonable search 
and seizure, and the protected zones of privacy that stem from these 
rights. In a case involving undisclosed wiretap surveillance, the Court 
stated: 
3The Role of Encryption in 
 Protecting Privacy and Civil Liberties
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF ENCRYPTION IN PROTECTING PRIVACY AND CIVIL LIBERTIES
 33Historically, the struggle for freedom of speech and press in England was 
bound up with the issue of the scope of the search and seizure power. 
. . . History abundantly documents the tendency of GovernmentŠhow
-ever benevolent and benign its motiveŠto view with suspicion those 
who most fervently dispute its policies. Fourth Amendment protections 
become the more necessary when the targets of of˜cial surveillance may 
be those suspected of unorthodoxy in their political beliefs.
1 The Court further described how the right to privacy is essential to 
protecting free speech rights: 
The price of lawful public dissent must not be a dread of subjection to 
an unchecked surveillance power. Nor must the fear of unauthorized 
of˜cial eavesdropping deter vigorous citizen dissent and discussion of 
Government action in private conversation. For private dissent, no less 
than open public discourse, is essential to our free society.
2 Concern about the effects of government surveillance is a recur
-ring theme in U.S. history. The Church Committee™s 1976 report, which 
detailed abuses of intelligence information involving every president 
from Franklin Roosevelt through Richard Nixon, warns of the potential 
chilling effect of government surveillance: 
When Government infringes those rights instead of nurturing and pro
-tecting them, the injury spreads far beyond the particular citizens 
 targeted 
to untold numbers of other Americans who may be intimidated.
3Vice President Hubert Humphrey observed in 1967: 
We act differently if we believe we are being observed. If we can never be 
sure whether or not we are being watched and listened to, all our actions 
will be altered and our very character will change.
4 These dangers to free expression posed by government surveillance 
were also addressed in Justice Sonia Sotoymayor™s concurring opinion in 
United States v. Jones: ﬁAwareness that the Government may be watch
-ing chills associational and expressive freedoms. And the Government™s 
1 United States v. United States District Court
, 407 U.S. 297, 313-4 (1972).
 2 Ibid., at 314.
3 Senate Select Committee to Study Government Operations with Respect to Intelligence 
Activities,
 1976, Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans, Book II Report No. 94-
755, U.S. Senate, April
 26, https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/default/˜les/94755_
II.pdf, p. 290.
4 E.V. Long, 1967, 
The Intruders
, with a foreword by Hubert H. Humphrey, p. viii. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
 
unrestrained power to assemble data that reveal private aspects of iden
-tity is susceptible to abuse.ﬂ
5Since the explosion of Internet availability and electronic communica
-tions capability around the world, exercising of the freedoms of speech 
and belief, including the right to obtain information, depends more and 
more on the ability to access the Internet and communicate elec
 
tronically.
6 As electronic communications and Internet access are subject to electronic 
surveillance, the right to privacy for one™s political, religious, and other 
communications, opinions, and activities has become even more important. 
In particular, as surveillance capabilities have increased, threats to 
the exercise of these fundamental rights have also increased. Repres
-sive regimes have imposed outright censorship on the Internet and tried 
to prevent the use of electronic messaging by political opponents and 
power
 
ful countries have attacked political actors in other countries. 
These developments have led to the view that encryption, which 
protects the privacy of communications and sensitive information, has 
become an intrinsic part of the rights to freedoms of speech and belief.
7 Some would also contend that regulation of encryption amounts to a 
restriction on the manner by which citizens represent their own expres
-sion. In practice, encryption has come to play a more and more critical 
role in the work of journalists, human rights advocates, lawyers, public 
activists, and private communities of faith and opinion.
8 Even in democracies that recognize the rule of law, the ability to 
5 132 S. Ct. 945, 956 (2012).
 6 As explained by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection 
of the right to freedom
 of opinion and expression, 
The Internet has profound value for freedom of opinion and expression, as it magni˜es the 
voice and multiplies the information within reach of everyone who has access to it. Within 
a brief period, it has become the central global public forum. As such, an open and secure 
Internet should be counted among the leading prerequisites for the enjoyment of the freedom 
of expression today. See David Kaye, 2015, 
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and 
Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression: A/HRC/29/32
, Report to the Human 
Rights Council, May
 22, p. 5.
7 ﬁEncryption and anonymity provide individuals and groups with a zone of privacy 
online to hold opinions and
 exercise freedom of expression without arbitrary and unlawful 
interference or attacks.ﬂ D. Kaye, 2015, 
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Promotion and 
Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression: A/HRC/29/32
, Report to the Human 
Rights Council, May
 22, p. 7.
8 In the United States, most of the major media have adopted methods using encryption 
to enable secure
 communication between sources and journalists. (See for example, https://
www.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2016/news-tips/.) The State Department has recognized 
the use of encrypted communications by human rights advocates and political dissenters in 
repressive countries as so important that the U.S. government has provided important sup
-port for the use of encryption technology. See D. Kaye, 2015, 
Report of the Special Rapporteur 
on the Promotion and Protection of the Right to Freedom of Opinion and Expression: A/HRC/29/32
, Report to the Human Rights Council, May
 22.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF ENCRYPTION IN PROTECTING PRIVACY AND CIVIL LIBERTIES
 35engage in secure communications is an important protection for civil 
liberties. Moreover, those in such countries also face threats from actions 
sponsored by other nations as well as potentially from domestic political 
opponents. In addition, citizens of these democracies who travel in other 
countries are affected by the state of civil liberties and the rule of law 
there. 
This report considers whether technical measures required by law to 
provide the government with access to speci˜c plaintext pursuant to a 
valid and proper warrant could weaken the security of other encrypted 
information belonging to other individuals. If so, such measures may 
negatively impact the civil liberties or human rights of those individuals 
who are not targeted by the particular warrant. At a minimum, the avail
-ability of encryption for communications protects against the chill to free 
speech stemming from the fear of illegal government surveillance.
9 There are also situations where law enforcement claims the legal 
right to obtain information without a warrant. In some of those situa
-tions, the Supreme Court has agreed with law enforcement, in others the 
Supreme Court has disagreed with law enforcement, and in still others, 
there remains some vagueness or uncertainty. Individuals may encrypt 
their information to safeguard against circumstances where the govern
-ment does not have a warrant and the law regarding government access 
is unclear. 
At the same time, as discussed in Chapter 4, criminals and terrorists 
use encryption to hide their activities from law enforcement and take 
actions that negatively impact the security of law-abiding individuals. 
Solutions, therefore, must take into account both the needs for indi
-viduals to be able to have their privacy and civil liberties protected from 
intrusive government encroachment and individuals™ interests in protect
-ing against both criminal actors and threats to national security. 
9 Public perception of the risk of illegal government surveillance has been shaped by re
-cent developments. For
 example, major thefts of documents from U.S. government agencies 
concerning their surveillance capabilities have generated widespread, although not always 
completely accurate, news coverage.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
As human activity has become increasingly digital, so too have 
crime and criminal evidence. Criminals increasingly take advantage 
of widespread encryptionŠoften available by defaultŠto facilitate 
drug traf˜cking, online child exploitation, human traf˜cking, and other 
crimes, and to impede detection, apprehension, or prosecution. In addi
-tion, the country faces myriad national security threats from terrorist 
groups and foreign rivals. 
This chapter explores the interplay between the needs of law enforce
-ment to obtain plaintext and potential alternatives to plaintext if it cannot 
be obtained because it is encrypted. Chapter 5 looks at options for law 
enforcement to obtain access to plaintext that is now encrypted. 
GOALS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS 
AND INTELLIGENCE ANALYSTS
Law enforcement of˜cials and intelligence analysts have different 
missions and work with different tools, legal frameworks, and norms, 
but both are attempting to piece together events or future plans from 
incomplete or fragmented information. 
The role of a criminal investigator is to identify the guilty party and 
obtain evidence for a conviction. In some cases, this involves exoneration 
of previous suspects once exculpatory evidence is uncovered. An inves
-tigator generally aims to gather evidence needed to bring a successful 
 
prosecution against a person or organization responsible for a crime or 
4Information Needs of Law Enforcement 
and the Intelligence Community
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NEEDS
 37to disrupt or prevent criminal activity. In order to successfully prosecute, 
either by trial or through a plea deal, the investigator must supply evi
-dence of guilty actions and intentions beyond a reasonable doubt.
1 Rules 
derived from constitutional and statutory law as interpreted by courts 
govern the ways in which investigators can access evidence, how they 
must share the evidence they gather with the defense, and how they must 
prove the reliability of the evidence in order to permit it to be introduced 
in court. 
An intelligence analyst, by contrast, has goals that are less about 
proving a case in court and more about gathering information for a vari
-ety of purposes, whether about a particular adversary or to describe 
developments to policy makers. Foreign intelligence material is gathered, 
analyzed, and disseminated according to a set of policies and oversight 
controls within each intelligence agency. The gathering itself makes use 
of a broad range of techniques and tools, including some not available to 
law enforcement agencies.
2 The degree of con˜dence that accompanies 
a particular assessment will vary, and it is up to the decision maker to 
assess its quality. Intelligence information and the sources and methods 
used to gather it are kept secret, and the targets of intelligence gathering 
are, unlike in criminal investigations, not usually afforded notice. 
THE VOLUME AND DIVERSITY OF INFORMATION 
RELEVANT TO LAW ENFORCEMENT AND 
THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY
The ways people communicate, engage in commerce, and other
-wise live their lives create information across a wide range of networks, 
devices, and communications streams. For example, the Pew Foundation 
has reported that only 8 percent of U.S. adults were on social media in 
2005, 47 percent in 2010, and 69 percent in 2016.
3 As is discussed below, 
this has two signi˜cant consequences for investigations: (1) the role of dig
-ital information in investigations is growing, and therefore loss of access 
owing to encryption has a greater impact, and (2) a wider variety and 
volume of digital information that may not be encrypted is also becom
-ing available. 
1 Most cases in the criminal justice system are settled through plea negotiations. Neverthe
-less, the evidence must
 be suf˜cient to convince a defendant to accept a plea.
2 For example, U.S. intelligence agencies working outside the United States could subvert 
the supply chain for
 technology used by a foreign intelligence target or leverage skills 
and computing power for decryption purposes without making these available to the law 
enforce
 
ment community more broadly.
3 Pew Research Center, 2017, ﬁSocial Media Fact Sheet,ﬂ January
 12, http://www.
 pewinternet.org/fact-sheet/social-media/. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
The new, varied, and growing pool of relevant information that may 
be available to investigators has provided the government with new 
resources and new challenges. In some cases, law enforcement of˜cials 
are able to track individual locations through tools such as cell 
 towers, 
transit passes, license plate readers, and geo-coded photographs and 
social media postings. Metadata, information about communications, or 
digital ˜les other than their content can provide valuable information in 
some circumstances. Many apps capture metadata that often includes the 
user™s location; this source of information was not available to investiga
-tors a decade ago. The widespread use of cloud storage means that law 
enforcement has another potential source of evidence to turn to when 
they do not have access to the data on devices, either because the device 
is unavailable or the data on the device is encrypted. Not all of this digital 
information will be useful, however. Because storage is cheap or even free, 
people keep all sorts of non-noteworthy electronic documents forever. 
At the same time, some forms of evidence that were previously gen
-erated and maintained in hard copy now exist only digitally. In some 
instances, this means that evidence found in new technologies is not 
necessarily in addition to, but rather may be instead of, former sources 
of evidence. 
Some of that information is relevant to the mission of government 
agencies responsible for protecting the public. In the law enforcement 
world, that subset is generally thought of as evidence of a crime. For 
intelligence agencies seeking foreign intelligence,
4 it is source material for 
collection. In either case, any reduction in access to that pool of relevant 
information may reduce their effectiveness at accomplishing their mission. 
Investigators and analysts are seeking access to relevant information 
from a range of sources. Relevant information comes in many different 
forms. The prevailing conceptual model divides law enforcement needs 
into two broad categories: evidence in motion and evidence at rest. Evi
-dence at rest can be relevant plaintext stored on a device or relevant 
plaintext stored on servers operated by a service provider or other third 
party. Evidence in motion is the target of real-time communications or 
data intercepts. This can take a traditional form, such as a phone call, or a 
cutting-edge form, such as messages exchanged over encrypted messag
-ing applications like Signal. 
Information used in investigations is sometimes divided into content 
and noncontent, or metadata. Metadata is generally de˜ned as data that 
provides information about other data. When the term metadata arises 
4 Foreign intelligence is ﬁinformation relating to the capabilities, intentions, or activities 
of foreign governments or
 elements thereof, foreign organizations, or foreign persons, or 
international terrorist activitiesﬂ (50 U.S. Code §
 303). 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NEEDS
 39in the encryption debate, it has multiple related meanings that are not 
always carefully distinguished. 
One use of the term metadata comes from electronic surveillance law, 
in which a distinction is drawn between the protections afforded to com
-munications content and those afforded to the noncontent, or metadata, 
associated with the content. For example, information about the phone 
numbers of parties to a call is distinguished from recordings of the call 
obtained from a wiretap.
5 This distinction stems from law and court 
cases of the telephony era, and relies in part on the third-party doctrine, 
which holds that people do not have a reasonable expectation of privacy 
in information they voluntarily provide to third partiesŠin this case the 
telephone numbers given to the carrier so that the call can be placed. 
In the context of government access to encrypted information and 
possible alternatives, the term metadata also refers more broadly to 
information that is associated with content that may be accessible in an 
unencrypted form even if the content itself is encrypted. Not all metadata 
is necessarily covered by the third-party doctrine; for example, a time 
stamp recorded when an encrypted ˜le is created on a computer would 
be considered metadata about that ˜le but would not have been provided 
to a third party if the computer is owned by the target of the investiga
-tion. Finally, metadata is sometimes used to refer to any noncontent 
information, even if not necessarily associated with a speci˜c piece of 
encrypted data, that may be useful as an alternative source of informa
-tion for an investigation if the encrypted data cannot be decrypted. 
In addition to the communications metadata discussed above, a num-ber of other forms of metadata are created by computer systems, includ
-ing the following: 
Ł Event-related data associated with communications streams pro
-vides information about the time, date, payload amount, and other details 
about a particular communications event but not the content. 
Ł Addressing data can often be used to identify who is communi
-cating, where they are located, andŠdepending on the speci˜city of the 
addressŠwhat content they are consuming (e.g., a particular URL). 
Ł Metadata associated with a particular digital ˜le, like the creation 
date, creation device, and other information stored with the content of the 
˜le, but separate from it, can provide information about when and where 
activity occurred. 
5 The boundary between content and noncontent is less clear for Internet protocol (IP)-
based communications. See S.M. Bellovin et al., 2016, ﬁIt™s too complicated: How the Internet 
upends Katz, Smith, and electronic surveillance law,ﬂ 
Harvard Journal of Law and Technology
 30(1). 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Ł Service logs and telemetry data created in the normal course of 
supporting software and reporting bugs can provide information on a 
user™s digital activity using that software.
6 Metadata may not be meaningfully available in all cases. Some meta
-data is ephemeral and thus not available to investigators after the fact. 
In other cases, metadata may exist but its existence may not be known to 
investigators. Also, some kinds of metadata can be altered if one has the 
right tools and know-how, which may reduce its evidentiary value. 
Some metadata may also be encrypted by either the service provider 
that creates it or only available to investigators as part of a communica
-tions stream or on a storage device that is itself encrypted. Other meta
-data, such as routing dataŠInternet Protocol (IP) address, e-mail address, 
or phone numberŠcannot easily be encrypted. 
ENCRYPTION AS AN IMPEDIMENT TO INVESTIGATIONS
Encryption has signi˜cantly reduced the amount of plaintext that 
investigators can access. Several factors are responsible for this. One is 
a desire to provide robust encryption to individuals and organizations. 
Another is the effort being made by some companies to reduce their abil
-ity to access customer information or encryption keys. Such moves might 
be made for a variety of reasons. For example, a company might wish to 
eliminate the possibility that an error will cause customer data to leak 
(and thereby to reduce liability for such a loss) or seek to gain the trust of 
a customer who fears the provider might snoop on the customer™s trade 
secrets for a business advantage. 
A recent Center for Strategic and International Studies report
7 observed that the share of unrecoverable encryption as a share of total 
message traf˜c is likely to grow as instant messaging becomes increas
-ingly dominant. The report notes that 3 of the top 12 mobile messaging 
apps have enabled end-to-end encryption by default. It estimates that 18 
percent of message traf˜c is encrypted today and that this will grow to 22 
percent by 2019 based on projected growth in the use of instant messag
-ing. The report also estimates that roughly 47 percent of all smartphones 
and tablets in the United States have full disk encryption and observes 
that if Android devices adopt universal disk encryption, the vast majority 
6 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2016, 
Exploring Encryption 
and Potential
 Mechanisms for Authorized Government Access to Plaintext: Proceedings of a Work
-shop
, The National Academies Press, Washington D.C., p. 44.
7 J.A. Lewis, D.E. Zheng, and W.A. Carter, 2017, 
Effect of Encryption of Lawful Access to Com-munications and Data: A Report of the CSIS Technology Policy Program
, https://www.csis.org/
analysis/effect-encryption-lawful-access-communications-and-data. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NEEDS
 41of smartphones in the world would appear to present serious barriers to 
law enforcement and intelligence agencies access. 
Some, but certainly not all, of the data will remain accessible because 
data is often stored in more than one place. For example, although some
-one™s Gmail messages may be inaccessible from a locked and encrypted 
phone, these same messages will be stored on Google™s servers. Customer 
data stored by U.S. providers is, however, sometimes stored outside the 
United States. Whether U.S. providers can be compelled by warrant under 
current law to provide data stored overseas is currently before the U.S. 
Supreme Court.
8 Law enforcement agencies have been reporting they are increasingly 
unable to unlock encrypted phones. In November 11, 2016, testimony 
to this committee, thenŒFederal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) General 
 
Counsel James Baker reported that for ˜scal year 2016, the FBI had 
encountered passcodes on 2,095 of the 6,814 mobile devices examined 
by its forensic laboratories. They were able to break into 1,210 of the 
locked phones, leaving 885 that could not be accessed. The information 
Baker presented neither addressed the nature of the crimes involved nor 
whether the crimes were solved using other techniques. More recent 
˜gures were provided by Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein in 
October 10, 2017, remarks at a U.S. Naval Academy conference: ﬁOver the 
past year, the FBI was unable to access about 7,500 mobile devices submit
-ted to its Computer Analysis and Response Team, even though there was 
legal authority to do so.ﬂ
9 Similar ˜gures were reported by FBI director 
 
Christopher Wray in an October 22, 2017, speech to the International 
Association of Chiefs of Police conference in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
He pointed to more than 6,900 devices from which federal agents were 
unable to access the contents. Wray described it as a ﬁhuge problem . . . 
that impacts investigations across the boardŠnarcotics, human traf˜ck
-ing, counterterrorism, counterintelligence, gangs, organized crime, child 
exploitation.ﬂ
10
 In November 2016, the Manhattan District Attorney™s Of˜ce reported 
that ﬁ423 Apple iPhones and iPads lawfully seized since October 2014 
remain inaccessible due to default device encryptionﬂ and that 10 percent 
8 United States v. Microsoft Corp.
, S.C. Docket No. 17-2.
9 R.J. Rosenstein, 2017, ﬁDeputy Attorney General Rod J. Rosenstein Delivers Remarks on
 Encryption at the United States Naval Academy: Remarks as prepared for delivery,ﬂ Oc
-tober 10, https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/deputy-attorney-general-rod-j-rosenstein-
delivers-remarks-encryption-united-states-naval. 
10
 M. Balsamo, 2017, ﬁFBI couldn™t access nearly 7K devices because of encryption,ﬂ 
Wash
-ington Post
, October
 22. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
of these devices ﬁpertain to homicide or attempted murder cases.ﬂ
11 That 
report also cites data from several other states, counties, and cities on the 
number or rate of locked devices and locked devices that could not be 
opened. In November 2017, the of˜ce reported that the number of locked 
and encrypted smartphones received by its digital forensics unit has 
increased steadily since 2014, reaching over half of all devices received. 
In the ˜rst 10 months of 2017, 1,283 smartphones were received by the 
of˜ce™s forensics unit; 466 of the 665 phones running iOS were locked, 
and 236 of the 618 phones running Android were locked. Also, according 
to the 2017 report, 160 state and local law enforcement agencies from 37 
states that have started to track locked devices report a total number in 
the thousands.
12
 The U.S. Department of Justice™s National Strategy on Child Exploita-tion Prevention and Interdiction Working Group has looked at the impact 
of encryption in child pornography investigations. It conducted a survey 
in late 2015 to early 2016 of ﬁmore than 1,000 federal, state, local, and 
tribal investigators; law enforcement managers; prosecutors; analysts; 
forensic examiners; victim service providers; and [Department of Justice] 
grant recipients.ﬂ In the survey, more than 30 percent of respondents 
reported that the use of encryption by child pornography offenders has 
signi˜cantly increased.
13
 The data cited above strongly suggest that widespread encryption 
is having a serious and growing negative impact on the ability of law 
enforcement to collect relevant plaintext. 
Although Director Wray provided a broad characterization of the 
crimes whose investigation is being impeded, and one can make assump
-tions about the nature of the cases being pursued by the Child Exploita
-tion Prevention and Interdiction Working Group, there remains a lack of 
speci˜c data about what kinds of investigations are being impeded and 
the extent to which investigations were successful by pursuing other 
routes. 
The Administrative Of˜ce of the U.S. Courts reports annually on 
the number of federal and state wiretaps and the number of times that 
encryption is encountered. The 2016 report indicates that of the 3,168 state 
and federal wiretaps authorized that year, encryption was encountered in 
57 state wiretaps and 68 federal wiretaps. Of˜cials were unable to deci
-11 Manhattan District Attorney™s Of˜ce, 2016, 
Report of the Manhattan District Attorney™s 
Of˜ce
 on Smartphone Encryption and Public Safety: An Update to the November 2015 Report
, November, http://manhattanda.org/smartphone-encryption.
12
 Manhattan District Attorney™s Of˜ce, 2017, 
Third Report of the Manhattan District 
 
Attorney™s 
Of˜ce on
 Smartphone Encryption and Public Safety
, New York, N.Y., November.
13
 U.S. Department of Justice, 2016, 
The National Strategy for Child Exploitation Prevention 
and Interdiction:
 Report to Congress
, https://www.justice.gov/psc/˜le/842411/download. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NEEDS
 43pher messages in 48 of the state and 53 of the federal wiretaps.
14
 It cannot 
be discerned from this information how often a wiretap was not sought 
because the data being sought was known to be encrypted nor what 
impact the inability to decrypt messages had on investigations. Finally, 
it is worth noting that a comparison of the number of wiretaps reported 
in the U.S. courts reports and those reported by service providers in their 
transparency reports suggests that the number of wiretaps (and thus, 
potentially, the number of instances where encryption was encountered) 
may be underreported by more than a factor of 2.
15
 Unfortunately, there are not more comprehensive and systemic data 
on the incidence and impact of encryption. Although existing data clearly 
show that encryption is being encountered with increasing frequency, the 
˜gures above do not give a clear picture of how frequently an inability to 
access information seriously hinders investigations and prosecutions. It is 
not straightforward to collect such data: it is time consuming, assessments 
of impact are inherently subjective, data sources are highly distributed, 
and there is no formal infrastructure in place for collection or reporting, 
especially at the state and local levels. 
Statistics tell only one part of the story. The Manhattan District Attor
-ney™s Of˜ce report describes how it is working with federal, state, and 
local partners to collect case-related information. The report cites exam
-ples collected by National Domestic Communications Assistance Center 
(NDCAC) of cases that could not be solved, including a violent home 
invasion in Louisiana; homicides in Massachusetts, Missouri, and New 
Jersey; identity theft and fraud in Missouri; a violent street gang investi
-gation in Minnesota; and a child sexual assault in Tennessee. 
To illustrate the national security challenges posed by encryption, 
2015 testimony to the Senate Judiciary Committee by thenŒFBI Director 
James Comey and thenŒDeputy Attorney General Sally Quillian Yates 
described how encryption is used when recruiting terrorists: 
With the widespread horizontal distribution of social media, terrorists 
can spot, assess, recruit, and radicalize vulnerable individuals of all ages 
in the United States either to travel or to conduct a homeland attack. As 
a result, foreign terrorist organizations now have direct access into the 
United States like never before. For example, in recent arrests, a group of 
individuals was contacted by a known ISIL supporter who had already 
successfully traveled to Syria and encouraged them to do the same. Some 
of these conversations occur in publicly accessed social networking sites, 
14 Administrative Of˜ce of the U.S. Courts, 2016, 
Wiretap Report 2016
, December 31, http://www.uscourts.gov/statistics-reports/wiretap-report-2016.
15
 A. Gidari, 2017, ﬁJust Security,ﬂ July
 6, 
https://www.justsecurity.org/24427/wiretap-
numbers-add. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
but others take place via private messaging platforms. These encrypted 
direct messaging platforms are tremendously problematic when used by 
terrorist plotters.
16
 The timeliness of plaintext recovery matters. The extent to which it mat
-ters will differ depending on the nature of the investigation. For example, 
information is, generally speaking, needed more urgently in an investiga
-tion intended to prevent a crime than one collecting evidence after the 
fact. Similarly, it may be critical in some cases to collect evidence quickly 
to identify and apprehend a suspect, while in others, the goal may be to 
gather evidence to support a prosecution after a suspect has been identi˜ed. 
Further, information is not fungible. It is not always possible to 
accomplish a particular aim with different information, either content or 
metadata, from another source. Location information and other metadata 
are extremely useful for understanding patterns and networks of people, 
but less so for motivations and plans. Location information or metadata 
would be very useful if the government™s object were to determine where 
a particular exchange of packages occurred, for example, but would be 
less useful in determining what was in the packages. The law enforce
-ment community thus argues that it is more dif˜cult to convince a jury 
of criminal intent using metadata evidence than with content evidence. 
It is unclear how manageable the loss of access to information owing 
to encryption is for the intelligence community, but it is likely to be less 
of a game-changer for a variety of reasons. At least with regard to nation-
state targets, the intelligence community has long been confronted by the 
use of encryption. The intelligence community has substantially more 
resources and can develop highly specialized solutions that do not need 
to be scalable. The intelligence community also typically operates outside 
the United States and thus under more permissive rules than those that 
govern domestic law enforcement activities. Finally, intelligence analysis 
is often based on inferred conclusions and is not held to a standard of 
beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Encryption is not the only impediment to law enforcement use of 
relevant plaintext; there are signi˜cant training, resource, capacity, and 
technology barriers to digital evidence-gathering. The challenge will grow 
as new technologies, and thus sources of information, are introduced. In 
addition, law enforcement must deal with a wide array of ˜rms that may 
hold data relevant to an investigation and the diverse range of procedures 
16
 J. Comey, 2015, ﬁGoing Dark: Encryption, Technology, and the Balances
 Between Public 
Safety and Privacy: Joint Statement with Deputy Attorney General Sally Quillian Yates 
 Before 
the Senate Judiciary Committee,ﬂ Federal Bureau of Investigation, July
 8, https://www.fbi.
gov/news/testimony/going-dark-encryption-technology-and-the-balances- between-public-safety-and-privacy. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NEEDS
 45these ˜rms will put in place for working with law enforcement. A related 
challenge is that the novelty of the technology and associated legal issues 
means that both law enforcement agencies and companies are likely to 
encounter unsettled lawŠthe resolution of which can delay the govern
-ment™s access to data. Finally, companies are increasingly distributing 
data across multinational networksŠfor example, to store data closer to 
where it is used. As a result, some relevant plaintext in domestic cases 
is accessible only through international legal mechanisms that may be 
slow and cumbersome, as well as unfamiliar to most state and local law 
enforcement investigators. See the introduction to Chapter 6. 
THE PRACTICAL UTILITY OF ALTERNATIVES 
TO EXCEPTIONAL ACCESS
As investigators and analysts lose access to some relevant plaintext 
because of encryption, they will look to alternative ways to accomplish 
their goals. Put another way, the real issue for investigators is not whether 
they can obtain needed information from a particular source but whether 
they can obtain the needed information from some source in a suf˜ciently 
reliable, timely, and scalable manner. In some cases, this will be tradi
-tional sources like witness interviews, physical surveillance, or biological 
evidence. In other cases, investigators turn to other sectors of the digital 
world. Even as encryption hampers access to some evidence, new sources 
of evidence are becoming available. At the same time, some forms of evi
-dence that were previously generated and maintained in hard copy now 
exist only digitally. One key issue is how useful the new forms of evidence 
are. Another is how the costs and bene˜ts of exploiting those new sources 
compare to those from compelled decryption through an exceptional 
access mechanism. Finally, in some cases, technology enables law enforce
-ment to gather and utilize evidence far more cheaply and ef˜ciently than 
has been possible in the past.
17
 17
 See, for example, Justice Samuel Alito™s concurring opinion in 
United States v. Jones
, 132 
S.Ct. 945 (2012):
 Traditional surveillance for any extended period of time was dif˜cult and costly 
and therefore rarely undertaken. The surveillance at issue in this caseŠconstant 
monitoring of the location of a vehicle for four weeksŠwould have required a 
large team of agents, multiple vehicles, and perhaps aerial assistance. 
An estimate of such costs by Bankston and Soltani, which looked at the cost of acquiring 
location information (but not analyzing it), shows that the cost of tracking a suspect has 
dropped dramatically as a result of communications technology. They estimate that track
-ing using a team of plainclothes police and unmarked cars would be about $275 an hour. 
A GPS device placed on a suspect™s car would cost only $10 an hour (but note that a search 
warrant is required to do this), while tracking a suspect using their cell phone signal would 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Broadly, the new sources of digital information potentially useful for 
law enforcement fall into three categories: (1) gaining access to content 
using new techniques, (2) exploiting new sources for content that might 
supplement or substitute for plaintext, and (3) using metadata. 
If access to content is hampered by encryption, investigators can 
attempt to gain access without the cooperation of the manufacturer or 
service provider by intruding into a system where plaintext is resident, 
but proper legal authority and oversight is necessary. Such ﬁlawful hack
-ingﬂ has a range of bene˜ts and challenges on its ownŠin particular, it 
tends not to be scalable and is best applied to a small number of targeted 
devices. See the section ﬁLegal Aspects of Lawful Hackingﬂ in Chapter 5 
for more discussion. 
Current and emerging technologies offer potential new sources for 
content and metadata. Some alternative sources of plaintext as well as 
kinds and sources of metadata are enumerated below with the objec
-tive of giving the reader an understanding of the alternatives and their 
utility. Application of the framework proposed by the committee will 
involve deeper examination of speci˜c solutions. Some possible alterna
-tive sources include the following: 
Ł Many devices and operating systems provide for online or cloud 
storage of some customer information. Provided there are business rea
-sons to keep content unencrypted or business requirements or customer 
demand to recover data when passwords are forgotten, much of this 
data should be available with appropriate legal demands. Of course, the 
cloud data is not always complete or current, and its presence or absence 
will depend on what backup features have been implemented and what 
options the device owner has selected. Moreover, it is technically possible 
for providers to implement encryption so that they do not have access to 
decryption keys, and some services provide this option. 
Ł Stored e-mail, photos, and social network posts can all provide 
information on interests, intentions, activities, and intentions. Their avail
-ability to investigators will depend on the data-retention policies of the 
service providers. 
Ł The location history of mobile phone users can be obtained from 
cell service providers. In addition, many smartphone applications them
-selves capture location information and transmit it to the providers of 
services associated with those applications. 
Ł Smartphones often synchronize contacts and other data with auto
-be even cheaper. See K.S. Bankston and A. Soltani, 2013, ﬁTiny constables and the cost of 
surveillance: Making cents out of United States v. Jones,ﬂ 
Yale Law Journal Forum
 123:335.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION NEEDS
 47mobile infotainment systems and telematics systems. These systems also 
store information about vehicle usage. 
Ł ﬁConnected homesﬂ contain data on smart thermostats and appli
-ances. Many devices in the home, such as smart televisions and personal 
assistants, continuously listen for and respond to voice commands and 
may retain buffered information about the user™s activity. Service pro
-viders are adopting technical measures to limit data retention to protect 
user privacy and have asserted constitutional defenses to producing such 
data, however, and its future utility is not certain. 
Ł Worn or implanted technology, such as ˜tness monitors and 
pacemakers and insulin pumps controlled from smartphones, provide 
information about the activities of their users and may produce useful 
evidence in some cases.
18
Of course companies could choose to limit the collection of such 
information if, for example, customers express concerns about privacy or 
the ability of the government to obtain this information and assuming it 
is not necessary for their service or business model. 
As discussed above, metadata is another alternative to content that 
at present is not usually encrypted. It is especially valuable for provid
-ing information about ﬁwho,ﬂ ﬁwhere,ﬂ and ﬁwhen.ﬂ For example, ﬁtoﬂ 
and ﬁfromﬂ Internet protocol addresses can be used to map criminal 
networks. Without access to the content of messages and stored data, 
one cannot directly determine ﬁwhatﬂŠsuch as the plans and intentions 
of criminalsŠalthough this information can sometimes be inferred from 
metadata. 
In each instance where an alternative source of evidence is identi
-˜ed, then, it is reasonable to ask (1) the extent to which it can meet law 
enforcement needs and (2) how much additional effort, training, or cost 
it will take to gather the alternative evidence as compared to exceptional 
access to plaintext. 
One issue that arises in comparing alternatives is the appropriate 
baseline. One view is to ask to what extent alternative sources can replace 
plaintext now inaccessible owing to encryption. Another is to take into 
account the recent growth of opportunities for government surveillanceŠ
such as widespread adoption of cellphones in the 1990s and smartphones 
a decade laterŠthat may help offset information lost to encryption. A third 
perspective is to consider the growing importance of digital evidence in 
all investigations. Beyond these points, many, if not all, of the questions 
18
 G. Ballenger, 2017, ﬁNew form of law enforcement investigation hits close to the heart,ﬂ 
Slate
, July
 19, http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2017/07/19/a_man_s_pace
-maker_data_will_be_used_against_him_in_court.html. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
in the framework set forth in Chapter 7 are relevant to evaluating the net 
costs and bene˜ts of proposed alternatives to accessing encrypted content. 
Whatever the baseline, it will be important to rigorously evaluate 
the impacts of encryption, proposed approaches for exceptional access, 
and the utility and cost of proposed alternatives. Such an effort would be 
facilitated by more rigorous data collection about the impact of encryp
-tion on federal, state, and local law enforcement and the effectiveness and 
costs of alternatives. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49
OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT
As discussed in Chapter 1, the options for ensuring access to plaintext fall into the following broad categories: 
Ł Take no legislative action but potentially pursue technical, law 
enforcement, and legal options to obtain or compel cooperation of target; 
Ł Provide additional resources to access plaintext; 
Ł Enact legislation that requires that device vendors or service pro
-viders provide government access to plaintext without specifying the 
technical means of doing so; and 
Ł Enact legislation requiring a particular technical approach. 
As noted previously, these are not necessarily mutually exclusive; for 
example, the second option can be pursued regardless of or in addition 
to the other three options. 
Each of these categories may involve some combination of (1) legal 
and policy changes, (2) technical means, and (3) provision of additional 
˜nancial or technical support. The sections that follow explain each 
of these three areas. Some are available today (but could be enhanced 
with additional resources), while others require new technologies, major 
investments, or legal changes. Although some of these options have been 
studiedŠsome over a period of almost two decadesŠall but the status 
quo represent new initiatives that would undoubtedly lead to new techni
-cal, market, and legal responses if implemented. The ˜nal section of this 
5Options for Accessing Plaintext
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
chapter considers some of the issues that would arise with legislation 
mandating government access. 
LEGAL TOOLS FOR OBTAINING PLAINTEXT 
 WITHIN THE CURRENT LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
Even without new legislation mandating government access, there 
are several legal avenues currently available to the government that may 
enable it to decrypt the information. This section discusses legal issues 
that arise in those situations. 
Compelled Disclosure of Biometric Identi˜ers or Passcodes
There are many different situations in which the government has legal 
authority to obtain information, but where access to the information or the 
meaning of the information may be defeated by encryption technologies. 
For example, in many cases, the government may legally obtain a com
-puter or handheld device that requires a ˜ngerprint or other biometric 
information or passcode for access. Even where access to the computer 
or device is not limited, a particular ˜le on a computer or device may be 
protected by a passcode or other means. The government may also have 
the legal authority to seize and obtain information stored in other places, 
like the cloud, but accessing such information may nevertheless require a 
biometric identi˜er or passcode. 
The legal avenues available to the government in these cases depend 
in part on whether the information is protected by a biometric identi˜er or 
by a passcode as well as whether the government is seeking information 
directly from the user or from a third party like the provider. 
Biometric Identi˜ers
Where the information is protected by a biometric identi˜er and the 
user of a device is in custody or otherwise available, the government may 
seek to compel the user to provide a ˜ngerprint or other biometric data to 
unlock a device and allow access to the data within. 
At the moment, the law is reasonably well settled that the government 
may obtain such an order in the context of certain physical acts.
1 As the 
Supreme Court held in United States v. Hubbell, 530 U.S. 27, 34-35 (2000), 
ﬁeven though the act may provide incriminating evidence, a criminal 
1 Holt v. United States
, 218 U.S. 245 (1910); 
Schmerber v. California
, 384 U.S. 757, 764 (1966); 
United States v.
 Dionisio
, 410 U.S. 1, 5-6 (1973); 
Doe v. United States
, 487 U.S. 201 (1988). 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 51suspect may be compelled to put on a shirt, to provide a blood sample or 
handwriting exemplar, or to make a recording of his voice.ﬂ 
To be sure, complexities may arise under the Fifth Amendment when 
the act of providing the ˜ngerprint could be deemed to be testimonialŠfor 
example, an implicit admission that the phone in question belongs to the 
subjectŠbut obtaining a ˜ngerprint per se, or compelling someone to touch 
a ˜ngerprint sensor, is likely not itself a testimonial act protected by the 
Fifth Amendment, although there may be exceptions.
2 As one court of appeals has explained, 
[A]n act of production can be testimonial when that act conveys some 
explicit or implicit statement of fact that certain materials exist, are in 
the subpoenaed individual™s possession or control, or are authentic. The 
touchstone of whether an act of production is testimonial is whether 
the government compels the individual to use ﬁthe contents of his own 
mindﬂ to explicitly or implicitly communicate some statement of fact. 
Put another way, the Court has marked out two ways in which an act 
of production is not testimonial. First, the Fifth Amendment privilege 
is not triggered where the Government merely compels some physi
-cal act, i.e.
 where the individual is not called upon to make use of the 
contents of his or her mind. The most famous example is the key to the 
lock of a strongbox containing documents, but the Court has also used 
this rationale in a variety of other contexts. Second, under the ﬁforegone 
conclusionﬂ doctrine, an act of production is not testimonialŠeven if 
the act conveys a fact regarding the existence or location, possession, or 
authenticity of the subpoenaed materialsŠif the Government can show 
with ﬁreasonable particularityﬂ that, at the time it sought to compel the 
act of production, it already knew of the materials, thereby making any 
testimonial aspect a ﬁforegone conclusion.ﬂ
3 There could be practical limits as well, of course, because some hard
-ware devices are designed to remain locked after several failed attempts 
to open them biometricallyŠfor example, by then requiring that the pass
-code be entered. And of course, not all users enable biometric features, 
and the features can be readily disabled. 
2 For a discussion of some of the complexities, see K. Goldman, 2015, ﬁBiometric pass
-words and
 the privileged against self-incrimination,ﬂ 
Cardozo Arts & Entertainment Law 
Journal
 33:211; O. Kerr, 2016, ﬁCan warrants for digital evidence also require ˜ngerprints to 
unlock phones?,ﬂ 
Washington Post
, October
 19; and O. Kerr, 2016, ﬁThe Fifth Amendment 
and Touch ID,ﬂ 
Washington Post
, October
 21.
3 In 
re Grand Jury Subpoena Duces Tecum Dated March 25, 2011
, 670 F.3d 1335, 1345-46 (11th 
Cir.
 2012). 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Passcodes
The situation is almost exactly reversed when it comes to compelled 
production of a passcode. In most situations, the law does not allow 
the government to compel disclosure of a passcode. Unlike a biometric 
marker, disclosing a passcode is generally understood as a testimonial 
act protected by the Fifth Amendment. Thus, under current case law, 
although providing a ˜ngerprint may resemble providing a physical key 
to a safe, disclosing a passcode is more like revealing the combination to 
a safe, which is protected.
4 At the same time, there may be circumstances 
where someone other than the owner in the case of a privately owned 
device or a corporation in the case of a business-owned device, knows the 
passcode and in that situation, the government could compel production 
of the passcode because that individual or organization would not have 
a Fifth Amendment right to refuse disclosure. 
Compelled Assistance by Third Parties and Related Issues
Where the government cannot obtain the assistance of the user of a 
device to defeat encryption, it may also seek assistance from third parties, 
such as the manufacturer of a device or the provider of a software operat
-ing system. To date, issues in this area have usually arisen under the All 
Writs Act (28 U.S.C. §1651); its application, however, is currently unsettled 
law. Issues may also arise under the ﬁtechnical assistanceﬂ provisions of 
the Wiretap Act (8 U.S.C. §2511). Another option for the government is 
ﬁlawful hacking,ﬂ which typically does not require compelled assistance 
from a third party, but accomplishes some of the same results and may 
raise some of the same questions. One controversy that arises in connection 
with compelled assistance is whether and on what time scale providers 
should be allowed to disclose that such assistance has been provided. 
All Writs Act
Although the use of the All Writs Act in a decryption case came to 
public prominence in connection with efforts by the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) to compel Apple to decrypt the phone of a dead ter
-rorist in the San Bernardino, California, case, the act has long been used to 
compel assistance from third parties in implementing surveillance orders 
obtained by the government. In 1977, the Supreme Court addressed such 
technical assistance in 
U.S. v. New York Tel. Co
.,
5 where it held that the 
4 See 
Doe v. U.S
., 487 U.S. 201 (1988) at 210 n.9.
5 434 U.S. 159 (1977).
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 53All Writs Act, which allows federal courts to ﬁissue all writs necessary 
or appropriate in aid of their respective jurisdictions and agreeable to 
the usages and principles of law,ﬂ
6 could be used to compel a telephone 
company to assist with installation of a pen register, a mechanism to 
record the telephone numbers called by the phone. The pen register itself 
was authorized under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 41, but that 
rule did not explicitly require telephone companies to provide technical 
assistance in installing a pen register. In deciding that the government 
could invoke the All Writs Act to compel assistance, the Supreme Court 
noted that the Wiretap Act contains a provision requiring companies to 
provide technical assistance. The Court explained that in light of the Wire
-tap Act™s ﬁdirect command to federal courts to compel, upon request, any 
assistance necessary to accomplish an electronic interception, it would be 
remarkable if Congress thought it beyond the power of the federal courts 
to exercise, where required, a discretionary authority to order telephone 
companies to assist in the installation and operation of pen registers, 
which accomplish a far lesser invasion of privacy.ﬂ 
The government has started using the All Writs Act to seek consider
-ably more in the way of technical assistance from providers or others to 
defeat encryption. To what extent the act applies to such cases and what 
kind of assistance can be compelled by the act is unsettled by the courts; 
Congress could conceivably step in to clarify as well. In the Eastern 
District of New York, for example, the Department of Justice and Apple 
engaged in a dispute about whether Apple could be compelled to unlock 
an iPhone for which there was a federal search warrant. The government 
relied on the All Writs Act and 
New York Tel. Co.
, while Apple claimed that 
the All Writs Act does not apply as a result of Communications Assistance 
for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA),
7 a 1994 statute that requires telecom
-munications providers to maintain their networks in certain ways that 
allow for wiretapping, but does not apply to stored data on a handset. 
Apple argued that Congress considered and rejected the possibility of 
imposing mandates for law enforcement access on handset device provid
-ers when it adopted CALEA. 
Apple™s main argument was that the All Writs Act could not be used 
to compel what Congress declined to address in CALEAŠthat is, that 
6 28 U.S.C. §1651.
7 47 U.S.C. §1001-1010. Under one provision of Commission on Accreditation for Law 
Enforcement Agencies, Inc. (CALEA), 47 U.S.C. §1002(b)(3), a ﬁtelecommunications carrier 
shall
 not be responsible for decrypting, or ensuring the government™s ability to decrypt, 
any communication encrypted by a subscriber or customer, unless the encryption was 
provided by the carrier and the carrier possesses the information necessary to decrypt the 
communication.ﬂ
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
CALEA occupies the ˜eld of compelled assistance.
8 In February 2016, 
a magistrate judge in Brooklyn, New York, ruled for Apple, concluding 
that ﬁthe relief the government seeksﬂ under the All Writs Act ﬁis unavail
-able,ﬂ primarily ﬁbecause Congress has considered legislation that would 
achieve the same result but has not adopted itﬂ in CALEA.
9 The govern
-ment™s appeal is pending. By contrast, a magistrate judge in the Central 
District of California reached the opposite conclusion.
10
 In this latter case, 
the FBI used technical means to obtain the data, and the lawsuit was dis
-missed. There will undoubtedly be more litigation in this area. 
Assuming that the government prevails in its interpretation of the 
All Writs Act and can legally compel companies to provide technical 
assistance to defeat encryption where the government has a lawful war
-rant for the encrypted information, the extent and circumstances of such 
assistance will presumably be worked out on a case-by-case base. 
Technical Assistance
As noted above, in applying the All Writs Act in 
New York Tel. Co.
, the Supreme Court reasoned by analogy to the ﬁtechnical assistanceﬂ 
provision in the Wiretap Act. It is therefore possible, in a case involving a 
wiretap (rather than access to stored data via a search warrant), that the 
government may seek to compel assistance from providers under that 
provision. There is today very little publicly available law on the limits 
of ﬁtechnical assistance.ﬂ A divided panel of the Ninth Circuit held that 
the Wiretap Act could not be used to compel assistance with a wiretap 
in ways that entirely disabled the communications system for the par
-ticular customer targeted by the surveillance. The majority concluded 
that disabling the system was inconsistent with the statutory command 
that technical assistance be provided ﬁin such a manner as will protect 
its secrecy and produce a minimum of interference with the services that 
such carrier . . . is providing that target of electronic surveillanceﬂ: 
8 See Quinta Jurecic, DOJ and Apple File Briefs in EDNY Encryption Case, Lawfare (Oct. 
26, 2015), https://www.lawfareblog.com/doj-and-apple-˜le-briefs-edny-encryption-case; 
see also H.R. Rep.
 103-827(I), 103d Cong. 2d Sess. at 13 (1994) (ﬁWhile the Supreme Court 
has read [18 U.S.C. §2518(4)] as requiring the Federal courts to compel, upon request of the 
government, ‚any assistance necessary to accomplish an electronic interception,™ United 
States v. New York Telephone, 434 U.S. 159, 177 (1977), the question of whether companies 
have any obligation to design their systems such that they do not impede law enforcement 
interception has never been adjudicated.ﬂ). 
9 In re Apple, Inc., 149 F. Supp.3d 341, 344 (E.D.N.Y. 2016).
 10
 In the Matter of the Search of an Apple iPhone Seized During the Execution of a Search 
Warrant on a Black
 Lexus IS300, California License Plate 35KGD203, 2016 WL 618401 (C.D. 
Cal. Feb. 16, 2016). 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 55[T]he ﬁa minimum of interferenceﬂ requirement certainly allows for some 
level of interference with customers™ service in the conducting of surveil
-lance. We need not decide precisely how much interference is permitted. 
ﬁA minimum of interferenceﬂ at least precludes total incapacitation of a 
service while interception is in progress. Put another way, eavesdrop
-ping is not performed with ﬁa minimum of interferenceﬂ if a service is 
completely shut down as a result of the surveillance.
11 The majority further concluded that the assistance provision, unlike 
CALEA, does not require providers to redesign their systems to facilitate 
government surveillance. 
Legal Aspects of Lawful Hacking
An alternative to introducing lawful access mechanisms to defeat 
encryption is to use what is sometimes referred to as ﬁlawful hacking,ﬂ 
which allows investigators to intrude into a computer system and access its 
content without the need to break encryption. For example, the government 
may obtain a warrant to secretly insert software on a targeted computer that 
surreptitiously records every keystroke on a computer. This can be used to 
capture the suspect™s passwords, thus allowing access to everything else. 
The idea behind lawful hacking is that ﬁ[i]nstead of introducing 
new vulnerabilities to communications networks and applications, law 
enforcement should use vulnerabilities already present in the target™s 
communications device to wiretap in the situations where wiretapping is 
dif˜cult to achieve by other means.ﬂ12 It is a technique that has been in use 
by the FBI since at least the early 2000s. Information must be in plaintext 
while the device is processing or displaying and is thus susceptible to 
capture by appropriately tailored malware to defeat or evade the encryp
-tion on a subject™s device. Although such malware is not guaranteed to 
work or be suf˜cient in every circumstance, it is another option that may 
be effective in many cases. 
Some have suggested that despite its limitations and challenges, lawful 
hacking offers potential middle ground for at least a subset of cases: ﬁThis 
proposal potentially offers an attractive solution to Going Dark challenges, 
which could theoretically satisfy equities on both sides of the debate.ﬂ
13
 11 In re U.S. for an Order Authorizing Roving Interception of Oral Communications
, 349 F.3d 
1132 (9th
 Cir. 2003). 
12 S.M Bellovin et al., 2014, ﬁLawful hacking: Using existing vulnerabilities for wiretapping 
on the Internet,ﬂ
 Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property
 12:i. 
13 S. Hennessey and N. Weaver, 2016, ﬁA judicial framework for evaluating network 
investigative techniques,ﬂ Lawfare Blog
, July 28, https://www.lawfareblog.com/judicial-
framework-evaluating-network-investigative-techniques. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Two important points about this technique should be noted. First, 
in discussing this technique, the committee is referring only to instances 
where the government has a lawful warrant to obtain the encrypted infor
-mation or in the case of foreign intelligence, a Foreign Intelligence Sur
-veillance Act order. Second, by lawful hacking, the committee means the 
use of techniques that have been authorized by a court pursuant to law. 
The legal dimensions of lawful hacking have not been extensively liti-gated and are still unclear. For example, it is uncertain whether there are 
circumstances when the government can be compelled to reveal details 
about the methods in criminal investigations. It is also uncertain how tools 
used to generate admissible evidence in court would be vetted in some 
way for its forensic soundnessŠfor example, the government would have 
to demonstrate that it could reliably extract evidence without altering it. 
Are the issues (particularly the legal issues) different for government-
supplied and vendor-supplied tools? Would all techniques be widely 
available, or available only to certain agencies? How would lawful hack
-ing tools be created and distributed? Under what circumstances is the 
government required to reveal the vulnerabilities it discovered to the 
companies that developed the products whose vulnerabilities that hack
-ing tools exploit? 
Again, the extent and application of such authority is unsettled and 
will depend on the particular circumstances of the requested order autho
-rizing lawful hacking. 
TECHNOLOGICAL APPROACHES FOR ACCESSING 
PLAINTEXT, LIMITATIONS, AND ALTERNATIVES
This section examines high-level technical options for providing 
access to plaintext and the associated challenges with each approach. 
The discussion draws on the basic concepts of cryptography described in 
Chapter
 2. It is not intended to be comprehensive but rather to introduce 
some major technical options and to illustrate the issues that arise in 
evaluating the associated bene˜ts and risks. 
Approaches to Exceptional Plaintext Access
A number of technical approaches to providing exceptional access 
to plaintext have been proposed (see, e.g., Box 5.1). The following are 
the general approaches most commonly discussed and also selected to 
be representative of the range of potential bene˜ts and shortcomings of 
technical access schemes. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 57BOX 5.1 Recent Efforts to Develop Technical Options
Several individuals with backgrounds in security and systems have begun 
to explore possible technical mechanisms to provide government exceptional 
 
access. Three individuals presented their ideas to the committee. 
Ernie Brickell, former chief security architect, Intel Corporation, described 
ways that protected partitions, a security feature provided by future microprocessor 
architectures, could be used to provide law enforcement access to devices in their 
physical possession, provide remote access by law enforcement, or provide key 
escrowed cryptography for use by applications and non-escrowed cryptography 
for a set of ﬁallowedﬂ applications. 

tect, Microsoft Corporation, argued that if a user trusts a vendor to update soft
-ware, the user should be able to trust the vendor to manage keys that can provide 
exceptional access. He proposed that this extension of the trust model used for 
software updates could be used to provide government exceptional access to 
unlock mobile devices. Ozzie also provided the committee with materials describ
-ing how this  approach could be extended to real-time communications such as 
messaging. Stefan Savage, professor of computer science and engineering, Univer
-sity of California, San Diego, described how phone unlock keys could be stored 
in hardware and made available via an internal hardware interface together with 

delay before law enforcement could unlock a device.At a 2016 workshop organized by the National Academies of Sciences, Engi
-neering, and Medicine
1 Butler Lampson, technical fellow at Microsoft, suggested 
the use of a design that uses a ﬁk out of n modelﬂ to improve the security of an 
exceptional access scheme. In this type of system, the encryption key is itself 
encrypted with a set of sealing keys for which a set of matched unsealing keys 
are created and given to trusted escrow agents. The escrowed encryption keys are 
broken into a number of pieces, n, and a certain number of them, k, must be 
combined in order to unlock the encryption. Arguing that the risk introduced by 
such a system would be small relative to broader cybersecurity risks, Lampson 
acknowledged that its security relies on eliminating technical bugs from the escrow agent computer systems and on trusting the people and institutions that operate 
each escrow agent. 
As discussed in Chapter 2, proposed encryption schemes are not consid
-ered ready for deployment until they have undergone careful scrutiny by experts 
regarding their effectiveness, scalability, and security risks and been subject to 
real-world testing at realistic scale in the relevant contexts. All three presenters 
stated that their proposals could help ease security trade-offs while providing 
government  access. None of the proposals presented to the committee provided 

position to perform the necessarily intensive work and did not reach any conclu
-continuedDecrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
sions about their merits. The framework in Chapter 7 is intended as a guide for 
such evaluations. 1 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2016, 
Exploring Encryption and Potential Mechanisms for Authorized Government Access to Plaintext: Proceedings of a 
Workshop
, The National Academies Press, Washington D.C.
BOX 5.1 ContinuedRequired Vendor Unlock
One proposed approach would require vendors to maintain capa
-bilities to unlock phones or other devices and access the data stored on 
them. When a law enforcement agency encounters a device that it needs 
to unlock, it would present an unlock request for a speci˜ed device along 
with the appropriate legal order. The vendor would then be responsible 
for validating the source of the request and the judicial documents and, 
depending on how the access arrangement is structured, either the vendor 
unlocks the phone when it is presented by law enforcement, or it provides 
the law enforcement agency with a token the agency can use to unlock 
the phone. 
An unlocking scheme could take various forms. The simplest, but 
riskiest in terms of the potential scale of compromise, would involve a 
single master key that covers all phones from a vendor or all phones of a 
particular model. More likely, a scheme would create an unlock token by 
combining a vendor™s signing key with a unique key associated with a 
unique device identi˜er that the vendor creates and stores for each phone. 
The discussion below assumes a scheme of the latter sort. 
An unlocking scheme will not provide direct access to prior com
-munications unless they are stored on the phone (and not separately 
encrypted by the communications application). However, unlocking a 
phone by authenticating as a user provides much more capability than 
just access to the data stored on that device. For example, it allows access 
to remote accounts or services belonging to the device owner (including 
but not limited to messaging services) and associated data that is not 
stored on the phone. The scope of what investigators are permitted to 
access from an unlocked phone would likely be de˜ned by the authoriz
-ing court order. In addition, limits could be set by the technical mecha
-nism. At least one proposal for a vendor unlock mechanism includes a 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 59provision to freeze the unlocked device and prevent it from being used 
directly to, for example, access remote accounts or services. 
In terms of the process for interacting with law enforcement agen
-cies, large online service operators such as Google, Facebook, and Apple 
already have processes in place to receive and validate warrants and 
other law enforcement requests to manage and deliver unencrypted cus
-tomer data that they hold. By contrast, device vendors such as Apple do 
not presently have processes in place to provide law enforcement agen
-cies with unlock codes, which would include not only validating law 
enforcement requests but also managing master signing keys and creat
-ing device-speci˜c unlock codes. A workable solution would have to be 
deployable on billions of devices. 
Vendors already have had to address at least some of the technical 
risks of an unlocking scheme. Most device and operating system ven
-dors already maintain a master key that is used to authenticate software 
updates. Because the software update capability enables the vendor to 
modify the device software arbitrarily, vendors already have strong pro
-cedures in place to protect these update keys and limit their use.
14
 The 
process and work˚ow used by vendors in delivering updates is designed 
to prevent inadequately tested, unapproved, or malicious code in an 
update and includes controls that keep a single individual from releasing 
an update. The key used for device unlock would, the argument goes, 
be handled by a similar system and similar procedures to those used to 
protect software update keys. If they are to cryptographically authenticate 
authorized unlock requests, manufacturers will have to store and protect 
secret signing keys for this purpose. Exposure of these keys would allow 
anyone to generate unlock tokens on their own. These signing keys, like 
the keys that manufacturers use to authenticate software updates, there
-fore, pose a cybersecurity risk and will have to be protected against crimi
-nal organizations and foreign agents. So, too, would the system that stores 
the keys associated with individual devices. A single point of failure could 
potentially jeopardize the security of millions of devices. 
There is an important difference, however, in the ease of use of an 
update signing key and a key to accomplish exceptional access. Stealing 
an update signing key does not give an immediate bene˜t. The only use 
for the key is to sign a piece of malicious software that will be used to 
attack a targeted system or systems. And creation of that malicious soft
-ware requires signi˜cant skill if it is to be capable of being deployed to 
a large number of target systems or a target system whose attributes are 
unknown, or if it is intended to be long-lived (e.g., to survive past future 
14
 The software update capability itself cannot be used to unlock a device because, as with 
well-designed
 smartphones, a software update can only be installed on an unlocked device. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
valid updates to the target system). The impact of such a signed malicious 
update could be extremely serious, and preventing theft of signing keys 
is thus a major concern for software vendors. 
Stealing an exceptional access key, by contrast, enables a thief, who 
has physical access to a device, to open it. An attacker might have only 
temporary access to a deviceŠperhaps at a border crossing, perhaps 
while the phone is left outside the protected facility during a meeting. If 
the exceptional access key can be used to decrypt an externally collected 
image of the device memory, theft of such a key is an especially serious 
threat. If the exceptional access key can only be used to decrypt the pro
-tected physical device (not a memory image) and if the device is rendered 
inoperable (frozen) by the act of decryption, as was the operating model 
for one concept presented to the committee, the device owner will at least 
have an indication that the device has been compromised. 
The security risks of the scheme can be partly mitigated if the access 
scheme is hardware based (see below) in order that an attack against a 
device unlock mechanism cannot be carried out remotely. This forces 
a party seeking to unlock a device to have physical possession of that 
device. 
Several operational factors distinguish an unlocking system from a 
software update system. For one, such a system would most likely be 
used more oftenŠperhaps several times per dayŠas compared to the 
keys used to sign software updates, which are used infrequently by a 
generally small group of highly trusted individuals. For another, a code 
intended to unlock a phone requires an individualized access key per 
phone (using, e.g., the phone™s unique identi˜er) and as many individual 
keys to be generated or retrieved as there are requests to unlock.
15
 Proponents and critics disagree about how much greater the risk of 
compromise would be as well as, at least implicitly, about how to weigh 
the incremental risk against the bene˜ts of enabling government access. 
How frequently might vendors be asked to unlock phones? It is dif
-˜cult to predict the volume of requests to vendors, but a ˜gure in the tens 
of thousands per year seems reasonable, given the number of criminal 
wiretaps per year in the United States and the number of inaccessible 
devices reported by just the FBI and the Manhattan District Attorney™s 
Of˜ce (see the section ﬁEncryption as an Impediment to Investigationsﬂ 
in Chapter 4). As a result, each vendor, depending on its market share, 
needs to be able to handle thousands to tens of thousands of domestic 
requests per year. 
15
 S. Landau, 2017, ﬁPunching the wrong bag: The deputy AG enters the crypto wars,ﬂ 
Lawfare
 Blog
, October
 27, https://www.lawfareblog.com/punching-wrong-bag-deputy-ag-
enters-crypto-wars. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 61Such a change in scale, as compared to the software update process, 
would necessitate a change in process and may require a larger number of 
people authorized to release an unlock code than are authorized to release 
a software update, which would increase the insider risk. 
Critics worry that using this approach might erode trust in the soft
-ware updates issued by vendors and lead users to eschew important 
security updates, thus signi˜cantly increasing their exposure to Internet 
malware and attacks by an array of actors. This risk stems in part from 
proponents having used software updates as an analogy to the unlock
-ing process. If advocates of required vendor unlock were to avoid this 
analogy, that would reduce the level of mistrust. So, too, would avoiding 
requests that vendors subvert the software update process (as contrasted 
with implementing a per-device unlocking scheme) to unlock devices. 
A related process and scale issue is the need for vendors to validate 
court documents before they release an unlock code or performing the 
unlock in order to thwart malevolent actors seeking to surreptitiously 
unlock devices. The challenge is similar to the one faced by telecommu
-nications carriers with CALEA
16
 or cloud providers served with requests 
for customer data. Such requirements could impose a burden on small 
vendors and constitute a barrier to entry for new vendors; small vendors 
would likely need to enlist trusted third parties similar to how telecom
-munications carriers ensure compliance with CALEA. 
Whether or not this burden would be reasonable or not depends, of 
course, on how one weighs the innovation and public safety equities. 
Although, as occurs in other sectors, small businesses could be protected 
from a signi˜cant ˜nancial burden in response to a law enforcement 
request, this ﬁsolutionﬂ is only partially effective. Should a small vendor 
grow largeŠwhich can happen quickly for Internet applicationsŠtheir 
system architecture must suddenly need to accommodate the assistance 
requirement. Thus a small vendor would essentially have to build pro
-visions for exceptional access into their architecture from the outset. 
This may mean that both the ˜nancial burdens and security risks of the 
requirement are present even before the vendor is formally subject to it. 
Requiring a U.S. vendor to have the ability to unlock every phone has 
the potential to erode trust in that vendor™s products in the international 
market, but it is dif˜cult to quantify the impact or assess how much 
additional impact the imposition of a U.S. requirement will have if other 
nations have already placed such requirements on a vendor. A competi
-tor could argue that another vendor may cooperate with U.S. authorities 
16
 Federal Communications Commission, 
Second Report and Order and Memorandum in the 
Matter of Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act and Broadband Access and Services
, FCC 06-56, p. 11, https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-06-56A1.pdf.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
to unlock a foreign phone, even in circumstances where the government 
lacks the authority. (Of course even if the United States does not impose 
an access requirement, other countries certainly could as a condition of 
participating in their domestic markets.) Similarly, it would be unsettling 
if foreign vendors could unlock any phone belonging to U.S. individuals. 
In the hands of a foreign government, this capability could, for example, 
be used against a U.S. executive to undermine U.S. corporate secrets and 
national security.
17
 The threat with respect to foreign governments is, of 
course, much lower in the case where the unlocking mechanism requires 
one to have physical possession of a device than in the case where a 
device can be unlocked remotely. 
Key Escrow
Key escrow is a scheme where the keys needed to decrypt data are 
held in escrowŠby the vendor, a third party, or the governmentŠso that 
an authorized third party can access the keys. The key escrow approach is 
applicable both to data at rest and data in motion. When this approach 
was studied extensively in the 1990s, several speci˜c proposals were 
made, and some products that implemented key escrow for encrypted 
network communications were built and offered commercially. 
The escrowing party could be the government, or it could be some other 
entity or entities. If vendors hold the keys, then each vendor can choose its 
own algorithms and formats. If a U.S. agency is to hold the recovery key, 
there are two possibilities. One is that the government determines the 
algorithms and formats that vendors use when implementing key escrow. 
Another is that the vendor provides the government with the necessary 
code to hold escrowed keys and perform the unlocking. The former would 
impose additional burdens on the vendor to integrate the government™s 
solution into its product or service (while also keeping it from selecting 
what it deems the best technical solution), while the latter would impose 
additional burdens on the government to maintain and operate a system 
for each product or service that it seeks to access. Note that the latter could 
also mean a similar situation that law enforcement currently faces with 
the complexity created by the plethora of changing formats, compression 
algorithms, and protocols used by software applications. 
The use of a third party to escrow keys may be perceived as preferable 
to having government itself hold the keys, which may be an attractive 
alternative for vendors who do not want to manage keys and authenticate 17
 Of course the security risks to U.S. travelers are well known and assumed as a fact of life 
by many U.S. business travelers. Those handling sensitive information are generally advised 
to travel with a ﬁthrowawayﬂ device to minimize their exposure.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 63requests for them, but third parties themselves will be attractive targets 
for attackers, especially if the same escrow agent maintains the keys for 
a wide range of systems. 
One way to protect the key is to split it into pieces known as ﬁsharesﬂ 
and store each share with a different organization. By analogy, many doors 
have a lower and upper lock for extra security. You could, of course, give 
the lower lock key to one friend and the upper lock key to another, mak
-ing it hard for either friend to misuse your key and enter your home by 
his or herself. If you did it for the keys to an encrypted computer, it would 
mean that someone would need to attack both of your friends to unlock 
it. More complicated schemes allow the cryptographic key to be splitŠfor 
example, into ˜ve shares so that any three can be used to decrypt. Two 
shares, however, are of no help in decrypting. Consequently, if two shares 
are compromised by an adversary, the data is still safe. This technique can 
be used to protect high-value secret keys. The proposals from the 1990s 
called for the law enforcement access secret keys to be split into parts held 
by separate government agencies. Although such a scheme provides addi
-tional security, it also introduces additional technical and organizational 
complexity to the key escrow system associated with retrieving and com
-bining the shares and thus, potentially, creates additional risks. 
The key escrow approaches that were proposed in the 1990sŠand the 
Clipper proposal in particularŠwere reviewed extensively by indepen
-dent researchers. Several weaknesses in Clipper that could interfere with 
government access were discovered,
18
 but none were found that would 
weaken the encrypted communication between parties using the Clipper 
devices to communicate. 
Owing to its complexity, it is dif˜cult to design and implement a 
large-scale key escrow system securely. Indeed, a 1996 National Research 
Council report on cryptography
19
 recommended that an escrow scheme 
be tested at scale before requiring its use, something that has never been 
done for an escrowed communications system. 
That report did not study the then-proposed Clipper scheme in depth 
but found that any scheme that includes key escrow would result in 
enhanced law enforcement access to encrypted information but weaken 
the security of authorized users™ information. The ˜nding of weakened 
security was based on the theoretical potential for abuse or the potential 
for failure of the escrow mechanism. The report also found that there 
18
 M. Blaze, 1994, ﬁProtocol failure in the escrowed encryption standard,ﬂ pp. 59-67 in 
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM
 Conference on Computer and Communications Security
, Association 
of Computing Machinery, http://www.crypto.com/papers/eesproto.pdf. 
19
 National Research Council, 1996, 
Cryptography™s Role in Securing the Information Society
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
was some bene˜t to authorized users, especially of storage encryption 
systems, from an escrow mechanism that would allow users to recover 
their own stored data owing to a failure of the encryption system or asso
-ciated key storage. The report made no attempt to quantify either bene˜t 
to law enforcement or cost in weakened security. Once the government 
abandoned its attempts to press for key escrow, Clipper and similar com
-munications key escrow schemes disappeared from the market. There 
were few purchasers within the United States, and even fewer abroad.
20
 By contrast, many storage encryption products today offer key 
escrow-like features to avoid data loss or support business record man
-agement requirements. For example, Apple™s full disk encryption for the 
Mac gives the user the option to, in effect, escrow the encryption key. 
Microsoft Windows™ BitLocker feature escrows the key by default but 
allows users to request that the escrowed key be deleted. Some point to 
the existence of such products as evidence that key recovery for stored 
data can be implemented in a way that sensibly balances risks and ben
-e˜ts at least in certain contexts and against certain threats. In any case, 
data that is recoverable by a vendor without the user™s passcode can be 
recovered by the vendor for law enforcement as well. Key escrow-type 
systems are especially prevalent and useful where the user, or some other 
authorized person such as the employer, needs access to stored data. Key 
escrow-type systems are less prevalent for transitory communications, 
including text messages, where the ability to retrieve past content is often 
less important. There are, however, some settings, such as the ˜nancial 
industry, where there are requirements that communications be stored 
and retrievable. 
Hardware-Based Device-Level Key Escrow for Access to Stored Data
An alternative approach for access to mobile devices would be to 
escrow a device decryption key in the device itselfŠfor example, by 
storing it in some form of secure hardware. To retrieve the key from 
the hardware module, an investigator wouldŠafter receiving proper 
legal 
 authorizationŠbe required to get an authentication token from 
the key holder. With this token, investigators would retrieve a key that 
can be used to decrypt the data stored on it. This would in turn require 
manufacturers to maintain a service to store and protect the keys used 
to generate the authentication tokens, validate law enforcement requests, 
and produce the tokens. This key could be stored whole or broken into 
pieces, with each piece escrowed separately with different parties. The 
20
 W. Dif˜e and S. Landau, 2010, 
Privacy on the Line: The Politics of Wiretapping and Encryp
-tion
, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 65mechanism for validating the authorization token and releasing the 
decryption key would be managed entirely by hardware and designed 
so that it could not be triggered by software running on the device. Com
-pared to the key escrow option described above, this approach has the 
advantage of only allowing the decryption key to be retrieved if one has 
physical custody of the device, but, otherwise, it raises the same risks 
and complexities. 
ﬁWeakenﬂ Encryption
There are several approaches to providing law enforcement access to 
encrypted information that fall into the general category of ﬁweakeningﬂ 
encryption. One is to limit the key length so that law enforcement or intel
-ligence agencies can reasonably recover plaintext by trying all possible 
keys. Another is to implement an encryption algorithm that incorporates 
a feature that allows authorized agencies to use a special key or algorithm 
to recover plaintext. The ˜rst alternative is very similar to the approach 
tried during the 1990s when exportable encryption products were limited 
to 40-bit keys. The second alternative, as described, has not previously 
been implemented although a variation of the ˜rst alternative, the IBM 
Commercial Data Masking Facility, involved manipulating a 56-bit DES 
key by setting certain bits to zero and encrypting the modi˜ed key using 
constant keys. Under that alternative, key management software contin
-ued to negotiate 56-bit keys, but law enforcement (or any other attacker) 
only had to exhaust a 40-bit key space to recover plaintext. 
Both approaches to weakening encryption have generally fallen out 
of favor as possible solutions. With today™s widespread availability of 
computing resources, many actors could exploit systems using shortened 
keys. Like any vulnerability, once discovered, such weaknesses can be 
exploited by anyone. And any solution that required shortened keys or 
use of a speci˜c encryption method would create a legacy problem; sys
-tems would have to accommodate the shortened keys in protocols, even if 
the methodology were found to be insecure and abandoned. That would 
create long-term risks, not only to the systems that employed shortened 
keys, but also to all systems needing to interact with it.
21
 21
 The so-called FREAK exploit discovered in 2015 took advantage of ˚awed implementa
-tions of OpenSSL and
 Apple TLS/SSL client software. In unpatched systems, it allows an 
attacker to use a man-in-the-middle attack to force vulnerable clients and servers to use 
weakened encryption. See B. Beurdouche, K. Bhargavan, A. Delignat-Lavaud, C. Fournet, 
M. Kohlweiss, A. Pironti, P.-Y. Strub, and J.K. Zinzindohoue 2015, ﬁA messy state of the 
union: Taming the composite state machines of TLS,ﬂ pp. 535-552 in 
2015 IEEE Symposium 
on Security and Privacy
, doi:10.1109/SP.2015.39.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Require Vendor Assistance But Impose 
 No Requirements on Deployed Technology
This variant of the above approaches would seek to compel vendors 
to render reasonable assistance on a case-by-case basis but not impose 
requirements on the technology they deploy to enable such assistance. It 
is an option that would presumably be pursued under the All Writs Act 
or some legislative clari˜cation or extension of that law. Of course, there 
may be very different views as to what constitutes ﬁreasonableﬂŠboth in 
terms of the costs to the vendor and the risks to a vendor (and its users) 
if the tool or technique used by the vendor is itself discovered or stolen 
and then exploited. This sort of divergence was on display in the San 
Bernardino case, where the FBI sought to have Apple prepare and sign 
software that would allow it to unlock a phone recovered from one of 
the shootersŠa request that was withdrawn after the FBI found a third 
party that could unlock the phone. New legislation could help establish 
parameters for what is reasonable, but extensive litigation is likely. The 
effectiveness of this mechanism may erode as vendors improve security to 
respond to the general threat environment orŠpotentiallyŠto speci˜cally 
hamper such assistance. 
It is also possible that the market will bifurcate. If the legal standard 
depends on the dif˜culty and cost of providing technical assistance, some 
companies will seek to raise those costs so as to not be required to provide 
such assistance. Alternatively, other companies will seek to make it as 
easy as possible to comply in order to keep costs down. One result would 
be that the accessibility of one™s data by the government could vary quite 
a bit by vendor. 
Future Cryptographic Technologies
New cryptographic techniques might change the parameters of the 
debate in the future. Standard encryption enables anyone who holds 
the secret key to fully decrypt, while all others learn nothing about the 
plaintext data. Modern cryptography now offers a richer set of capa
-bilities than simply full access or no access. For example, when certain 
ciphers are used to encrypt, it is possible to issue a 
restricted
 secret key 
that lets the key holder ascertain whether a certain keyword or phrase 
appears in the plaintext but learn nothing else about the plaintext. In 
theory, this restricted key could enable law enforcement to determine 
whether a suspected device contained certain keywords or phrases, 
while learning nothing else about the contents of the device. Researchers 
continue to make advances in this general technical area, but technolo
-gies for a general-purpose search on encrypted data are not yet ready 
for mass adoption. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 67These techniques would also pose many challenges in the context of 
investigations. First, even simple obfuscation, such as avoiding likely key 
words or obfuscating the text by replacing the letter ﬁiﬂ with the letter 
ﬁlﬂ (ell) will prevent a keyword match. More aggressive text obfusca
-tionŠnotably prior encryption using other cryptographyŠwill prevent 
the search from working altogether. Finally, a scheme that uses a restricted 
secret key generated by a trusted authority has the same dif˜culties as the 
key escrow schemes discussed above. 
Ways to Bypass a Plaintext Access Mandate
In the 1990s, law enforcement authorities seemed willing to accept 
the risk that end-users would install encryption features that did not 
implement the (then-proposed) key escrow mechanisms. Today, a similar 
question about effectiveness arises with proposals to regulate the use of 
encryption in mass-market products and services. Sophisticated crimi
-nals have always had means to evade surveillance, while changing the 
defaults has the potential to affect a much wider range of investigations. 
Nevertheless it is important to note that smart and determined actors 
can employ a variety of techniques that can be used to evade a mandate 
against default encryption. At the same time, most people accept vendor 
defaults, even when they may present risks to their security and privacy. 
The discussion below does not speak to 
whether
 bad actors will seek to 
circumvent regulations on encryption but rather 
how
 they might go about 
doing so. 
A few possible techniques are discussed below. 
Adapt to a Platform-Level Mandate by Adopting 
 Application-Level Encryption
If cryptography is implemented inside an application, a mandate 
placed on the vendor™s hardware and operating system (such as an Apple 
iPhone and its operating system iOS or the multiple vendors of Android 
phones) will not provide access to that application™s data, because even 
once the phone™s disk is decrypted, the application™s data remains 
encrypted and unavailable to an investigator. Already, dozens of applica
-tions support such application-level encryption, and many are developed 
outside of the United States. These include stand-alone applications that 
would allow a user to store encrypted ˜les on a smart phone or laptop. Of 
course, if the user chooses a weak password in the application or a ˚aw 
in the application can be identi˜ed and exploited, it may still be possible 
to gain access. 
One could imagine imposing a similar requirement on all application 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
developers, but there are a number of complications. First, developers 
reside worldwide, and it is not clear how one would impose this 
 mandate 
on everyone. In fact, as with mandated access to devices, this man-date could disadvantage U.S. developers relative to foreign developers 
who are not subject to the mandate. Second, as in the case of mandated 
vendor unlock, discussed above, it raises scale and process challenges for 
small ˜rms. Third, even if one can regulate application software produced 
by companies, there is a wide range of open-source software with encryp
-tion capabilities that is freely available and modi˜able.
22
 With some platforms, such as Apple™s iPhone, only applications 
approved by the vendor can be installed through the normal software 
installation channel. On these platforms, it may be possible to block the 
installation of applications that provide unapproved encryption.
23
 How
-ever, there are several ways for a determined and knowledgeable user to 
bypass these restrictions. 
On some platforms, applications can be loaded from any number of 
widely available application stores. Even on more restricted platforms, 
such as Apple™s iPhone, applications can be ﬁside loadedﬂ using freely 
available developer tools and distributed on a limited basis by anyone 
with a developer account. Another possibility is to ﬁjailbreakﬂ the phone 
(see below) and disable or remove the offending features.
24
 Moreover, 
platforms such as Android and iOS provide at least a limited ability for 
running code entered by the user. For example, one can install a Python 
interpreter from Apple™s app store that can access the system clipboard, 
and use it for encryption and decryption. 
Applications providing encryption could even be run entirely within 
a Web browser, making it even more dif˜cult to regulate their use. As with 
jailbreaking (see below), it is important to understand how much such 
bypassing erodes the bene˜ts to law enforcement of access mandates. 
There are also platforms, such as the open-source Android operating 
system, that do not impose such restrictions on what software can be 
installed. 
These considerations point to the difference between an exceptional 
access regime intended to work against a skillful adversary, which is 
impractical, and making it work for mass-market, default communica
-tions and storage products and services. The only way to guarantee that 
22
 A recent global survey of encryption products found that one-third were open source. 
See B. Schneier,
 K. Seidel, and S. Vijayakumar, 2016, 
A Worldwide Survey of Encryption Prod
-ucts
, Berkman Center Research Publication No. 2016-2, https://ssrn.com/abstract=2731160. 
23
 Indeed, Apple recently removed encryption and VPN
 software from its China app store 
at the request of the Chinese government.
24 Because jailbreaking involves breaking the secure boot mechanism, it reduces protection 
against malicious
 software.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 69every form of encryption is subject to exceptional access is to certify 
the software that is allowed to run on every storage and communica
-tion device, which would be extremely expensive, intrusive, and bad for 
innovation. Consider by analogy the situation with physical search: a 
skillful adversary can make it effectively impossible for government to 
˜nd physical objects, but it is tricky, expensive, and inconvenient to do 
this, so one does not abandon physical search just because it may not be 
effective in some circumstances. 
Also, with respect to the possibility that third parties create applica
-tions that provide encryption without exceptional access, it is important 
to bear in mind that correctly designing and implementing systems that 
use encryption is challenging. One consequence in a world in which 
exceptional access is mandated is that systems without exceptional access 
may be less secure than mainstream systems that do provide exceptional 
access. The latter can bene˜t from the resources and expertise of the large 
enterprises or consortia that develop, deploy, and maintain them, which 
may stand in contrast to the groups that build capabilities intended to 
thwart a requirement.
25
 Install Alternative Operating System Software
Vendor mandates rely on devices running operating system software 
that properly responds to unlock codes. If the user is able to alter the exist
-ing operating system or install an alternative operating system (which on 
some platforms requires circumventing vendor security measures), the 
device may no longer respond to unlock codes. When faced with such 
a device, law enforcement might be unable to unlock it, even with the 
vendor™s assistance. 
Jailbreaking of mobile devices is a fairly common occurrence, although 
by no means universalŠand vendors are strongly motivated to prevent 
all devices they have supplied from being broken by a single ﬁwhole
-saleﬂ attack of the sort needed for a jailbreak. It is worth noting that an 
exploit used to jailbreak is different from one that is used to circumvent a 
device lock and encryption; jailbreaks work only after a phone has been 
unlocked. 
25
 Note, however, that the messaging app Signal, which is believed to work securely, was 
developed by
 two people. A system that includes exceptional access would be more com
-plicated and might require a larger team.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Use Legacy Devices or Software
This technique relies on continuing to use devices or software that 
are not compliant with a new regulation. It is in general dif˜cult to stop 
people from using old hardware and software, although this is a time-
bounded problem as people upgrade to take advantage of new capa
-bilities. As discussed above, app store restrictions do not apply on all 
platforms and, in any event, are not foolproof for restricting access to non
-compliant software. With respect to hardware, legacy smartphones could 
presumably be restricted through regulations on what devices 
 cellular 
carriers allow to connect to their networks, but laptops and other hard
-ware could not similarly be regulated. 
Use Other Techniques for Concealing Messages and Stored Data
Finally, determined actors can use other techniques to conceal mes
-sages or stored data. One way is to use steganography, a technique where 
one hides private information by embedding it in public data. For exam
-ple, one can hide secret information in public images such as pictures of 
cats. The information is hidden in the pixels representing the cats. Only 
someone who knows where to look will ˜nd the data. To a law enforce
-ment agent, the images look like normal uninteresting images. Many free 
steganography applications are currently available for both Android and 
iOS, and all are quite easy to install and use. The use of such applications 
could be regulated, subject to all of the caveats as for encryption appli
-cations. It is sometimes possible to detect but not necessarily to decrypt 
steganographic messages. 
Another technique is to employ secret sharing, where the user splits 
a ˜le into two or more shares, where a single share reveals nothing about 
the ˜le contents. Each share is stored on a different device, so that capture 
of a single device reveals nothing. An investigator who recovers a phone 
but not the other device will learn little from unlocking it. 
Alternatives to Exceptional Access
There are other avenues for investigators to gain access to plaintext 
and other digital information that may aid an investigation. Some have 
argued that these tools, especially in aggregate, may serve as at least a 
partial substitute for regulations that mandate exceptional access. Others, 
notably from the law enforcement community, have warned that these 
tools, although useful in some cases, will not be a satisfactory substitute 
in many others. The following are some important examples. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 71Use Metadata
Although encryption hides content, current encryption systems gen
-erally do not hide metadata. For example, in a chat system, metadata 
includes information such as who communicated with whom, for how 
long, the participant™s location, and so on. Metadata is also needed to 
prevent spamming and denial of service, which is why many existing 
systems collect this information. Such metadata provides new sources of 
information not previously available to investigators that exceeds the old 
ﬁwho called whom whenﬂ provided by the telephone network.
26
 None
-theless, metadata is not necessarily a substitute for content (see the section 
ﬁThe Practical Utility of Alternatives to Exceptional Accessﬂ in Chapter 4). 
It is not a given that all metadata will remain unencrypted. Methods have 
been developed for hiding ﬁwho communicated with whom.ﬂ As these 
technologies become more robust and popular, even some basic metadata 
could become unavailable. 
Access Data Stored in Cloud Services
In coming years, the majority of user data at rest will probably be 
stored in the cloud. Because in many instances users or service providers 
want access to this data (e.g., for searching, aggregation, and analysis), 
the data is typically stored in a way that enables the provider to access 
the data in the clear. Law enforcement can interact with cloud providers 
to obtain data that they need for investigations, such as data mirrored or 
backed up from mobile devices. Using this approach requires no modi
-˜cation of cryptographic systems on the mobile devices. However, some 
˜rms offer services that encrypt data so that the service provider cannot 
access it. Also, users who are sensitive to the possibility of government 
access can generally opt out of cloud storage for their data. 
Lawful Hacking
This section focuses on technical aspects of lawful hacking; legal 
aspects are discussed in the section ﬁLegal Aspects of Lawful Hackingﬂ 
above.
The scope of impactŠand potential riskŠwill depend on the exploit 
that is used. Sometimes the government will succeed through an approach 
that affects only a single device, such as leveraging miscon˜gurations of a 
target system. Other times, the government will exploit a vulnerability in 
26
 Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University, 2016, 
Don™t Panic: Mak
-ing Progress on the ﬁGoing Darkﬂ
 Debate
, February
 1, https://cyber.harvard.edu/pubrelease/
dont-panic/Dont_Panic_Making_Progress_on_Going_Dark_Debate.pdf.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
the target system. When the government ˜nds vulnerabilities in products 
that lead to exploits, it can choose to either collect these exploits or report 
the vulnerabilities to the vendor. The product is vulnerable in either case; 
choosing which alternative to take is a matter of policy. But the fact that 
the vulnerability was discovered means it is possible that others will 
discover it too, although the probability of independent discovery is a 
matter of debate. 
The equities for lawful hacking may vary considerably depending 
on the particular circumstances. For example, one consequence of pursu
-ing this approach is that it increases the incentives for government (and 
the contractors that provide lawful hacking services to government) to 
acquire and hold exploits rather than report them to vendors. As with the 
use of hacking techniques for foreign intelligence collection, it requires 
that the bene˜ts to investigators be balanced with the risks to users of 
systems with unpatched vulnerabilities. The Obama administration estab-lished the ﬁvulnerabilities equities processﬂ in an attempt to address these 
trade-offs, and it has recently been updated and made public.
27
 Another 
consideration with respect to equities is that vulnerabilities are fragile; 
they may be discovered and ˜xed if they are used. They may also be dis
-covered and reused by other parties. A ˜nal risk is that information about 
vulnerabilities or hacking tools that use them can leak or be stolen from 
government agencies and then be used by malicious actors. 
From a technical perspective, there are three domains where tools 
are needed: locked devices, encrypted data in the cloud, and encrypted 
communications. In each case, the challenge for investigators is acquiring 
the tools needed to cover all the devices and services that may arise in 
investigationsŠand obtaining the necessary resources. For which devices 
would law enforcement have hacking tools, and would those tools require 
physical possession of the device? Another is the time and effort required 
to use the tools. From the perspective of law enforcement, something fast 
and reliable would be best, but one can imagine tools that require thou
-sands of dollars™ worth of computation or days to weeks of effort. More
-over, given the fragility and speci˜city of lawful hacking approaches, law 
enforcement will need to develop or otherwise acquire a large number of 
exploits, which will be expensive and time-consuming. Such delay may be 
acceptable for some investigations, but for others, it may put law enforce
-ment into a situation where they are always lagging the events they are 
charged to investigate. 
Exploitable vulnerabilities will always be present in software, espe
-27
 Executive Of˜ce of the President, 2017, 
Vulnerabilities Equities Policy and Process for the 
United States Government
, November
 15, https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.
gov/˜les/images/External%20-%20Unclassi˜ed%20VEP%20Charter%20FINAL.PDF.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 73cially in large and complex systems. However, it will not necessarily 
be easy for the government, especially state and local law enforcement 
agencies, to stay ahead of continually improving security technologies. 
Many vendors have made major investments in software security, which 
will likely raise the cost of discovering vulnerabilities. Patches are also 
available much more rapidly in today™s environment where users are 
accustomed to constant updates. Trusted boot, which is fundamental to 
device encryption, has made malware implantation harder. Other secu
-rity advances that impede hackers include anti-hammering protections 
(which mitigate the risk of repetitive password attacks), biometric and 
two-factor authentication (which reduces reliance on passwords and the 
risk of phishing), and anonymous routing services (which makes it more 
dif˜cult to identify endpoints and targets). Additionally, if the lawful 
hacking attack is discovered and the attack vector is understood and 
publicized, it will be remediated, creating further challenges for those 
seeking accessŠassuming the software is updated, which may or may not 
be automatic depending on the particular vendor and context. 
As a result, lawful hacking of individual communications applica
-tions such as Snapchat and devices such as iPhones and laptops with 
full disk encryption will require a level of effort that may well not scale 
to the number of investigations implicated and may well not be feasible 
for all investigative agencies. There are also limits on what tools may 
be appropriate for law enforcement agencies to use. For example, some 
of the means at the disposal of the National Security Agency would be 
 
inappropriate or illegal for traditional law enforcement. 
Acquire Better Tools and Capabilities for Accessing and Analyzing 
Plaintext
As observed earlier, encryption is not the only barrier to effective use 
of plaintext. Even when information is not encrypted, it can be dif˜cult 
for law enforcement or intelligence agencies to access and analyze infor
-mation. Information may be transmitted using nonstandard protocols or 
stored in unfamiliar formatsŠand these may change on a regular basis 
as companies evolve software and services. Making effective use of data, 
especially when the volumes are large, requires specialized tools and 
expertise. Acquiring these capabilities will require additional resources; 
see the next section. 
ENHANCED FINANCIAL AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT
The following are options for providing additional ˜nancial or techni
-cal support to respond to the challenges posed by encryption: 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Ł Provide law enforcement with additional ˜nancial resources. 
Law enforce
-ment capabilities and spending have not kept pace with the growing role 
of digital evidence in investigations.
28
 In today™s world of multiple types 
of devices, applications, and networks, the ﬁone-size-˜ts-allﬂ solutions of 
the telephony era are no longer possible. Thus greater technical expertise 
is a necessity in modern investigations. With additional resources, the 
government could hire more specialists, pursue more sources of informa
-tion, ˜nd additional clever workarounds when data is encrypted, expand 
capabilities for lawful hacking, and ˜nd and punish more criminals. As 
indicated previously, with more resources, law enforcement would be 
able to access and use sources of information that are now too dif˜cult. 
Ł Sharing and access to specialized services.
 When one law enforcement 
group learns how to use a new source of data, or ˜nds (or develops) a use
-ful tool, how do other law enforcement groups learn about this, as there 
are surely some that could use it? More broadly, there are clear economies 
of scale. A small townŠor even small cityŠpolice department cannot 
maintain the technical staff needed to ˜nd new sources of data or learn 
about new methods and tools. At the same time, it may be desirable to 
limit the spread of sensitive techniques used to access plaintext, lest they 
leak out and bad actors either learn how to circumvent them or make use 
of the techniques for their own purposes. 
Both formal and informal sharing institutions can play a role if prop
-erly staffed and funded. Existing specialized federal entities and govern
-ment-af˜liated nonpro˜ts (Box 5.2) and the existing analysis capabilities 
of federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies can be leveraged to 
assist law enforcement groups that lack the necessary skills and equip
-ment. For this assistance to partially offset the loss of plaintext, the capa
-bilities and scale of these entities may well have to increase by orders of 
magnitude. 
Ł Enhance corporate outreach to law enforcement.
 Companies could 
enhance their efforts to engage the law enforcement community, making 
sure law enforcement of˜cials are familiar with their products and what 
data does and does not exist. (Fully implementing this would require a 
detailed discussion of the changing details of what data is retained, how 
its location is determined, and how long it is kept.) The U.S. Department 
28
 The gap is recognized in the FBI™s ˜scal year (FY) 2017 budget request that included an 
increase of $38 million to
 ﬁcounter the threat of Going Darkﬂ (U.S. Department of Justice, 
FY 2017 Authorization and Budget Request to Congress, https://www.justice.gov/jmd/
˜le/821341/download). The FY2018 request calls for an increase of $22 million, 80 posi
-tions, and 20 agents for ﬁGoing Dark/Investigative Technologyﬂ(U.S. Department of Justice, 
FY 2018 Budget Request at a Glance, https://www.justice.gov/jmd/page/˜le/968261/
download).
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 75BOX 5.2 Technical Assistance and Training Organizations
Federal Government OrganizationsThe National Domestic Communications Assistance Center, a center or
-ganized under the U.S. Department of Justice, provides state and local law en-forcement investigators with access to subject matter experts and technical tools 
and services. It also provides training on new and emerging technologies, industry 
processes, and how to develop tools for interpreting digital evidence. 
The Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers, a program of the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security, provide training to law enforcement on a wide 

-ery from seized computers, and Internet investigations. 
The National Computer Forensics Institute, operated by the U.S. Secret 
Service, provides state and local law enforcement with training in digital evidence 
and cyber crime investigations.The National Consortium for Justice Information and Statistics Assistance 
and Training Center offers training on investigating digital crimes and working with 
digital evidence. The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children provides online 
and classroom training on forensic imaging and other skills needed to investigate 
cases of missing and sexually exploited children. The National White Collar Crime Center provides information and train
-
economic crime. The National Criminal Justice Training Center of Fox Valley Technical 
College provides training on digital investigations and technology-facilitated crimes 
against children.of Justice™s National Domestic Communications Assistance Center cur
-rently facilitates some level of assistance. Other avenues for cooperation 
include the following: 
 Š Vendors supply source code and internal documentation.
 Some ven
-dors, such as those selling secure messaging, might be willing to volun
-tarily supply information if the government™s equities process provides 
suf˜cient priority to the release of vulnerabilities to vendors so that the 
vendors can remediate them. One objection is that for many programs 
the implementation changes several times a year, so guaranteeing that 
the supplied code is what is running on a particular device would be 
challenging. In the long run, this is likely to make the systems more 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
secure; law enforcement™s opportunity comes between the discovery of 
an exploitable vulnerability and when it is patched in the systems they 
care about. Pursuing this option assumes that the vulnerabilities equities 
process favors disclosure to the vendor and assumes that law enforcement 
agencies have the capability to discover new vulnerabilities. 
 Š Vendors voluntarily share information about vulnerabilities. 
Vendors 
will ˜x the security vulnerabilities they ˜nd, but in the interim, legiti
-mate government interests as well as bad actors could potentially make 
use of the vulnerabilities. Absent a requirement to share these bugs, it is 
not clear, especially in the current environment, whether vendors would 
actually participate; they generally avoid sharing vulnerabilities for any 
offensive purpose in part because they fear legal liability and reputational 
damage if they enable their own customers to be attacked successfully. 
With both this case and the one that follows, a further complication to 
consider is the risk that the government agencies that hold a vulnerabil
-ity may lose it; the risk is more than theoretical in light of reports about 
government-held tools being compromised. 
 Š Third parties voluntarily share information about vulnerabilities.
 Third parties often discover security vulnerabilities and report them to 
vendors. They could share this information to the government before or 
at the same time they provide it to vendors.
Ł Support innovation.
 Research funding may lead to innovative tech
-nical solutions that better accommodate government access and end-user 
security. One example would be searchable encryption, discussed above 
as well as in Chapter 2.
LEGISLATION MANDATING ACCESS
As discussed earlier, there are two broad categories of possible legisla
-tion mandating government access to encrypted information. 
Ł Enact legislation that requires that device vendors or service providers 
provide government access to plaintext without specifying the technical means 
of doing so.
 The mandate could be described in a variety of ways, with 
different types of problems. For example, it might require that vendors be 
able to comply with warrants seeking access to the plaintext of the infor
-mation when their products and services are used to encrypt but leave it 
to industry to design the technical solution. 
Ł Enact legislation requiring a particular technical approach.
 For exam
-ple, a law or regulation could require vendors to implement hardware-
based device-level key escrow for access to stored data or require vendors 
or third-party key escrow for access to communications. As a middle 
ground, a law could call for rulemaking to select a technical approach. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OPTIONS FOR ACCESSING PLAINTEXT 77The ˜rst approach has the advantage of allowing industry greater 
˚exibility in developing and selecting solutions that best ˜t their techni
-cal and business circumstances. On the other hand, if industry is left to 
choose, there may be a plethora of plaintext recovery solutions adopted. 
This cacophony in the marketplace may be a challenge to government 
agents, because they will have to rely on different techniques in differ
-ent cases. But because the United States cannot regulate what applica
-tions and devices are developed outside U.S. borders, some degree of 
cacophony is likely to exist for investigators regardless of limits created 
by U.S. legislation. 
By contrast, the second approach may be more burdensome if the 
selected approach is dif˜cult for vendors to implement, and it would not 
foster innovative solutions. However, it may provide the greatest scale 
because law enforcement would have a repeatable and dependable way 
to access plaintext when authorized pursuant to law. By having everyone 
adopt the same technical approach, it would also magnify the risk of 
catastrophic failure if that common approach were to have exploitable 
security ˚aws. 
Even for a technically non-speci˜c mandate, there are many details 
that would need to be worked out and speci˜ed in a legislative proposal. 
For example, 
Ł Which companies, products, and services are covered, and what 
are the exact responsibilities of vendors and service providers? 
Ł How will legacy devices be treated? Are they exempt from the 
requirements, or must they be taken out of service if they cannot comply? 
If they are not grandfathered, how will the requirements be enforced? 
Ł How robust must the exceptional access mechanism be against 
user efforts to disable it? 
Ł What rules apply to devices that are carried into the United States 
by foreign visitors? Must they be retro˜tted or disabled at the border? 
Similarly, what rules apply to services provided by ˜rms without a clear 
U.S. presence, and how would these rules be enforced?
In terms of cost, if industry is left to innovate, it will incur research 
and development costs, product (re)development costs, and the costs of 
adhering with any access regime. (Some of those costs are incurred today 
with regard to access to plaintext, such as the costs of responding to judi
-cial process.) If the government mandates a particular solution, there will 
be the cost of re-engineering systems, protecting the access mechanisms, 
and responding to government requests for data. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
Encryption is a global issue for nations, corporations, and individuals. 
However, as characterized by a recent Center for Strategic and Interna
-tional Studies report,
1 despite ﬁglobal concernﬂ there is no ﬁglobal con
-sensus.ﬂ Although the debate on encryption continues, a clear trend is the 
increasing demands of governments for access to data from Internet com
-panies as recorded by ﬁtransparency reportsﬂ whether by domestic U.S. 
legal process or foreign requests.
2 A number of countries are currently 
exploring a variety of regulatory approaches, with signi˜cant variation 
even within the European Union.
3,4 There are several concurrent themes to the international dimensions 
of the issue. 
Ł Global availability.
 Because encryption technologies are available 
and developed globally, there are limits to what can be achieved with 
domestic regulation. 
1 J.A. Lewis, D.E. Zheng, and W.A. Carter, 2017, 
Effect of Encryption of Lawful Access to Com-munications and Data: A Report of the CSIS Technology Policy Program
, https://www.csis.org/
analysis/effect-encryption-lawful-access-communications-and-data.
2 ﬁHand Over the Data,ﬂ 2017, 
Technology Review
 102(2):26.
3 D. Severson, n.d., 
The Encryption Debate in Europe
, Aegis Paper Series No. 1702, research 
report, Hoover
 Institution, http://www.hoover.org/sites/default/˜les/research/docs/
 severson_webreadypdf.pdf.
4 S. Herpig and S. Heuman, 2017, ﬁGermany™s crypto past and hacking 
 future,ﬂ 
Lawfare
 Blog
 (April
 13),
 https://www.lawfareblog.com/germanys-crypto-past-and-
 hacking-future.
6International Dimensions
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNATIONAL DIMENSIONS
 79Ł Potential proliferation of national regulation
. Other nations are 
already seeking to regulate encryption and impose access requirements. 
Those measures may affect the United States in various ways. At the 
same time, if the U.S. government takes steps to mandate companies to 
provide access to encrypted content, it will encourage other countries 
to demand access as well. The resulting proliferation of approaches to 
enforce such an access requirement may give rise to a patchwork mul
-tinational regulatory structure that will likely decrease the technology 
products that can be sold to the global market. 
Ł Restrictions on international data transfer
. Given the amount of Inter
-net traf˜c that transits the United States and the amount of data stored by 
U.S. technology companies, any movement toward legislated access for 
the U.S. government will create concern by other countries that the United 
States does not have adequate controls over whether law enforcement 
and/or the intelligence community are accessing the data of citizens of 
their country. This dynamic may put international data transfer mecha
-nisms, such as the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield Framework, at risk of further 
legal and political challenges, especially in the European Union. Weaken
-ing the mechanisms that allow for lawful international data transfer to 
the United States will create a disincentive to use U.S. technology and 
communications networks. 
Ł Global impacts of domestic regulations on citizens of other nations. 
Citi
-zens around the world have become more aware of and sometimes con
-cerned about the possibility of surveillance by nations other than their 
own.
Decisions on encryption will have critical consequences for interna
-tional trade and the competitiveness of U.S. companies whether or not the 
approaches and solutions are adopted worldwide (and they seem unlikely 
to be). Any government decisions requiring exceptional access, whether in 
the United States or elsewhere, are also likely to have global rami˜cations 
for human rights, especially privacy, freedoms of speech and association, 
and the right to information (see Chapter 3). Corporations are faced with 
the choice of complying with country-speci˜c laws or foregoing markets 
for their products. As outlined in Chapter 5, countries have a variety of 
options for responding to the encryption dilemma. 
Vendors, whether based in the United State or elsewhere, generally 
rely on complex international supply chains for the hardware and soft
-ware that comprise their products and services. This dependence creates 
opportunities for coercion by foreign governments. 
Another international issue is the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty 
(MLAT) process through which a country may seek data that is held in 
another country. This is related to the encryption debate because one 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
approach when encryption is encountered in an investigation is to seek 
alternative sources of data stored in the cloud. Increasingly, that data 
may turn out to be stored in another country, which under the existing 
process greatly complicates and delays access. Numerous studies have 
called for reform to enhance both the speed and process to ensure better 
effectiveness but the framework relies on voluntary cooperation. There 
are already efforts in this direction, such as those between the United 
States and United Kingdom. Civil liberties and human rights organiza
-tions have expressed concerns that current proposals do not incorporate 
adequate safeguards to protect individual rights. It may be that interna
-tional agreements will be easiest in the context of responding to speci˜c 
types of crimes, such as terrorism or child exploitation. Similarly, it will 
be much easier to reach bilateral or multilateral agreements regarding law 
enforcement interests than intelligence interests. 
EFFECTS OF U.S. ACTIONS ON OTHER COUNTRIES AND 
 THE INTERNATIONAL MARKET FOR 
U.S. GOODS AND SERVICES
For U.S. vendors, a mandate to provide access could have a signi˜cant 
impact on global revenue. For most multi-national companies, a signi˜
-cant portion of their revenue is generated overseas, owing to demograph
-ics (e.g., China and India have more than 1 billion people each) and large 
potential opportunities in emerging markets more broadly. At the same 
time, some of the customers in these jurisdictions may be reluctant to use 
products that provide government access to plaintext, particularly U.S. 
government access to plaintext. The impact will be sensitive to the par
-ticular technical approach used. For example, if key escrow were imple
-mented but the keys were to be stored only in the country of the customer, 
some customers might ˜nd that approach acceptable because they are 
already subject to local laws. It seems plausible that whether they do will 
depend on whether the country in question provides strong rule-of-law 
protections; customers may nevertheless be concerned about U.S. ˜rms 
providing data to the U.S. government. At the same time, some customers 
in some markets may be more affected by their own country™s approach 
to encryption than by the U.S. approach, even if they are buying products 
from U.S. companies. Indeed, in some cases U.S. ˜rms have tailored their 
products and services to the regulations of a country in order to partici
-pate in that market.
5 On the other hand, an approach that uses local stor
-5 See, for example, P. Mozur, 2017, ﬁApple removes apps from China store that help internet 
users evade
 censorship,ﬂ 
New York Times
, July
 29, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/29/
technology/china-apple-censorhip.html.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTERNATIONAL DIMENSIONS
 81age of escrowed keys and gives repressive regimes control over those keys 
might not be supported by the United States as an international solution. 
The international challenges are compounded by the fact that mobile 
devices are mobile, which means that a solution does not necessarily satisfy 
law enforcement needs; for example, sophisticated criminals could simply 
purchase devices outside the nation in which they intend to use them. Fur
-ther compounding the challenge is the intersection of encryption and trade 
policy. For example, trade agreements may constrain how the U.S. govern
-ment treats foreign visitor™s devices that do not comply with U.S. rules. 
The market for encryption products is a global market. It has been 
estimated that as of early 2016 there are 846 encryption products on the 
market of which 545 are produced outside of the United States.
6 Require
-ments for government exceptional access in U.S. encryption products, 
may drive people toward products designed in countries without any 
encryption regulation. Such a dynamic would, if it plays out in this way, 
weaken the competitiveness of U.S. companies while reducing the ben
-e˜ts for law enforcement. 
GLOBAL NORMS
The challenges of addressing government exceptional access interna
-tionally stem in part from the lack of global norms around such related 
issues as security interests, business-government relationships, and infor
-mation and communications privacy. Although the United Nations Group 
of Government Experts on Developments in the Field of Information and 
Telecommunications in the Context of International Security (UNGGE) 
has been meeting since 2010, there has been little success in establish
-ing norms and con˜dence-building measures for responsible behavior 
and the application of international law. To be sure, a set of principles 
has been promulgated, but the insight from two decades ago by another 
National Research Council study still remains true todayŠinternational 
communications are conducted with no universally adopted information 
or communications privacy and security standards or policies.
7 The his
-torical experience suggests that it will be dif˜cult to reach agreement on 
international norms for exceptional access. 
There have been a number of (to date unsuccessful) private-sector 
initiatives to establish industry norms and advocate that states create 
6 B. Schneier, K. Seidel, and S. Vijayakumar, 2016, ﬁA Worldwide Survey of Encryp
-tion
 Products,ﬂ Berkman Center Research Publication No. 2016-2, https://ssrn.com/ab
-stract=2731160. Note that not all of the products listed in this survey are complete solutions, 
provide robust security, or are easy to use.
7 National Research Council, 1996, 
Cryptography™s Role in Securing the Information Society
, National Academy
 Press, Washington DC.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
both offensive and defensive norms to foster and maintain trust in mass-
market products and services. As part of these appeals industry has 
requested the establishment of principle-based and coordinated policies 
on how to handle vulnerabilities. The plan for implementation would be 
to use intergovernmental forumsŠsuch as the G20, Global Conferences 
on Cyberspace, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
(OSCE), Shanghai Cooperative Organization (SCO), UNGGE, or the U.N. 
Institute for Disarmament ResearchŠto establish this framework.
8 Multi
-stakeholder forums such as the recently established Global Commission 
on the Stability of Cyberspace, which seeks to develop norms to enhance 
peace and security in cyberspace, may also offer another avenue for seek
-ing consensus. 
However, the differing expectations in areas such as business-
 government relationships, fair ﬁbusiness practices,ﬂ and the role of major 
power security interests plague the possibility of solutions. The pre
-requisite for a global information structure remains the sameŠnational 
governments must agree to the principles. This prerequisite remains the 
answer and the problem. 
For products and services that provide encryption, one could try to 
establish an international uniform model code, a harmonization of the 
laws, increased mutual recognition of products, or some international 
interoperability regime for encryption. Each solution has its 
 advantagesŠhowever, unless a strategic approach is taken, the global market on 
encryption may fragment with more authoritarian nation-states mandat
-ing access and the market producing inaccessible products for individuals 
willing to take the risk to secure communications and suffer the state con
-sequences. At the same time, an effort to reach agreement on standards 
might not provide the level of protection for privacy and civil liberties 
that some nations or other stakeholders might expect or require. 
In short, a global solution seems unlikely and the governments of 
the United States and other countries and the vendors based in or doing 
business in these countries will be faced with dif˜cult trade-offs. Key 
questions include how the U.S. government and others decide to proceed 
domestically and internationally, and how these government decisions 
affect the trade-offs made by vendors. 
8 S. Charney et al., 2016, ﬁFrom Articulation to Implementation: Enabling Progress on Cy
-bersecurity Norms,ﬂ
 Microsoft Corporation, https://mscorpmedia.azureedge.net/mscorp
-media/2016/06/Microsoft-Cybersecurity-Norms_vFinal.pdf.
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.83
As discussed earlier, prominent leaders of the law enforcement 
community have warned that encryption is restricting their access to 
 
unencrypted stored data or message plaintext and that even as the vol
-ume of digital information expands, important parts of the digital world 
are ﬁgoing darkﬂ as more stored data and communications are encrypted 
by default. Some members of the intelligence community have concurred 
that pieces of the digital world are getting ﬁdimmerﬂ although not nec
-essarily ﬁdark.ﬂ Thus, some government of˜cials have argued that they 
need a reliable, timely, and scalable way to access plaintext. They point to 
(1) the widespread and increasing use of encryption by default in widely 
used products and services, (2) the myriad national security threats posed 
by terrorist groups and foreign rivals, (3) the increasing importance of 
digital evidence as human activity and crime have become increasingly 
digital, and (4) the limited effectiveness of alternative sources of digital 
evidence. 
Opponents of regulations that would afford government excep
-tional access to plaintext have objected on a number of legal and prac
-tical grounds. Their primary arguments are that any regime by which 
pro
 
viders of products and services featuring encryption are required to 
provide a way for ensuring government access to plaintext likely would 
(1) be ineffective, (2) pose unacceptable risks to cybersecurity, (3) pose 
unacceptable risks to privacy and civil liberties, (4) disadvantage U.S. 
providers of products and services, and (5) hamper innovation in encryp
-tion technologies. They take the view that the growing use of information 
7A Framework for Evaluating 
Approaches to Access Plaintext
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
technology and sophisticated collection and analysis capabilities have 
created a wealth of information for investigators. 
With arguments on both sides, how can policymakers and citizens 
decide what to do? How can they evaluate the policy choices of whether 
to enable law enforcement and the intelligence community to maintain 
their current level of access, provide more resources to facilitate lawful 
government access, impose a legal requirement for mandatory access, or 
pursue other options? How can they assess the effect of each approach 
on law enforcement and national security, computer and data security, 
privacy and civil liberties, competitiveness, and other important values? 
To inform that evaluation, this chapter provides a framework of ques
-tions that the committee believes any proposal must address. It captures 
the issues that the committee grappled with as it considered potential 
approaches and the broader context in which they arise. The objective of 
this framework is not simply to help policymakers determine whether a 
particular approach is optimal or desirable, but also to help ensure that 
any approach that policymakers might pursue is implemented in a way 
that maximizes its effectiveness while minimizing harmful side effects. 
Importantly, in addressing these questions, policymakers will have to 
contend with incomplete data, limits on the ability to measure important 
properties, and an inability to fully predict the consequences of courses 
of action (Box 7.1). They will also need to contend with the complexity 
introduced by the thousands of communications and computing products 
available today, an international marketplace where new computing and 
communications products and services are introduced with regularity, 
and the interactions of those markets with the strategies and policies that 
are adopted by other nations. 
Underlying the questions are a set of trade-offs associated with 
encryption and government access. One of the fundamental trade-offs is 
BOX 7.1 Data Limitations and UncertaintiesIncomplete data on the impacts on law enforcement. The Federal Bureau of 
of phones they cannot unlock, but the dataŠespecially at the state and local 
levelŠare incomplete, and this data does not tell us how often investigations 

comprehensive data: it is time consuming; assessments of impact are inherently 
continuedDecrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING APPROACHES TO ACCESS PLAINTEXT
 85subjective; data sources are highly distributed; and there is no infrastructure in place for collection or reporting, especially at the state and local levels. Relatedly, 
although there is some information about default use of encryption based on its 
availability in major platforms, there is little data on either deliberate use of encryp
-tion by either average citizens or criminals. Limited ability to measure security risks. One of the arguments against adding exceptional access features to encryption systems is that it adds risk when com
-puter systems are already at great risk and that the added risk is unacceptable. 



 One might seek to 
regulate encryption used for consumer services such as messaging but not busi
-
enforcement investigations. However, such efforts to partition the problem must 
take into account the considerable use of consumer services in enterprise settings. 
For example, ﬁbring your own deviceﬂ smartphones may be used to authenticate 
users for sensitive corporate applications. At the same time, unlike in the consumer 


-ery or regulatory compliance. Technology changes by vendors.
 One of the alternatives to exceptional access 
to smartphones is for investigators to obtain cloud backups of phone data. That 
option would be blocked if vendors were to move either by default or as an option to user-controlled encryption. Similarly, vendors decisions to encrypt metadata 
would change its availability to investigators. 
Necessarily speculative projections about future behavior.
 There are also a 
number of cases where one can only speculate about future behaviors that have 
bearing on the implications of government regulation of encryption. For example, 

effective
 ness of that measure would depend in part on how many and which 
 users chose to install alternative applications that do not afford exceptional 
 
access. 

-nals will simply download noncompliant, unbreakable encryption software, which 
is widely available globally. On the other hand, most users tend to accept product 
defaults. What percentage of criminals will actually take the extra step to install and 
use noncompliant software? Clearly, the answer is greater than 0 percent (some 
will) but less than 100 percent (some will not). Similarly, some have argued that 
non-U.S. business customers will be reluctant to buy products whose encryption 
keys are accessible to the U.S. government. That may be true, too, but some multi-
national business have a U.S. presence and can be compelled to produce plaintext 
data anyway, while others may store their data out of the reach of the United States 
(i.e., the U.S. government might be able to compel the production of the key, but 
it would have no data to decrypt). So what percentage of foreign companies will 
actually eschew U.S. products because key recovery has been mandated? Again, 


proposed approach will work in practice.
BOX 7.1 ContinuedDecrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
BOX 7.2 
 A Fundamental Trade-Off
There is a fundamental trade-off associated with providing the government 
with exceptional access to devices and services that use encryption to protect the 

access necessarily weakens security to some degree, while the absence of ex
-ceptional access necessarily hampers government investigations to some degree. 
Impact on security. 
Exceptional access features, no matter how well designed 
and implemented, will reduce their security to some degree as a result of the added 
complexity and greater potential for weaknesses in their design, implementation, 
or operation. How much security is reduced, and whether the resulting level of se
-

of users. Additionally, although the probability of failure associated with exceptional 

even all users of a system or service. Quantifying the incremental risk from add
-
characterize or measure cybersecurity risks more generally. 
Impact on government investigations.
 If exceptional access features are not 
provided in widely used devices and services that use encryption, law enforce
-

resources to resolve. Other investigations will be entirely thwarted because critical 
evidence is unavailable. The impact on the investigation will vary depending on the 
particular circumstances of the case and the extent to which other investigative 
avenues, including the use of other sources of digital evidence, can compensate 
for the lost information. The impact on society when an investigation is hindered 
or thwarted will depend on the scope and scale of the associated crime or national 
security threat, which can range from undetected or unpunished commission of 
an individual crime to commission of a major criminal conspiracy or a terrorist plot 
affecting a large number of victims. Quantifying the impact of lost information on 
investigations or the net effect on government investigations has been complicated 

criminal activity or national security threats.that adding exceptional access capability to encryption schemes necessar-ily weakens their security to some degree, while the absence of an excep
-tional access mechanism necessarily hampers government investigations 
to some degree (Box 7.2). If the extent of those impacts were clear and 
could be weighed, it would certainly help illuminate the path forward, 
but, alas, the impacts are not precisely quanti˜able. As the debate pro
-ceeds, it will help to have a framework to sort through the issues. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING APPROACHES TO ACCESS PLAINTEXT
 87With any proposal, one should certainly explore all the foreseeable 
consequences, and the framework provides a tool for doing so. Potential 
˚aws do not, however, necessarily invalidate an option. There are unlikely 
to be options that satisfy everyone, and solutions will be, at best, only 
partially effective. Circumstances will also change over time, in ways that 
cannot reliably be foreseen. This is especially true for those in the United 
States anticipating events and trends overseas. 
The framework is designed to be applicable to (1) regulatory require
-ments, such as a general requirement that the manufacturers of a particu
-lar device must ensure lawful access to that device; (2) policy choices, 
such as a decision to provide more funding to support efforts by gov
-ernment agencies to obtain lawful access to plaintext; and (3) particular 
technologies or system modi˜cations that might be imposed by law or 
implemented in response to a general requirement for access. The ques
-tions that follow use the term ﬁapproachﬂ to describe all of these. 
The more speci˜c the approach being considered, the greater the 
ease and precision with which the framework may be applied. This does 
not mean that a vague proposal is necessarily desirable or undesirable, 
but simply that it will be more dif˜cult (and, in some cases, impossible) 
for policymakers and others to assess its desirability. This is a signi˜cant 
point because the stakes involve critical values to our society. 
The questions that comprise the framework are as follows: 
1. To what extent will the proposed approach be effective in permitting 
law enforcement and/or the intelligence community to access plaintext 
at or near the scale, timeliness, and reliability that proponents seek? 
This question has four elements. The ˜rst is whether the proposed 
approach works to provide access to plaintext. An approach that cannot 
be demonstrated to work is unlikely to warrant further consideration. The 
second is what scale, timeliness, and reliability are needed to achieve the 
desired objective. For example, a lesser scale may be needed if the objec
-tive is to afford access in the more limited number of situations where 
critical national security interests are at stake. The third is whether the 
proposed approach works at the scale, timeliness, and reliability neces
-sary to achieve its proponents™ objectives. The fourth is how long the 
solution will be effective in the face of rapid technological change. 
Some ways of obtaining access to plaintext are slow and resource 
intensive. These may be entirely appropriate for one-off needs. For exam
-ple, the Federal Bureau of Investigation reportedly paid around $1 million 
in 2016 for a way to access the encrypted iPhone used by a San Bernardino 
terrorist. However, whether or not that was an effective approach when 
the government sought access to only a single encrypted device, if the 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
goal is to provide access to a large number of encrypted communications 
or the content on many encrypted devices, then the proposed approach 
must work far more ef˜ciently and cost effectively. An approach may not 
provide 100 percent of the desired access, but it needs to be worth the 
effort and worth the trade-offs. 
Determining whether a proposed approach works at scale is often not 
easy because multiple components must not only be evaluated individu
-ally but also assessed for how well they integrate together. For example, 
a requirement that mobile phone manufacturers provide some way for 
law enforcement or intelligence of˜cials to bypass encryption on devices 
requires not only testing the method for how well it works in real-world 
settings, but also assessing the tools for verifying the credentials of gov
-ernment of˜cials who seek access and the tools for ensuring that access 
is provided only when legally authorized. In addition, evaluating effec
-tiveness at scale also requires considering how easy it is for end-users 
to disable or otherwise circumvent the proposed approach, for example, 
by using an encrypted app or altering the device™s encryption. It also 
involves understanding what requirements regarding robustness against 
skilled adversaries are practical to include, and how effective they would 
be. Evaluating effectiveness at scale requires not only de˜ning what the 
needs are but also estimating the investment in the people, equipment, 
and facilities required to provide access that is suf˜ciently responsive to 
meet the needs of law enforcement and the intelligence community. 
2. To what extent will the proposed approach affect the security of the 
type of data or device to which access would be required, as well as 
cybersecurity more broadly? 
Given how important encryption is for the security of devices, sys
-tems, and data; the magnitude of cybersecurity threats faced in the digital 
environment; and how great the consequences can be of falling victim to 
those threats, it is critical to determine whether and to what extent a pro
-posed approach is likely to affect cybersecurity more broadly. 
This question consists of two parts. The ˜rst focuses on the speci˜c 
context in which access to plaintext is sought and asks whether the pro
-posed approach would affect the security of that particular type of com
-munication, device, or service. This would include an assessment of what 
risks the proposed approach might add as well as the context of existing 
risks associated with the device or service. The second question asks 
about the broader impact of the proposed approach on security generally 
and is likely to be more dif˜cultŠbut also more importantŠto answer. 
For example, the use of surveillance or a spear phishing attack to obtain 
the password to a single mobile phone poses a serious risk to the security 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING APPROACHES TO ACCESS PLAINTEXT
 89of data on that device, but low risk to any other device. Conversely, a 
limit on the strength of encryption that may be provided in products and 
services would pose a much broader security challenge. 
Answering this question also requires considering what happens in 
the case of failureŠfor example, if access credentials or known vulnerabil
-ities are stolen from law enforcement or intelligence of˜cials, as happened 
with the publication of known vulnerabilities in 2016 and 2017 that were 
reportedly stolen from the Central Intelligence Agency and National Secu
-rity Agency. Even without a theft from a government agency, how likely 
is the method for gaining access to be exploited by unauthorized third 
parties? Is there a reliable way to cancel stolen credentials or to notify 
equipment and service providers of known vulnerabilities and prevent 
their exploitation? If the system is compromised, what is the potential 
scale of abuse that could occur? Is it possible to detect that a system or 
credentials have been compromised? 
3. To what extent will the proposed approach affect the privacy, civil 
liberties, and human rights of targeted individuals and others? 
Encryption, like all technological innovations, can be used for either 
legitimate or illicit purposes. Some of those legitimate uses include pro
-tecting the privacy of communications and other content. As we have 
seen, the law in many countriesŠincluding the Constitution in the United 
StatesŠprotects personal privacy. It is therefore important to consider to 
what extent a proposed approach could threaten legally protected privacy 
rights and other civil liberties. 
This inquiry, too, has two elements. The ˜rst focuses on individuals 
who are speci˜cally targeted by law enforcement or by the intelligence 
community and is concerned with how well a proposed approach ensures 
that government access will be permitted only with appropriate authori
-zation and only to the content speci˜cally authorized. 
The second part of the question focuses on the privacy and civil lib
-erties interests of people who are not targeted. How likely is it that the 
proposed approach could be used for unauthorized surveillance, whether 
accidental or deliberate, and how well does the approach guard against 
unauthorized surveillance? Will the proposed approach result in such 
greatly increased surveillanceŠeven when authorizedŠthat it will chill 
free expression or free association? Even if it is used as planned and 
authorized, to what extent will the proposed approach permit collection 
of information about people who are not targeted, including those who 
may be communicating with targets? Does the approach include appro
-priate minimization procedures or other safeguards to limit the use of 
communications of people who are not targets? 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
4. To what extent will the proposed approach affect commerce, eco
-nomic competitiveness, and innovation? 
Encryption has become a mainstay of commerce as a way of not only 
protecting the content of communications and documents, but also verify
-ing the identity of communicating parties and of protecting the integrity 
of transactions, especially online. Policymakers should therefore consider 
to what extent a proposed approach is likely to affect commerce. 
This inquiry should also consider the likely impact of any proposed 
approach on the economic competitiveness of U.S. providers of equip
-ment, software, cloud-computing services, and encryption tools them
-selves. Will the proposed approach limit the ability of U.S. service pro
-viders and manufacturers to market their products and services as secure 
options or otherwise compete in other countries? 
Finally, how does the proposed approach affect the ability of the sci
-enti˜c and technical research community to continue to advance encryp
-tion technologies or the U.S. industry to innovate in the development and 
deployment of new products and services? 
5. To what extent will ˜nancial costs be imposed by the proposed 
approach, and who will bear them? 
Any approach to ensuring government access to plaintext will impose 
costs. This inquiry focuses on the ˜nancial costs and asks, ˜rst, how great 
are those costs likely to be? In answering this question, it is important to 
consider the full range of ˜nancial costs and the full range of parties who 
might incur them. For example, those costs may include not only the 
expenses associated with engineering and design, testing, implementa
-tion, compliance, enforcement, and oversight, but also opportunity costs 
of customers who may go elsewhere or products and services that might 
not be offered. 
The second part of the inquiry focuses on who bears those costs. 
Under some laws, such as the Communications Assistance for Law 
Enforcement Act, the U.S. government covered only part of the costs 
incurred by industry. Will that be the case with the proposed approach: 
Will the costs incurred by industry, individuals, and states be covered in 
whole or in part by the federal government? 
6. To what extent is the proposed approach consistent with existing law 
and other government priorities? 
It is obviously necessary that any approach enacted by the government 
comply with relevant legal requirements. Constitutional requirements can
-Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING APPROACHES TO ACCESS PLAINTEXT
 91not be changed simply by enacting a new law. More than just compliance, 
it is also important that policymakers consider the degree to which a pro
-posed approach is consistent with other laws and other government objec
-tives. For example, what would the effects of a proposal be on freedom of 
expression and association? 
These considerations also arise in an international context. The avail
-ability of encrypted communications has been a key tool for organizing 
protests and resisting authoritarian governments. Support for democracy 
movements around the world has, at least historically, been an important 
objective of U.S. foreign policy. Enacting laws that would ensure govern
-ment access to encrypted communications, depending on the speci˜c 
mechanisms required, could con˚ict with that longstanding objective. 
An issue related to consistency with existing law is whether unsettled 
questions of law may make a particular approach more challenging or 
otherwise less attractive. For example, policymakers may want to con
-sider the impact of unsettled law regarding Fifth Amendment implica
-tions of requiring an individual to provide a biometric or a passcode. 
7. To what extent will the international context affect the proposed 
approach, and what will be the impact of the proposed approach 
internationally? 
Although laws are typically limited by state or national jurisdictional 
boundaries, ˚ows of information and markets for digital products and 
services are increasingly global. It is therefore important for policymakers 
to consider both the impact of a proposed approach in the broader multi
-national context as well as the impact of multinational considerations 
on the proposed approach. For example, to what extent will a proposed 
approach to ensuring access to plaintext affect international trade or the 
quest for democracy in other countries? What would be its impact on 
foreign users not targeted by the U.S. government? How will it affect 
U.S. nationals traveling abroad? How would a proposed approach jeopar
-dize existing international agreements around privacy and cybersecurity? 
For example, what are the implications for the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield 
Framework, which provide companies with a mechanism to comply with 
data protection requirements for personal data transferred to the United 
States? 
International developments may also have an impact on the effective
-ness of a proposed approach. For example, if U.S. law limits the strength 
of U.S. encryption products or requires that there be a guaranteed way 
for the U.S. government to access plaintext, will users simply switch to 
products and services that are not subject to such a law? Will enforcement 
be practical if users can download nonconforming encryption products 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
from the WebŠor implement their own solutions based on globally avail
-able knowledge? What, if any, enforcement will be necessary at border 
crossings to cover people who enter carrying noncompliant devices? Or 
will the new requirements make U.S. users communications or equipment 
less secure against foreign intrusion? 
8. To what extent will the proposed approach be subject to effective 
ongoing evaluation and oversight? 
Any measure for ensuring government access to plaintext is liable 
to be misused, whether accidentally or deliberately. The more powerful 
and far-reaching the approach, the greater the harm that may result from 
its misuse. It is therefore important that the approach be subject to effec
-tive and continuing evaluation and oversight and include a robust and 
assured audit mechanism that supports detection of misuse, detection of 
authorized use that has unintended consequences (e.g., on speci˜c popu
-lations or international stakeholders), and degradation of the effectiveness 
of the approach as it is applied. This will help ensure compliance with the 
Constitution and other law, guard against relying on and investing scare 
resources in approaches that do not work, and sustain public support for 
any proposed approach. Policymakers are therefore advised to consider 
whether the evaluation and oversight mechanisms are suf˜ciently reli
-able, robust, and effective, especially in light of the breadth of their scope. 
* * *The committee anticipates that developing and debating answers to 
these questions will help illuminate the underlying issues and trade-offs 
and help inform the debate over government access to plaintext. More
-over, it is the committee™s hope that the analytical framework above, 
together with the common vocabulary and context provided by this 
report, will facilitate an ongoing, frank conversation, involving all par
-ties, about the encryption debate and proposed approaches. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.95
FRED H. CATE, 
Chair
, is vice president for research, distinguished pro
-fessor, and the C. Ben Dutton Professor of Law, and adjunct professor of 
informatics and computing at Indiana University (IU). He served as the 
founding director of IU™s Center for Applied Cybersecurity Research from 
2003 to 2014, where he is now a senior fellow. Professor Cate has testi
-˜ed before numerous congressional committees and speaks frequently 
before professional, industry, and government groups. He is a senior 
policy advisor to the Centre for Information Policy Leadership at Hunton 
& Williams LLP, and a member of the National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine Forum on Cyber Resilience. Previously, Pro
-fessor Cate served as a member of the National Academies™ Committee 
on Technical and Privacy Dimensions of Information for Terrorism Pre
-vention, the Department of Homeland Security™s (DHS™s) Cybersecurity 
Subcommittee, the National Security Agency™s (NSA™s) Privacy and Civil 
Liberties Panel, the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Develop
-ment (OECD™s) Panel of Experts on Health Information Infrastructure, 
Microsoft™s Trustworthy Computing Academic Advisory Board, Intel™s 
Privacy and Security External Advisory Board, the Federal Trade Com
-mission™s (FTC™s) Advisory Committee on Online Access and Security, 
and the board of directors of The Privacy Projects. He served as counsel to 
the Department of Defense Technology and Privacy Advisory Committee 
and as chair of the International Telecommunication Union™s High-Level 
Experts on Electronic Signatures and Certi˜cation Authorities. The author 
of more than 150 articles and books, he served as the privacy editor for the 
ABiographies of Committee Members
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers™ 
Security and Privacy
 and is 
one of the founding editors of the Oxford University Press journal 
Inter
-national Data Privacy Law
. Professor Cate attended Oxford University and 
received his J.D. and his A.B. with honors and distinction from Stanford 
University. A former senator and president of the Phi Beta Kappa Society, 
he is a fellow of Phi Beta Kappa and the American Bar Foundation and 
an elected member of the Council on Foreign Relations and the American 
Law Institute. 
DAN BONEH is a professor of computer science at Stanford Univer
-sity where he heads the applied cryptography group and co-directs the 
computer security laboratory. Dr. Boneh™s research focuses on applica
-tions of cryptography to computer security. His work includes crypto
-systems with novel properties, security for mobile devices, web security, 
and cryptanalysis. He is the author of more than 150 publications in the 
˜eld and is a recipient of the 2014 Association for Computing Machin
-ery (ACM) Prize in Computing, the 2013 ACM SIGACT Gödel Prize for 
outstanding papers in theoretical computer science, and six best paper 
awards. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering (NAE), 
a Packard fellow, a Sloan fellow, and an ACM fellow. 
FREDERICK R. CHANG
 is the executive director of the Darwin Deason 
Institute for Cyber Security, the Bobby B. Lyle Centennial Distinguished 
Chair in Cyber Security, and professor in the Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering in the Lyle School of Engineering at Southern 
Methodist University (SMU). He is a member of the NAE and a senior 
fellow in the John Goodwin Tower Center for Political Studies at SMU™s 
Dedman College and a distinguished scholar in the Robert S. Strauss 
 
Center for International Security and Law, at the University of Texas, 
 
Austin. He is the former director of research at the National Security 
Agency. Dr. Chang received his B.A. from the University of California, San 
Diego, and his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Oregon. 
He also completed the senior executive program at the Sloan School of 
Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). 
SCOTT CHARNEY is vice president for security policy at Microsoft Corpo
-ration, working with public- and private-sector organizations to develop 
and implement strategies to help secure the information technology eco
-system. He currently serves as vice chair of the National Security Tele
-communications Advisory Committee, as a commissioner on the Dutch 
Commission for the Stability of Cyberspace, and as chair of the board 
of the Global Cyber Alliance. Prior to his current position, Mr. Charney 
led Microsoft™s Trustworthy Computing Group, where he was respon
-Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 97sible for enforcing Microsoft™s mandatory security engineering policies 
and implementing Microsoft™s security strategy. Before that, Mr. Charney 
served as chief of the Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section 
(CCIPS) at the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) where he was responsible 
for implementing DOJ™s computer crime and intellectual property initia
-tives. Under his direction, CCIPS investigated and prosecuted national 
and international hacker cases, economic espionage cases, and violations 
of the federal criminal copyright and trademark laws. He served 3 years 
as chair of the G8 Subgroup on High-Tech Crime, was vice chair of the 
OECD Group of Experts on Security and Privacy, led the U.S. Delegation 
to the OECD on Cryptography Policy, and was co-chair of the Center for 
Strategic and International Studies Commission on Cybersecurity for the 
44th Presidency. Mr. Charney graduated from the Syracuse University 
College of Law with honors and received his undergraduate degree from 
the State University of New York, Binghamton. 
SHAFRIRA GOLDWASSER
 is the RSA Professor of Electrical Engineering 
and Computer Science at MIT, a co-leader of the cryptography and 
information security group, and a member of the complexity theory group 
within the Theory of Computation Group and the Computer Science and 
Arti˜cial Intelligence Laboratory. In 1992
, she began a parallel career as a 
professor of computer science and applied mathematics at the 
 Weizmann 
Institute of Science in Israel. Dr. Goldwasser has made fundamental contri
-butions to cryptography, computational complexity, computational num
-ber theory, and probabilistic algorithms. She is a member of the National 
Academy of Sciences and the NAE and was a recipient of the ˜rst ACM 
SIGACT Gödel Prize for outstanding papers in theoretical computer sci
-ence in 1993 and co-recipient of the Turing Award in 2012. She received 
a B.S. in mathematics from Carnegie Mellon University (1979) and M.S. 
(1981) and Ph.D. (1984) degrees in electrical engineering and computer 
science from the University of California, Berkeley. 
DAVID A. HOFFMAN
 is director of security policy and global privacy 
of˜cer at Intel Corporation, in which capacity he oversees Intel™s 
privacy activities and security policy engagements. Mr. Hoffman joined 
Intel in 1998 as Intel™s 
eBusiness attorney to manage the team providing 
legal support for Intel™s chief information of˜cer. In 1999, he founded 
Intel™s Privacy Team, and in 2000 was appointed Group Counsel of 
 
eBusiness and Director of Privacy. In 2005, Mr. Hoffman moved to Munich, 
Germany, as group counsel in the Intel European Legal Department, while 
leading Intel™s Worldwide Privacy and Security Policy Team. Mr. Hoffman 
served on the FTC™s Online Access and Security Advisory Committee 
and DHS™s Data Privacy and Integrity Advisory Committee. He served 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
on the TRUSTe board of directors from 2000 to 2006, where he was chair 
of the Compliance Committee of the board. Mr. Hoffman has lectured on 
privacy and security law at schools in the United States, Europe, Japan, 
and China. He received a J.D. from Duke University School of Law and 
an A.B. from Hamilton College. 
SENY KAMARA
 is an associate professor of computer science at Brown 
University. He was previously a researcher in the Cryptography Group 
at Microsoft Research. Dr. Kamara™s interests are in security and cryptog
-raphy with a focus on privacy issues in surveillance, cloud computing, 
and databases. His contributions include ef˜cient algorithms to search on 
encrypted data, attacks on encrypted databases, and protocols for privacy-
preserving contact chaining. In 2006, he was a research fellow at the Uni
-versity of California, Los Angeles, Institute for Pure and Applied Mathe
-matics. In 2015, he initiated the Workshop on Surveillance and Technology. 
In 2016, he was named a fellow of the Boston Global Forum. He received 
his Ph.D. in computer science from Johns Hopkins University. 
DAVID KRIS
 is a founder of Culper Partners, LLC, a business consulting 
˜rm specializing in national security issues. Prior to forming Culper in 
2017, Mr. Kris was for 6 years the general counsel of Intellectual Ventures, 
a privately held invention investment company. He was also the deputy 
general counsel and chief compliance of˜cer of Time Warner, Inc., the 
network and media company, where he worked from 2003 to 2009. In gov
-ernment, Mr. Kris was the presidentially appointed and Senate-con˜rmed 
head of DOJ™s National Security Division (2009-2011); a senior advisor 
to Republican and Democratic attorneys general and deputy attorneys 
general (2000-2003); and a federal prosecutor (1992-2000). He currently 
advises two elements of the U.S. Intelligence Community and serves as 
an amicus curiae to the two Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Courts. 
Mr. Kris is co-author of the treatise 
National Security Investigations and 
Prosecutions
, as well as the author of several other articles and blog posts. 
He is a director and contributing editor of the Lawfare website, adjunct 
professor at the University of Washington Law School, and a university 
af˜liate at Georgetown University. He is a recipient of the National Intel
-ligence Superior Service Medal, the Of˜ce of the Secretary of Defense 
Medal for Exceptional Public Service, the Central Intelligence Agency 
Seal Medal, the DOJ Edmund J. Randolph Award, and on two occasions 
the Attorney General™s Award for Exceptional Service. He is a 1988 gradu
-ate of Haverford College and a 1991 graduate of Harvard Law School and 
a former law clerk to Judge Stephen S. Trott of the U.S. Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 99SUSAN LANDAU is a Bridge Professor in the Fletcher School of Law and 
Policy and the School of Engineering, Department of Computer Science, 
Tufts University, and visiting professor of computer science at University 
College London. Dr. Landau works at the intersection of cybersecurity, 
national security, law, and policy. Her latest book, 
Listening In: Cyber-
security in an Insecure Age
, was published in 2017. Dr. Landau is also the 
author of 
Surveillance or Security? The Risks Posed by New Wiretapping 
Technologies
 (2011) and 
Privacy on the Line: The Politics of Wiretapping and 
Encryption
, co-authored with Whit˜eld Dif˜e (1998). She has testi˜ed to 
Congress and frequently briefed U.S. and European policymakers on 
encryption, surveillance, and cybersecurity issues. Dr. Landau has been 
a senior staff privacy analyst at Google, a distinguished engineer at Sun 
Microsystems, and a faculty member at Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 
the University of Massachusetts, and Wesleyan University. She has served 
on the National Academies™ Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board (2010-2016), the National Science Foundation™s Computer, Informa
-tion Science & Engineering Advisory Committee (2010-2013), the Infor
-mation Security and Privacy Advisory Board (2002-2008), as an associate 
editor-in-chief on 
IEEE Security and Privacy
, section board member on 
the 
Communications of the ACM
, and associate editor at the 
Notices of the 
American Mathematical Society
. A 2015 inductee in the Cybersecurity Hall 
of Fame and a 2012 Guggenheim fellow, Dr. Landau was a 2010-2011 fel
-low at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study and the recipient of the 
2008 Women of Vision Social Impact Award. She is also a fellow of the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science and of the ACM. 
She received her B.A. from Princeton University, her M.S. from Cornell 
University, and her Ph.D. from MIT. 
STEVEN B. LIPNER
 is executive director of 
SAFECode, a nonpro˜t dedi
-cated to increasing trust in information and communications technology 
products and services through the advancement of effective software 
assurance methods. He retired in 2015 as partner director of software 
security in Trustworthy Computing at Microsoft Corporation. His exper
-tise is in software security, software vulnerabilities, Internet security, 
and organization change for security. He was the founder and long-time 
leader of the Security Development Lifecycle (SDL) team that delivered 
processes, tools, and associated guidance and oversight that signi˜cantly 
improved the security of Microsoft™s software. Mr. Lipner has more than 
40 years of experience as a researcher, development manager, and general 
manager in information technology security. He served as executive vice 
president and general manager for Network Security Products at Trusted 
Information Systems and has been responsible for the development of 
mathematical models of security and of a number of secure operating 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
systems. Mr. Lipner was one of the initial 12 members of the U.S. Com
-puter Systems Security and Privacy Advisory Board (now the Information 
Security and Privacy Advisory Board) and served two termsŠa total of 
10 years on the board. He is the author of numerous professional papers 
and has spoken on security topics at many professional conferences. He 
is named as inventor on 12 U.S. patents in the ˜elds of computer and net
-work security and has served on numerous scienti˜c boards and advisory 
committees, including as a current member of the National Academies™ 
Committee on Future Research Goals and Directions for Foundational 
Science in Cybersecurity. Mr. Lipner is a member of the NAE and was 
elected in 2015 to the National Cybersecurity Hall of Fame. He received 
an S.B. and S.M. in civil engineering from MIT. 
RICHARD LITTLEHALE is special agent in charge of the Tennessee 
Bureau of Investigation™s (TBI™s) Technical Services Unit and supervises 
TBI™s electronic surveillance, digital forensics, online child exploitation, 
and cyber investigation functions. He is an attorney and serves as one 
of TBI™s constitutional law and criminal procedure trainers. He provides 
instruction to law enforcement of˜cers in techniques for obtaining and 
using communications evidence in support of criminal investigations 
and is active in national groups of law enforcement technical and elec
-tronic surveillance specialists. He serves as a subject-matter expert on 
electronic surveillance for the Association of State Criminal Investigative 
Agencies (ASCIA) and the International Association of Chiefs of Police, 
and chairs ASCIA™s Technology and Digital Evidence Committee. He 
frequently represents the law enforcement community™s interest in law
-ful access to communications evidence at the state and national level. He 
attended Bowdoin College and Vanderbilt Law School. 
KATE MARTIN
 is a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress 
where she works on issues at the intersection of national security, civil 
liberties, and human rights. The New York Times
 Taking Note blog 
described her as an expert on surveillance and detention, and a lead
-ing advocate for the rule of law in the so-called ﬁwar on terror.ﬂ Before 
joining the Center for American Progress, Ms. Martin served as director 
of the Center for National Security Studies for more than 20 years. She 
frequently testi˜es before Congress on national security and civil liberties 
issues. She is also a frequent commentator in the national media and has 
written extensively on these issues for the past 25 years. At the Center for 
National Security Studies, Ms. Martin brought lawsuits that challenged 
government deprivations of civil liberties. She has taught national secu
-rity law and served as general counsel to the National Security Archive. 
She is a graduate of the University of Virginia School of Law and Pomona 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 101College. Before joining the public interest world, she served as a partner 
at the law ˜rm of Nussbaum, Owen & Webster. 
HARVEY RISHIKOF
 is co-chair of the American Bar Association™s Cyber
-security Legal Task Force. He previously served as director, Of˜ce of Mili
-tary Commissions/Convening Authority, U.S. Department of Defense, 
and as a senior counsel in Crowell & Moring™s Privacy and Cybersecurity 
and Government Contracts groups in Washington, D.C., where his prac
-tice focused on national security, cybersecurity, government contracts, 
civil and military courts, terrorism, international law, civil liberties, and 
the U.S. Constitution. At the leading edge of many of the interactions 
between the legal community and the federal government and corpora
-tions, Mr. Rishikof is routinely called upon to represent the legal com
-munity at meetings and forums on national security, cybersecurity, and 
terror
 
ism. Prior to joining Crowell & Moring, he was most recently the 
dean of faculty of the Roger Williams University School of Law and pro
-fessor of national security law at the National War College at the National 
Defense University, Washington, D.C. Mr. Rishikof currently serves as an 
outside director to CBI, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, chairing the company™s 
Government Security Committee. He is also the chair of the American Bar 
Association Advisory Standing Committee on Law and National Security, 
co-chair with Judy Miller of the ABA National Taskforce on Cyber and the 
Law, and a lifetime member of the American Law Institute and the Coun
-cil on Foreign Relations. Over his career, Mr. Rishikof has been a member 
of Hale and Dorr and has held multiple positions in government focused 
on national and cybersecurity investigations. He most recently served as 
senior policy advisor to the National Counterintelligence Executive, the 
agency responsible for counterintelligence and insider threat management 
across the federal government. He has also served at the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation (FBI) as a legal counsel to the deputy director of the FBI 
focusing on national security and terrorism and served as liaison to the 
Of˜ce of the Attorney General at DOJ. Until recently, Mr. Rishikof also 
had a joint appointment as professor of law at Drexel University, teaching 
courses in national security and cyber law. 
PETER J. WEINBERGER has been a software engineer at Google, Inc., 
since 2003 working on software infrastructure. After a stint at the Uni
-versity of Michigan, Ann Arbor, he moved to Bell Labs. At Bell Labs, 
he worked on Unix and did research on various topics before moving 
into research management, ending as Information Sciences Research vice 
president. After AT&T and Lucent split, Dr. Weinberger moved to Renais
-sance Technologies, a technical trading hedge fund, as head of technol
-ogy. At the National Academies, he has been on the Computer Science 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
and Telecommunications Board and participated in a number of studies, 
including one on electronic voting and one on bulk surveillance. From 
2008 to 2016, he was a member of the Information Security and Privacy 
Advisory Board, the last 2 years as chair. He has a Ph.D. in mathematics 
(number theory) from the University of California, Berkeley. 
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.103
NOVEMBER 11, 2016, WASHINGTON, D.C.
James A. Baker, Federal Bureau of Investigation 
Matthew Blaze, University of Pennsylvania 
Ernie Brickell, Intel Corporation (former) 
Alan Davidson, U.S. Department of Commerce 
Robert Litt, Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence 
Paul Ohm, Georgetown University Law Center 
Ronald Rivest, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Peter Swire, Georgia Institute of Technology 
JANUARY 30, 2017, PALO ALTO, CALIFORNIA
Andrew Crocker, Electronic Frontier Foundation 
Jim Dempsey, University of California Berkeley School of Law 
Jennifer Granick, Stanford Law School 
Herb Lin, Stanford University 
Bruce McConnell, EastWest Institute 
Ray Ozzie, Microsoft Corporation (former) 
Seth Schoen, Electronic Frontier Foundation 
Alex Stamos, Facebook 
BBriefers to the Committee
Decrypting the Encryption Debate: A Framework for Decision MakersCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 DECRYPTING THE ENCRYPTION DEBATE
MARCH 30, 2017, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Christopher Kelly, Of˜ce of the Attorney General, Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts 
James Lewis, Center for Strategic and International Studies 
Marybeth Paglino, National Domestic Communications Assistance 
Center 
APRIL 26, 2017, WASHINGTON, D.C.
Richard Ledgett, National Security Agency 
Stefan Savage, University of California, San Diego 
