DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/25104Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and Options107 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-47559-4 | DOI 10.17226/25104Committee on Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The UndergraduatePerspective; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Board onMathematical Sciences and Analytics; Committee on Applied and TheoreticalStatistics; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; Board on ScienceEducation; Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education; NationalAcademies of Sciences, Engineering, and MedicineData Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   DATA SCIENCE FOR UNDERGRADUATES: 
OPPORTUNITIES AND OPTIONS
      Committee on Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective
  Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board
 Board on Mathematical Sciences and Analytics
 Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics
 Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
  Board on Science Education
 Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences
 and
 Education
    A Consensus Study Report of
           Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 
           500 Fifth Street, NW
            
Washington, DC 20001
   This activity was supported by 
Award
 No. 1626983 from the National Science Foundation
 (Directorate 
for Computer and Information Science and Engineering; Directorate for Education and Human 
Resources; Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences/Division of Mathematical Sciences; and 
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sci
ences).
 Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or 
recommendations expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of any organization or 
agency that provided support for the project.
  International Standard Book 
Number
-13: 
________________
_ International Standard Book 
Number
-10: 
_________________
 Digital Object Identifier: 
https://doi.org/10.17226/
25104  Additional copies of this publication are available for sale from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth 
Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington
, DC 20001; (800) 624
-6242 or (202) 334
-3313; http:// www.nap.edu.
  Copyright 2018 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
  Printed in the United States of America
  Suggested citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2018. 
Data Science for 
Undergraduates: Opportunities and Options
. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
https://doi.org/10.
17226/25104.      Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
      The 
National Academy of 
Sciences
 was established in 1863 by an Act of Congress, signed by 
President Lincoln, as a private, nongovernmental institution to advise the nation on issues 
related to science and technology. Members are elected by their peers for outstanding 
contribution
s to research. Dr. Marcia McNutt is president.
  The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964 under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences to bring the practices of engineering to advising the nation. 
Members are elected by their pee
rs for extraordinary contributions to engineering. Dr. C. D. 
Mote, Jr., is president.
  The 
National Academy of Medicine 
(formerly the Institute of Medicine) was established in 
1970 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences to advise the nation 
on medical 
and health issues. Members are elected by their peers for distinguished contributions to 
medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau is president.
  The three Academies work together as the 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine
 to provide independent, objective analysis and advice to the nation and 
conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform public policy decisions. The 
National Academies also encourage education and research, recognize outstanding 
contributions t
o knowledge, and increase public understanding in matters of science, 
engineering, and medicine.
  Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine at 
www.nationalacademies.org.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
      Consensus Study Reports 
published by the 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine document the evidence
-based consensus on the study
™s statement of task by an 
authoring committee of experts. Reports typically include findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations based on information
 gathered by the committee and the committee
™s deliberations. Each report has been subjected to a rigorous and independent peer
-review 
process and it represents the position of the National Academies on the statement of task.
  Proceedings 
published by the 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
chronicle the presentations and discussions at a workshop, symposium, or other event 
convened by the National Academies. The statements and opinions contained in proceedings 
are those of the partici
pants and are not endorsed by other participants, the planning 
committee, or the National Academies.
  For information about other products and activities of the National Academies, please visit 
www.nationalacademies.org/about/whatwedo.
   Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    v  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  COMMITTEE ON ENVISIONING THE DATA SCIENCE DISCIPLINE: THE 
UNDERGRADUATE PERSPECTIVE
  LAURA HAAS, NAE,
1 University of Massachusetts Amherst, 
Co-Chair
 ALFRED O. HERO III, University of Michigan, 
Co-Chair
 ANI ADHIKARI, University of California, Berkeley
 DAVID CULLER, NAE, University of California, Berkeley
 DAVID DONOHO, NAS,
2 Stanford University
 E. THOMAS EWI
NG, Virginia Tech
 LOUIS J. GROSS, University of Tennessee, Knoxville
 NICHOLAS 
J. 
HORTON, Amherst College
 JULIA LANE, New York University
 ANDREW M
CCALLUM, University of Massachusetts Amherst
 RICHARD M
CCULLOUGH, Harvard University
 REBECCA NUGENT, Carnegie 
Mellon University
 LEE RAINIE, Pew Research Center
 ROB RUTENBAR, University of Pittsburgh
 KRISTIN TOLLE, Microsoft Research 
 TALITHIA WILLIAMS, Harvey Mudd College
 ANDREW ZIEFFLER, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis 
   Staff
  MICHELLE K. SCHWALBE, Director, Board on Mathematical Sciences and Analytics (BMSA), 
Study 
Director
 JON EISENBERG, Director, Computer Science and T
elecommunications Board (CSTB)
 BEN WENDER, 
Director, Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics
 AMY STEP
HENS, Program Officer, Board on Science Education
 LINDA CASOLA, BMSA, Associate Program Officer and Editor
 RENEE HAWKINS, CSTB, Financial Manager
 JANKI PATEL, CSTB, Senior Program Assistant 
                                                          1 Member
, National Academy of Engineering.
 2 Member
, National 
Academy of Sciences.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    vi  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
  FARNAM JAHANIAN, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Chair
 LUIZ ANDRE BARROSO, Google, Inc.
 STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, NAE,
1 Columbia University
 ROBERT F. BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC
 DAVID CULLER, NAE, University of California, Berkeley
 EDWARD FRANK, Cloud Parity, 
Inc.
 LAURA HAAS, NAE, University of Massachusetts
 Amherst
 MARK HOROWITZ, NAE, Stanford University
 ERIC HORVITZ, NAE, Microsoft Corporation
 VIJAY KUMAR, NAE, University of Pennsylvania
 BETH MYNATT, Georgia Institute of Technology
 CRAIG PARTRIDGE, Raytheon B
BN Technologies
 DANIELA RUS, NAE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 FRED B. SCHNEIDER, NAE, Cornell University
 MARGO SELTZER, Harvard University
 MOSHE VARDI, NAS
2/NAE, Rice University
   Staff
  JON EISENBERG, Director 
 LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Dire
ctor 
 EMILY GRUMBLING, Program Officer
 KATIRIA ORTIZ, Associate Program Officer
 RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager
 JANKI PATEL, Senior Program Assistant 
 SHENAE BRADLEY, Administrative Assistant
                                                         1 Member
, National Academy of Engineering.
 2 Member
, National Academy of Sciences.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    vii
  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  BOARD ON MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES AND 
ANALYTICS
  STEPHEN M. ROBINSON, NAE,
1 University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
Chair
 JOHN R. BIRGE, NAE, University of Chicago
 W. PETER CHERRY, Independent Consultant
 DAVID CHU, Institute for Defense Analyses
 RONALD R. COIFMAN, NAS,
2 Yale University
 JAMES CURRY, 
University of Colorado Boulder
 CHRISTINE FOX, Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory
 MARK L. GREEN, University of California, Los Angeles
 PATRICIA A. JACOBS, Naval Postgraduate School
 JOSEPH A. LANGSAM, Morgan Stanley (
Retired
) SIMON A. LE
VIN, NAS, Princ
eton University
 ANDREW W. LO, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 DAVID MAIER, Portland State University
 LOIS CURFMAN M
CINNES, Argonne National Laboratory 
 FRED S. ROBERTS, Rutgers
, The State
 University
 of New Jersey
 ELIZABETH A. THOMPSON, NAS, 
University of Washington
 CLAIRE TOMLIN, University of California, Berkeley
 LANCE WALLER, Emory University
 KAREN WILLCOX, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 DAVID YAO, NAE, Columbia University
   Staff
  MICHELLE K. SCHWALBE, Director
 BEN WENDER, Program O
fficer
 LINDA CASOLA, Associate Program Officer and Editor
 BETH DOLAN, Financial Manager
 RODNEY N. HOWARD, Administrative Assistant
                                                          1 Member
, National Academy of Engineering.
 2 Member
, National Academy of Sciences.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    viii
  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  COMMITTEE ON APPLIED AND THEORETICAL STATISTICS 
  ALFRED O. HERO III, University of Michigan, 
Chair
 ALICIA CARRIQUIRY, 
NAM,
1 Iowa State University
 MICHAEL J. DANIELS, University of Florida
 KATHERINE BENNETT ENSOR, Rice University
 AMY HERRING, Duke University
 NICHOLAS 
J. 
HORTON, Amherst College
 DAVID MADIGAN, Columbia University
 JOSÉ M.F. MOURA, NAE,
2 Carnegie Mellon Univer
sity
 NANCY REID, NAS,
3 University of Toronto
 CYNTHIA RUDIN, Duke University 
 AARTI SINGH, Carnegie Mellon University
   Staff
  BEN WENDER, Director
 LINDA CASOLA, Associate Program Officer and Editor
 BETH DOLAN, Financial Manager
 RODNEY N. HOWARD, Administra
tive Assistant
                                                         1 Member
, National Academy of Medicine.
 2 Member
, National Academy of
 Engineering.
 3 Member
, National Academy of Sciences.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    ix  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  BOARD ON SCIENCE EDUCATION
  ADAM GAMORAN, William T. Grant Foundation, 
Chair
 SUNITA V. COOKE, MiraCosta College
 MELANIE COOPER, Michigan State University
 RODOLFO DIRZO, 
NAS,
1 Stanford University
 RUSH D. HOLT, American Association for the 
Advancement of Science
 MATTHEW KREHBIEL, Achieve, Inc.
 MICHAEL LACH, University of Chicago
 LYNN LIBEN, Pennsylvania State University
 CATHRYN (CATHY) MANDUCA, Carleton College
 JOHN MATHER, 
NAS, 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
 TONYA M. MATTHEWS, Michigan Sc
ience Center
 BRIAN REISER¸ Northwestern University
 MARSHALL 
(MIKE
) SMITH, Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching
 ROBERTA TANNER, Thompson School District (Retired)
 SUZANNE WILSON, Michigan State University
   Staff
  HEIDI SCHWEINGRUBER, Directo
r KERRY BRENNER, Senior Program Officer
 MARGARET HILTON, Senior Program Officer
 KENNE DIBNER, Program Officer
 AMY STEPHENS, Program Officer
 MATTHEW LAMMERS, Program Coordinator
 LETICIA GARCILAZO GREEN, Senior Program Assistant
 MARGARET KELLY, Senior 
Program Assistant
 COREETHA ENTZMINGER, Program Assistant 
                                                        1 Member, 
National Academy of Sciences.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
    Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  xi          Acknowledgments
  This Consensus Study Report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their 
diverse perspectives and technical expertise. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the National Academ
ies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine in 
making 
each 
published report as sound as possible and to ensure that it meets the institutional standards 
for quality, objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draf
t manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. 
 We thank the following individuals for their review of this repor
t:   Richard (Dick) De Veaux, Williams College,
  Natalie M. Evans Harris, BrightHive,
  Charles Isbell, 
Jr., Georgia Institute of Technology,
  Iain Johnstone, 
NAS,
1 Stanford University,
  Brian Kotz, Montgomery College,
 Peter Norvig, Google, Inc.,
 Renata Rawlings
-Goss, South Big Data Regional Innovation Hub,
 Ali Sayed, 
NAE,
2 University of California, Los Ange
les,
 Margo Seltzer, Harvard University, and
 Sharon Wood, 
NAE, 
University of Texas, Austin.
  Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they 
were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations presented
 in the report, nor did they see 
the final draft of the report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by 
Alicia L.
 Carriquiry, 
NAM,
3 Iowa State University
. She 
was
 responsible for making certain that an independent 
examination of this r
eport was carried out in accordance with the standards of the National Academies 
and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report 
rests entirely with the authoring committee and the National Academ
ies.
 The committee would like to thank Andy Burnett from Know
innovation for facilitating the 
committee
™s May 
2017 workshop as well as the following staff members from the National Science 
                                                      1 Member, National Academy of Sciences.
 2 Member, National Academy of Engineering.
 3 Member, National Academy of Medicine.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  xii
  Foundation for their input, assistance, and support of this study: 
Stephanie August, Chaitan Baru, Eva 
Campo, Vandana Janeja, Nandini Kannan, Sara Kiesler, Gabriel Perez
-Giz, Earnestine Psalmonds
-Easter, 
and Elena Zheleva. The committee would also like to thank the many individuals who provided input to 
this study; the fu
ll list of these individuals is included in Appendix C.
  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  xiii
          Contents
   PREFACE
            P-1  SUMMARY 
           S-1  1 INTRODUCTION
          1-1  A Look to the Future, 1
-3 Report Overview, 1
-4 References, 1
-4  2 KNOWLEDGE FOR DATA SCIENTISTS
        2-1  Data Scientists of Today and Tomorrow, 2
-4 Data Acumen, 2
-7 A Code of Ethics for Data Science, 2
-15 References, 2
-16  3 DATA SC
IENCE EDUCATION
        3-1  Undergraduate Modalities, 3
-1 Middle and High School Education, 3
-17 References, 3
-18  4 STARTIN
G A DATA SCIENCE PROGRAM
      4-1  Ensuring Broad Participation, 4
-2 Academic Infrastructure, 4
-4 Curriculum, 4
-7 Faculty Resources, 4
-7 Assessment, 4
-8 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  xiv
  References, 4
-8  5 EVOLUTION AND EVALUATION 
       5-1  Evolution, 5
-2 Evaluation, 5
-5 Roles for 
Professional Societies, 5
-10 References, 5
-11  6 CONCLUSIONS
          6-1  APPENDIXES
  A Biographies o
f the Committee
        A-1 B Meetings and Presentations
         B-1 C Contributing Individuals
         C-1 D Data Science Oath
          D-1  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    P-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER 
EDITORIAL CORRECTION
        Preface
  The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine established the Committee on 
Envisioning the Data Science Discipline:
 The Undergraduate Perspective to set
 forth a vision for the 
emerging discipline of data science at the undergraduate level (see Box 
P.1 for the c
ommittee
™s statement 
of task). 
  BOX P
.1 Statement of Task
  A National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine study will set forth a vision for 
the emerging discipline of data science at the undergraduate level. It will emphasize core underlying 
principles, intellectual content, and pedagogical issues spe
cific to data science, including core concepts 
that distinguish it from neighboring disciplines. It will not consider the practicalities of creating 
materials, courses, or programs. It will develop this vision considering applications of and careers in 
dat
a science. It will focus on the undergraduate level, addressing related issues at the middle and high 
school level as well as community colleges as appropriate, and will draw on experiences in creating 
master™s
-level programs. It will also consider opportu
nities created by the emergence of a new 
science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics
 (STEM
) field to engage underrepresented student 
populations and consider ways to reduce the 
ﬁleakage
ﬂ seen in existing STEM pathways. Information 
gathering will cent
er around two workshops, the first likely focused on principles and intellectual 
content, and the second likely focused on pedagogy and implications for middle and high schools and 
community colleges. To get material on the record quickly and spark communi
ty feedback, a 
rapporteur
-authored workshop summary report will be issued following the first workshop. A final 
report will be issued following both workshops and committee deliberations setting forth a vision for 
undergraduate education in data science.
   This study was sponsored by the National Science Foundation. The 
Committee 
on Envisioning 
the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective (see Appendix A for biographical sketches 
of the committee members) conducted a number of information
-gat
hering activities and engaged a broad 
community in its conversations to address the statement of task shown in Box P.1 (see Appendix B for a 
list of the presentations given during these meetings and Appendix C for a list of those who contributed). 
In Decem
ber 2016
, the committee met to discuss possible future directions based on progress with current 
data science programs; societal implications of the evolving field of data science; approaches to expand 
diversity and inclusion in data science among students
, staff, and topic areas; and perspectives on 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    P-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER 
EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  envisioning the future of data science for undergraduates. In April 2017
, the committee organized a 
webinar to collect further input from the public on topics of importance for this study. 
 In May 2017
, the com
mittee convened a workshop in which participants discussed educational 
models to build relevant foundational, translational, and professional skills for data scientists in various 
roles; the use of high
-impact educational practices in the delivery of data 
science education; and strategies 
for broad participation in data science education that rely on formal modes of evaluation and assessment. 
Participants focused on the ways in which students, institutions, and programs could change in the 
coming decade, as
 well as how these changes will affect future plans for data science education. 
 The committee also 
held
 nine webinars throughout Fall 2017 as another means to engage the 
public in conversations about various aspects of data science education, which 
addressed 
the following 
topics:
  1. Building data acumen;
 2. Incorporating real
-world applications;
 3. Training faculty and developing curriculum;
 4. Enhancing communication and teamwork skills;
 5. Fostering interdepartmental collaboration and institutional organization;
 6. Considering ethics;
 7. Assessing and evaluating data science programs; 
 8. Emphasizing diversity, inclusion, and increased participation; and
 9. Exploring 2
-year colleges and institutional partnerships.
  Although these nine webinars focused specifically on applications to data science programs, many of the 
discussions highlighted best practices relevant for all types of academic programming. The committee 
met for a f
inal session in December 2017 to prepare for the writing of this report. During this session
, the 
committee synthesized discussions from t
he webinar series and 
results from 
activities
 under way 
in the 
data science community.
 This final 
report, which was pr
eceded by a September 2017
 interim report
, explores key questions about the future of the field of data science.
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    S-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
        Summary
   Data science is emerging as a field that is revolutionizing science and industries alike. Work 
across nearly all domains is 
becoming more data
 driven
, affect
ing
 both the jobs that are available and the 
skills that are required. As more data 
and ways of analyzing them 
become available, more aspects of 
the 
economy, society
, and daily 
life will become 
dependent
 on data
. As a resul
t, the National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine was 
asked to set
 forth a vision for the emerging discipline of data 
science at the undergraduate level. 
To that end
, the committee considered c
ore underlying principles, 
intellectual content
, and pedagogical issues specific to data science, including 
the essential
 concepts that 
distinguish it from neighboring disciplines
. All of this was anchored in exploration related
 to applications 
of and careers in data science.
 Today, the term 
ﬁdata 
scientist
ﬂ typically describes a knowledge worker who is principally
 occupied with 
analyzing
 complex and massive data resources
. However, data science 
spans
 a broader 
array of activities that involve applying
 principles for data collection, storage, integr
ation, analysis, 
inference, communication, and ethics. In future decades
, all undergraduates will 
profit from
 a fundamental awareness of and competence in data science. 
  Recommendation 2.3: 
To prepare their graduates for this new data
-driven era, academic
 institutions should 
encourage the
 development of a basic understanding of data science in 
all undergraduates.
  The continued transformation of work requires both a 
larger
 population with a basic 
understanding of data science and a substantial cadre of tal
ented graduates with highly developed data 
science skills and knowledge, acquired through substantial coursework and practice
.   Recommendation 2.1: 
Academic institutions should embrace data science as a vital new 
field that requires specifically tailored 
instruction delivered through 
majors and minors in 
data science as well as the development of a cadre of faculty equipped to teach in this new 
field. 
  The new majors and minors will initially combine ingredients from existing courses, 
in areas such as
 computer science, statistics, business analytics, information technology, optimization, applied 
mathematics, and numerical computing. 
Over time, as features of the new data
-driven era take shape, 
academic 
programs 
will
 be compelled to 
develop new skill cl
usters, and a body of distinctive courses and 
instructional materials will emerge.
  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    S-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Recommendation 4.1: 
As data science
 programs develop, they should focus on attracting 
students with varied backgrounds and degrees of preparation and preparing them for 
suc
cess in a variety of careers. 
  Graduates of these programs will work in virtually every 
job 
sector and will serve in a number of roles, 
including operating the systems on which analyses are run, preparing data for analysis, defining and 
coordinating the a
nalysis, visualizing information
, and supporting data
-driven decision
 making
 to 
uncover 
the stories buried in the data. O
thers 
who use data science skills 
will be journalists, administrators, artists, 
lawyers, teachers, and other workers who need some ability to understand and 
use 
data. This need to 
prepare diverse students for various careers further increases the educational challenge. 
 A wide variety of 
instructional programs will be needed
 to prepare students for the data
-enriched 
world of the coming years
.   Recommendation 2.2: 
Academic institutions
 should provide and evolve a range of 
educational pathways to prepare students for 
an array of data science
 roles in the 
workplace
.   These include introductory courses, full degrees at both associate and bachelor levels, and a range of 
minors and certificates. The forms of these programs and their scope will vary depending on the culture of 
a given institution
 and the aims of its students.
 Regardless of the type of program, certain elements need to be covered, though perhaps to 
varying degrees and with varying emphases. A key goal is to give all students the ability to make good 
judgments, use tools responsibly
 and effectively, and ultimately make good decisions using data
. The 
committee defines this 
collection of abilities 
as ﬁdata acumen.
ﬂ To that end
, students will need exposure 
to material
 from multiple disciplines
Šnotably
, mathematical, statistical, and com
putational 
foundations
Šand they will need training in 
data acquisition
, modeling
, management and curation
, data 
visualization
, workflow and reproducibility
, communication and teamwork
, domain
-specific 
considerations
, and ethical problem solving.
 The 
committee underscores the centrality of studying the
 many ethical considerations that arise 
as workers 
engag
e in data science
. These considerations 
include 
deciding what data to collect, obtaining 
permissions to use data, crediting the sources of data prop
erly, validating the data
™s accuracy
, taking steps 
to minimize bias, safeguarding the privacy of individuals referenced in the data, and using the data 
correctly and without alteration. It is important that students learn to recognize ethical issues and to
 apply 
a high ethical standard.
1   Recommendation 2.4: 
Ethics is a topic that, given the nature of data science, students 
should learn and practice throughout their education. 
Academic institutions
 should ensure 
that ethics is woven into the data science c
urriculum from the beginning and throughout. 
  Recommendation 2.5: 
The data science community should adopt a code of ethics; such a 
code should be affirmed by member
s of professional societies, 
included in professional 
development programs and curricula
, and conveyed through educational programs
. The 
code should be reevaluated often in light of new developments.
                                                        1 For information about community efforts toward more transparent data
-driven decision making for social 
good, see http://datafordemocracy.org, accessed March 12, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    S-3  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Academic institutions are stepping up to these educational challenges with a variety of programs 
and educational pathways. 
Several 4
-year undergr
aduate institutions offer data science majors and/or 
minors
Šserving not only those students pursuing data science as a career but also 
those 
students who 
want 
to acquire data skills while majoring in another field. Two
-year institutions are starting to int
roduce 
associate degrees and certificates in data science to prepare students to transfer to 4
-year programs or to 
give them skills to compete in the workforce. Summer programs enable undergraduate students to build 
up data science skills rapidly. Boot cam
ps and intensive training programs that aim to refresh or retool 
post
graduate students with the skills required of the growing data science workforce are now appearing. 
Massive open online courses in data science are proliferating and serve as stand
-alone 
points of entry for 
all kinds of students
 (and flexible opportunities for professional development for instructors)
.  These pioneering examples of programs show what is possible, but there are significant 
challenges to developing data science programs more broadly and pervasively. The popularity of data 
science courses and programs will affect the entire
 academic
 institu
tion by influencing enrollment
, budgets, classroom allocation, computing resources, and scheduling. Institutions may need to consider 
how to 
create incentives for
 faculty in multiple departments and fields to collaborate to develop and 
deliver curricula th
at best meets students
™ needs. Today, there is a shortage of faculty in this rapidly 
evolving area
. Enlisting and training existing faculty will be essential in the short term, and developing 
new faculty will be important in the long term. These challenges
, among others, will need to be addressed 
to ensure the success of undergraduate data science students.
  Recommendation 5.1: 
Because these are early days for undergraduate data science 
education, academic institutions should be prepared to evolve programs 
over time. They 
should create and maintain the flexibility and incentives to facilitate the sharing of courses, 
material
s, and faculty among departments and programs. 
  The evolution of data science programs will be 
affected 
by a broad range of factors, in
cluding their initial 
home and structure, the needs and interests of students, and in
stitutional culture. Although 
new program
s could 
be launched by combining existing courses and materials, over time new classes and ma
terials will 
need to be developed
. In
stitutions will need to think through the pathways students are taking into data 
science and how to create bridges and remove barriers. Academic and career advising will be vital parts 
of data science programs; the advising programs will themselves need to
 evolve as the field and the 
market for graduates mature.
 Data science itself provides the tools to continuously evaluate and 
improve 
data science 
education. Evaluation should include assessment of student learning and assessment of how well a 
program is m
eeting the needs of the market it aims to serve. Evaluation can be used to shape a program at 
a given institution, showing what is working and where improvement is needed. It can also be used 
comparatively to detect approaches, classes, or curricula that m
ay be of value to other campuses or 
contexts. 
  Recommendation 5.3: 
Academic institutions should ensure that programs are continuously 
evaluated and should work together to develop professional approaches to evaluation. This 
should include developing and s
haring measurement and evaluation frameworks, data sets, 
and a culture of evolution guided by high
-quality evaluation. Efforts should be made to 
establish relationships with sector
-specific professional societies to help align education 
evaluation with mar
ket impacts.
  Much of the necessary data for evaluation could come from 
institutions
™ administrative records. 
These
 records, 
used 
in conjunction with other data sources such as economic information and survey data, could 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    S-4  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  enable effective transformation and
 generalization of programs and might even inform a cohesive national 
approach to undergraduate data science education. 
 In many fields
, professional societies play a role in creating and nurturing community, in 
facilitating the sharing of resources and results, and in convening groups to set standards or determine 
best practices. Such capabilities 
are valuable
 to data science as well. How
ever, it may be difficult for a 
single existing society to represent all the interests of the data science community. A structured 
collaboration of existing professional societies might work better, with potential development of sub
-societies devoted to da
ta science elements in any of many 
pre
existing societies. 
  Recommendation 5.4: Existing 
professional societies should coordinate to enable regular 
convening sessions 
on data science 
among
 their members. Peer review and discussion 
are
 essential to share id
eas, best practices, and data. 
  Conferences, workshops, training sessions, and other networking opportunities would benefit the joint 
communities. Other opportunities for the collaborating societies would be collecting materials; convening 
discussions 
around critical topics such as curriculum, evaluation, and ensuring broad participation; and 
potentially creating publication venues for the broad community.
 As data science continues to evolve, it is 
essential that academic institutions and other stakehol
ders take steps to prepare students for a data
-enabled world. The time to act is now. 
  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     1-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
       1 Introduction
   In the past decade
, the world has been transformed by the rapidly evolving field of data science. 
This new science, which is already revolutionizing business, science, and society, builds on an array of 
technological developments, including the widespread use of smartphones 
and rapid technological 
progress in 
computing and 
communications. Massive investments have gone into building out wireless 
infrastructure and data centers (the cloud) 
and 
into leveraging such facilities. New methods have been 
developed to connect and 
understand the data being generated.
1  In this new landscape
, all 
individual
s constantly generate data about their whereabouts, habits, 
and preferences. All parts of 
commerce
Šbrowsing, ordering, shipping, inventory, manufacturing, 
advertising
Šhave gained a
 digital footprint. Social network sites 
illuminated
 relationships among billions 
of individuals, and tweets and posts made global
-scale communication patterns instantly visible. 
Governmental bodies digitized and gave public access to vast corpora of data 
and documents. Most of 
recorded history and literature became digitized and accessible for algorithmic analysis. Electronic health 
records allowed medical analyses across populations and time, while genomic sequencing brought 
individualized treatment to th
e cellular level. Design and synthesis of pharmaceuticals, materials, and 
chemicals became computational. The volume of data being collected 
automatically
Šand the processing 
of such data
Šsoared. New data
-driven services arose (e.g., navigation apps, ride
-hailing apps, and voice
-driven assistants), exploited this new data
-driven environment, and convinced the 
public
 of the power and 
elegance of the data
-driven paradigm. Several of the highest market capitalization companies were 
heavily involved in digital t
ransformation, displacing oil and car companies that had been market leaders 
for decades. 
 These emblematic advances signal more extensive and widespread transformations to come. The 
smartphone, mobility, genomics, and cloud 
ﬁrevolutions
ﬂ are in fact only 
at the
ir inception as 
technologists find ways to leverage them ever further. The increased use of Internet
-connected home 
thermostats and fitness wristbands marked the beginning of the Internet
-of-Things era, in which people 
                                                      1 Science and engineering provide many notable examples of digital transformations in th
e previous decade 
foreshadowing the large public transformation now taking place. Examples from the 1995
-2005 time frame 
include virtual observatories (see, for example, Szalay and Gray, 2001; NSF, 2018) and advanced 
computational methods (see, for example
, Berman, Fox, and Hey, 2003). 
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     1-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  are surrounded by an environmen
t that is instrumented, communicative, and responsive. Meanwhile, rapid 
advances in machine learning are enabling new applications.
 This year
™s entering undergraduates, who may be in the workforce until roughly 2075, will face 
an employment landscape trans
formed by these developments. The data
-driven era will spawn many new 
occupational niches based on the massive opportunities presented by new kinds and volumes of data
 even 
as it supplants
 traditional occupational categories.
 Today, the term 
ﬁdata scientis
tﬂ typically describes a knowledge worker who 
uses
 the complex 
and massive data resources characteristic of this new era. However, data science is a broader concept 
involving principles for data collection, storage, integration, analysis, inference, commun
ication, and 
ethics appropriate for this new data
-driven era.
 Several industries and academic disciplines have 
perceived that a new field of data science is emerging out of several established fields, including 
information technology, computer science, 
statistics, mathematics, operations management, and business 
analytics.
 However,
 core data science concepts involving 
the aforementioned 
principles are not being 
conveyed by mainstream training in any one field because data science is not reducible to any 
of the 
pre
existing fields. Data scientists of the future will need to 
be 
educated in the full scope of data science 
principles. 
 There are many reports that industry finds itself constrained by today
™s relatively small supply of 
well
-trained data science t
alent, and data scientist hiring demand has begun to increase rapidly; some 
projections forecast 
that 
approximately 2.7 million new data science positions 
will be available 
by 2020 
(Columbus, 2017). Not only is 
the 
lack of data science talent an issue, but
 so too is students
™ lack of 
understanding about what a data scientist is and what types of tasks such an individual might perform.
  It is imperative that educators, administrators, and students begin today to consider how to best 
prepare for and keep pace
 with this data
-driven era of tomorrow. Undergraduate teaching, in particular, 
offers a critical link in offering more data science exposure to students and expanding the supply of data 
science talent. 
Many distinct data science roles 
will exist 
in the fut
ure workplace; both specialists and 
broad users with different levels of knowledge and different skill sets will be in high demand.
  Understandings of and applications for data science vary among professionals, within academic 
institutions, and throughout 
the broader world. One common observation is that data science is now 
essential in many academic fields (Hey, 2009) and can be both pervasive in and yet distinct from other 
disciplines. For example, data science techniques and tools may be applied 
commonly
 across a variety of 
disciplines, including those in the sciences and in the humanities. However, what gives data science its 
unique identity is that it draws on individual skills and concepts from a wide spectrum of disciplines that 
may not always overlap
 with one another
Ša truly multidisciplinary field. As discussions continue 
regarding the distinctions among data science, computer science, statistics, and other fields, many
 U.S. 
academic institutions are considering how to best deliver data science educa
tion and thus better prepare 
graduates for the data
-driven era that lies ahead of them.
  The need for data science instruction is much broader than just the major and extends to a wide 
range of students from varied programs. Depending on the students
™ leve
ls of interest and career goals, as 
well as institutional goals and resources, one can envision a variety of models for data science instruction, 
including discipline
-centered data science courses offered by specific academic departments focusing 
narrowly 
on the skills needed by that department
™s majors, large introductory data science courses serving 
the 
campus
-wide student body, highly structured course sequences within a formal data science major, 
online courses, boot camps, and other innovative approach
es. To achieve this vision, data science 
education and practice demand a level of collaboration not necessarily seen in other fields, new 
approaches to evaluating educational outcomes, and a constant eye toward refining and evolving the 
undergraduate exper
ience as this field continues to advance. Stand
-alone data science departments may 
emerge naturally on some campuses when the level of collaboration surpasses the bandwidth of currently 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     1-3  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  established departments 
or when the studen
t demand increases greatly
. However, developing 
stand
-alone
 departments is not 
the only means of 
effective delivery of data science education nor may it be 
appropriate in all settings
Šequipping students with data 
science
 skills can be done through a variety of 
pathways, as wi
ll be 
discussed in this report.
   A LOOK TO THE FUTURE
  Imagine it is now 2040. Students born in 2018 are graduating from college. It is 
more than
 30 
years since billions of autonomous sensors and devices started continuously delivering data to cloud
-based databases
, which
 record the states and activities of vehicles, buildings, customers, patients, and 
citizens. Many other data
-driven changes that 
were difficult to foresee have b
ecome pervasive and 
important. 
Thus
, it is not farfetched to expect academic institutions to envision the data
-driven world of 
2040 as they shape the future
 undergraduate experience.
 In the ideal case for the future evolutio
n of data science, all private industries and public agencies 
would 
use data confidently and efficiently to operate fairly without gender or racial bias. Data science 
jobs 
would be
 plentiful
. While some of these data science jobs
 would
 require vocational e
ducation, other 
data science subspecialties 
would 
require certificates, associate
™s degrees, and bachelor
™s degrees. Efforts 
would 
have been undertaken to distribute the workforce equitably over rural, urban, and suburban 
regions; socioeconomic strata; and
 ethnic identities. The importance of data skills 
would be 
appreciated in 
all high schools, and the vast majority of high school graduates
 would
 have basic understanding of data 
science. Data science methods 
would 
be used by data science programs to continuously evolve to meet 
the needs of their students. 
 Data scientists
™ work 
would be 
varied
, and different skill mixes 
would be 
needed for different 
data science positions. Some of these individuals 
would 
have been tra
ined in particular fields but have 
learned data science along the way. Others 
would 
have explicit degrees in data science. For those who 
need a degree in data science for their work, there will likely be many options. They 
might
 earn those 
degrees remotely
, on site, or in combination. They 
might
 learn through a combination of interactive web 
applications and augmented reality simulations, interactions with fellow learners and multidisciplinary 
faculty, and immersive industry apprenticeships. Students in 2
- and 4
-year institutions 
would
 be 
exposed 
to important concepts through a range of motivating applications. Humanities, social sciences, and 
professional education (e.g., music, art, 
and 
architecture) 
would be taught for enrichment, for building 
cross
-disci
plinary communication skills, and as contexts in which to provide examples of different types 
of data. Ethical data concepts like privacy, justice, fairness, and reproducibility 
would be taught 
continuously in safe spaces where students learn from their mi
stakes without penalty and without harm to 
others. Faculty 
would use data science to continuously monitor their students
™ progress and to adapt their 
curriculum to ensure student competency, confidence, and well
-being with respect to the needs of 
industry,
 government, and society.
 The committee
™s vision for the world of 2040 has many debatable elements
Šwhether 
the 
transformations just described will actually go nearly as far as depicted or whether this mostly utopian 
vision will develop dystopian elements. 
This much is not debatable: the undergraduate instructional 
framework will need to transform if it is to support the transition from the world of 2018 to the likely 
world of 2040. This report outlines some considerations and approaches for academic institu
tions and 
others in the broader data science communities to help guide this transformation, but 
it 
is not intended to 
be a final word on undergraduate data science education. This vision needs to be continually evolved and 
refined as the field matures.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     1-4  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
    REPORT OVERVIEW
  In Chapter 2
, the committee considers 
what
 data science professionals will need to know. 
Because expectations and tasks for data scientists will vary across industries and over time, it is important 
to consider the skill sets, learning out
comes, and ethical considerations best suited for individual 
undergraduate students to be successful in their future careers. In Chapter 3
, the committee lays the 
groundwork for exploring 
how these data science students can be educated and thus well prepar
ed. Using 
data from existing data science education programs, the committee discusses the successes and challenges 
associated with implementing and delivering 2
- and 4
-year undergraduate programs and classes, 
alternative courses, and interdisciplinary appr
oaches in an effort to guide individual institutions to follow 
the pathways that simultaneously align with their missions and meet the varied needs of the field of data 
science. In Chapter 4
, the committee describes a number of challenges that arise in cre
ating a new data 
science program. Acknowledging that the field of data science and the content of data science education 
will continue to change rapidly, the committee considers how to evolve from current to future data 
science education and practice in Ch
apter 5. The committee evaluates strategies to refine educational and 
administrative infrastructure, create professional development opportunities, and utilize professional 
societies. In Chapter 6
, the committee offers a summary of its findings and recomme
ndations that 
appeared throughout Chapters 2
 to 
5. 
   REFERENCES
  Berman, F., G. Fox, and A.J.G. Hey, eds. 2003. 
Grid Computing: Mak
ing the Global Infrastructure a 
Reality
. West Sussex
, UK
: Wiley.
 Columbus, L. 2017. IBM 
predicts 
demand 
for 
data 
scientists 
will 
soar 
28% by 2020. 
Forbes
, May 13.
 Hey, T., S. Tansley, and K. Tolle, eds. 2009. 
The Fourth Paradigm: Data
-Intensive Scientific Discovery
. Redmond, Va
.: Microsoft Research.
 NSF (National Science Foundation). 2018. 
ﬁHistory: The NEON Project.
ﬂ http://www.neonscience.org/observatory/history. Accessed February 6, 2018.
 Szalay, A., and J. Gray. 2001. The world
-wide telescope. 
Science
 293(5537):2037
-2040.   Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
       2 Knowledge for Data Scientists
  Over the past decade
, data science has emerged out of a variety of widespread developments (as 
discussed in Chapter 1)
, and companies, academic institutions, and governments are striving to hire data 
scientists while transforming their practices (BHEF and PwC, 2017; E
rnst and 
Young
, 2017). There are 
many instances of academic data science. Still, 
ﬁdata science
ﬂ is not yet 
fully defined as an academic 
subject; the central tenets, concepts, knowledge, skills, and ethics powering this emerging discipline 
remain points of 
active discussion 
and continue to evolve. A new generation of tool developers and tool 
users will require t
he ability to understand data, to make good judgments about and good decisions with 
data, and to use data analysis tools responsibly and effectively (referred to as 
ﬁdata acumen
ﬂ throughout 
this report). Developers and users draw from computing, mathematic
s, statistics, and other fields and 
application domains. Educators and administrators are beginning to reimagine course content, delivery, 
and enrollment at the undergraduate level to best prepare students to operate in this new discipline. 
 New and greate
r volumes of information, along with its variety and velocity, compound long
-standing challenges of data analysis
Šand raise new ones. The ability to measure, understand, and react to 
large quantities of complex data can shape scientific discovery, social i
nteraction, political interactions 
and institutions, economic practice, public health, and many other areas. Data science workflows not only 
consume data, 
but 
they 
also 
produce data
Šsuch as intermediate data sets, statistics, 
and 
other by
-products 
like vis
ualization
Šthat need to be understood.
 Although the definition of data science is evolving, it centers on the notion of multidisciplinary 
and interdisciplinary approaches to extracting knowledge or insights from large quantities of complex 
data for use in 
a broad range of applications. 
Data science 
is about synthesizing the most relevant parts of 
the foundational disciplines to solve particular classes of problems or applications that are newly enabled 
because the volume and variety of data available are ex
panding swiftly, data are available more 
immediately, and decisions based on data are increasingly automated and in real time. Data scientists 
often work at the interface of disciplines and can help develop new approaches to address problems in 
these areas
. Data science applications have varying levels of risk. For example, recommender systems that 
suggest purchases within an online shopping platform or select advertisements for website visitors are 
relatively low risk. Although provider sales may be affect
ed if undesirable products are recommended and 
users may be dissatisfied with their purchases, the overall impact of poor retail recommender systems to 
individuals and society is generally low. Still, the recommendations influence the behavior of large 
segments of a population and are often coupled with 
a just
-in-time supply chain, which aims to forecast 
consumer demand given available data and optimize production and shipping of goods. In this case
, the 
systems can have substantial impact, especially if they result in a shortage of necessary items, such as 
food and medicine, 
owing to
 natural disaster
 or unanticipated interactions with other external facto
rs. But 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  increasingly, as similar data
-driven a
lgorithms are used 
to recommend sentencing or release of criminals,
 guide
 testing or treatment of patients, 
plan
 urban development, draw political boundaries, allocate funds, 
and inform other critical public policy decisions, impacts on individuals and soc
iety can be profound. 
 While new volumes and types of information can make analyses more accurate than past methods 
that relied on sparse surveys with lower than desired survey frequency, response rates, and sample sizes, 
they still have limitations. W
eakn
esses in data 
quality and data 
analysis might 
have a wide range of 
negative policy effects: problems might be misunderstood in their causes and scale
; a program that a 
family depends on might get insufficient funding
; or a policy might be enacted that has 
unintended 
consequences for large segments of the population.
 Thus
, it will be important that data are collected and analyzed appropriately, especially as 
we 
increasingly rely
 on data collection. It will be equally important that there are clear principles
 guiding the 
use of data for human good. Further
more
, the complexity of the analyses and the increasing dependency 
on data across all fields of human endeavor will drive demand for 
ﬁsmarter
ﬂ tools and best practices for 
data science
 that
 minimize mistakes 
in interpretation.
 Data science is not just the practice of analyzing a certain data set 
about
 a particular question. It 
often results in the 
creation 
of processes that 
continuously 
take in new data, often from many sources, and 
generate refined 
distillations of that data
, which
 in turn 
become sources for new inquiries, questions, and 
analyses. The products of the data scientist
Šincluding data, code, visualizations, and recommendations
Šoften take on a life of their own far beyond the initial quest
ion that gave rise to their creation. In this way
, data science takes on aspects associated with engineering
Šnamely
, the creation of infrastructures that 
undergird society and
 must
 safely withstand unanticipated changes in demand and use.
 Academic institut
ions, 
companies
, and government
s recognize these shifts and are rapidly 
embracing a vision of an emerging discipline of data science that is unique yet builds on knowledge from 
existing disciplines (NRC, 2014). Generally, each academic discipline recognize
s that its viewpoint alone 
is insufficient to encompass all of data science.
1 Advances in the power and usability of data science 
computing tools have made it possible for even inexperienced people to conduct complex analyses over 
enormous data sets withou
t really understanding the possible artifacts and biases that may be lurking in 
the data or the reliability of the results and interpretations. Machine learning models may achieve 
superhuman performance on challenging machine vision tasks yet may employ bi
ased or unfair 
interpretations of the data (Jordan, 2013). 
Application domains
 (e.g., business, medicine, natural science, 
social sciences, or engineering) are developing and adapting machine learning 
and deep learning 
techniques to solve specific research
 questions.
 These techniques can be more effective than previously 
used methods but may lack mathematical or statistical rigor or computational scalability. Increasingly, 
domains in the humanities, such as philosophy, rhetoric, history, and literary studie
s, embrace elements of 
data science while issues of algorithmic bias present moral and ethical questions.
 Data scientists have the potential to help address critical real
-world challenges. Just a few 
examples are listed
 here
:   Enabling more accurate diagno
sis of melanomas through better analysis of images
. Deep 
learning techniques have been applied to detect melanoma, the 
deadliest
 form of skin cancer. 
                                                      1 The American Statistical Association and the Computing Research Association have both released formal 
statements to this effect (ASA, 2015; CRA, 2016). The 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
 (IEEE) 
has intro
duced numerous data science conferences associated with its various special interest groups. National 
position statements around information management and operations research are less well
-defined. The popular 
press is full of comparisons of data science 
and business analytics or business intelligence; none assert that the 
latter two subsume data science.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-3  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  These methods improve the analysis of tissue images, 
promising 
a more accurate diagnosis 
than traditional techniques (Codella et al., 2017). 
  Enhancing business decisions
. Business analytics can assist entrepreneurs and company 
executives in making timely decisions based on market trends. This can be coupled with 
anal
ysis of 
online social media information to respond directly to consumer demands or 
create a more personalized advertising experience (Chen et al., 2012). 
  Helping aid organizations to respond 
faster
. Data science and analytics are used to assist aid 
organi
zations to respond more quickly in times of need, such as when the Swedish Migration 
Board used data science to make predictions about and determine national implications 
of 
emigration 
trends (Pratt, 2016). 
  Developing 
ﬁsmart cities.
ﬂ Cities around the wor
ld, such as London, Rio de Janeiro, and 
New York
, collect real
-time data from a variety of sources, such as public transportation, 
traffic cameras, environmental sensors for parameters such as temperature and humidity, and 
social media interactions regardi
ng local issues. The data can then be processed, analyzed, 
and utilized to improve city efficiency and cost
-effectiveness as well as resident well
-being 
(Kitchin, 2014). 
  However, there are also many instances of high
-impact and high
-profile data science 
research 
that has 
resulted 
in flawed or inaccurate findings, as well as ethical and legal quandaries. A few examples are 
listed
 here
:    Inaccurate predictions of flu trends.
 In 2013
, Google Flu Trends overpredicted true 
influenza
-related doctors
™ visits as
 determined by the Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention. This 
has been 
primarily 
attributed to 
overreliance on outdated models (Butler, 
2013). 
  Release of personally identifiable data.
 The abundance of data available on individuals from 
companies and 
social media can present ethical dilemmas to researchers in terms of privacy, 
scalability of results, and subject participation agreement. For instance, a 2013 study 
linking 
numerous Twitter users to sensitive information from their financial institutions 
prompted 
discussions of 
when
 researchers should be required to obtain written consent when using 
nominally publicly accessible information (Danyllo et al., 2013). 
  Biases in predictive policing. 
There is much debate over the use and appropriateness of 
pred
ictive policing
Šthe use of data science by law enforcement to predict crime before it 
occurs. There is no consensus yet on the effectiveness of this methodology, and civil liberties 
groups argue that the data used to develop (i.e., train) the models are in
herently biased 
(Hvistendahl, 2016). 
  Surveillance of citizens
. China is deploying facial recognition technologies as well as other 
data science approaches to track citizens, influence behavior, and identify individuals who 
will 
break laws. The national go
al is to link these surveillance systems by 2020 to 
ﬁimplement a national 
‚social credit
™ system that would assign every citizen a rating based on 
how they behave at work, in public venues
, and in their financial dealings
ﬂ (Chin and Lin, 
2017).
  Data scien
ce is currently being applied in 
many
 organizations within industry, academia, and 
government, often by self
-taught practitioners. There are indications of strong demand in a variety of 
domains for graduates with data science skills. A recent study by IBM 
found more than 2.3 million data 
science and analytics job listings in 2015, and both job openings and job demand are projected to grow 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-4  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  significantly by 2020
 (Columbus, 2017)
. Three
-fifths of the data science and analytics jobs today are in 
the finance and
 insurance, professional services, and information technology sectors, but the 
manufacturing, health care, and retail sectors also are hiring significant numbers of data scientists (Miller 
and Hughes, 2017). The IBM study also shows that it takes significa
nt time to find and hire staff with the 
right mix of skills and experience
 (Columbus, 2017)
. Since many employers are themselves new to the 
use of data science, they may not be able to provide training and therefore may prefer to hire individuals 
who alrea
dy have appropriate classwork and hands
-on experience. More generally, a poll conducted by 
Gallup for the Business
-Higher Education Forum revealed that 69 percent of employers expect candidates 
with data science and analytics skills to get preference for j
obs in their organizations by 2021 (BHEF and 
PwC, 2017). 
 Current data science courses, programs, and degrees are highly variable in part because emerging 
educational approaches start from different institutional contexts, aim to reach students in differen
t communities, address different challenges, and achieve different goals. This variation makes it 
challenging to lay out a single vision for data science education in the future that would apply to all 
institutions of higher learning, but it also allows da
ta science to be customized and to reach broader 
populations than other similar fields have done in the past. Moreover, the continual emergence of new 
data sources and new analytical tools make this an extremely fluid environment, where the courses that 
are taught today might be organized around concepts and practices that are supplanted in the near future. 
Any data science program will have to take this into account, and this complicates any number of issues 
about how to define and structure the field.
 However, important foundational data science skills are highlighted in this chapter
 and may
 serve 
as a platform for any practicing data scientist.
 The themes 
described in this chapter 
underlie 
data science 
education, but they are not necessarily novel 
challenges or even unique to data science. The lessons 
learned from other disciplines can help pave the way to ensuring the success of data science education.
   DATA SCIENTISTS OF T
ODAY AND TOMORROW
  As was discussed in the previous section, there is a cur
rent shortage of workers with data science 
skills. The day
-to-day work, and thus educational needs, of the different types of data scientists are highly 
differentiated. This section of the report will map the educational needs with the roles that students 
will be 
expected to perform in the workplace and the skills needed to prepare students for graduate studies and 
research careers in many fields of inquiry (NRC, 2013).
 Data science roles vary 
across government, industry, and academia
 and 
will continue to 
evolve in 
the future. As with other complex fields of study, there is both differentiation and overlap in each
 of these 
roles
. The breadth and depth 
of data science roles
 underscores the complexity 
that 
employers face in the 
identification of qualified cand
idates for their job postings
 and the challenges that academic institutions 
face in preparing their students for these emerging roles
. Some current areas of focus for data scientists 
include the following:
   Computing 
hardware and software platforms for 
data science
. Data scientists 
who 
manage 
the platforms
 on which data science models are created
 focus on understanding and 
maintaining a computing environment that meets the demands for big data, fast (sometimes 
real time or near real time) model generatio
n, and data interrogation
Šup to and including the 
demands of real
-time data collection (i.e., streaming) and complex data visualizations. 
A significant
 challenge of this job is remaining current on the latest computing hardware and 
software. Unlike system 
administrators
, who need to understand only one or two computer 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-5  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  systems, these data scientists create environments for data science modelers and analysts that 
can be used across a range of computing platforms. This requires that they understand the 
changin
g programming languages used for data science, the supporting libraries, and 
the 
many 
types of data storage systems, as well as how to keep all of 
these 
components
 operational and secure. Because of the rapid rate of change in this area, educational traini
ng 
needs to focus on key topics such as database maintenance, security, programming hardware, 
and operating systems. A certain level of proficiency in these skills could be developed in a 
2-year associate
™s degree program, upon completion of which graduate
s will be able to 
manage changing computing systems and keep 
pace 
with the ever
-growing computational 
needs of machine learning and data science model development
 and workflows
. However, 
additional depth may be required to equip professionals to keep pace 
with rapidly advancing 
technology, perform capacity planning and availability assessments, and deploy solutions
 that 
are reliable and scalable
.  Data storage and access.
 Data scientists 
who 
focus on managing data storage solutions as 
well as extracting, tra
nsforming, and loading data for modeling
 should have
 the ability to 
manage exceptionally large data 
sets 
from a variety of heterogeneous data sources
 and
 in 
batch or streaming
 form
, and to assess the predictive value of these data sources. A strong 
knowled
ge of both databases and streamed analytical processing is key to this role. These 
data scientists need to understand the data science workflow, to document data quality 
problems, and to select appropriate methods of interpolation
Ševen, in some cases, crea
ting 
data models to clean and reduce errors in downstream model development performance. 
Some domain knowledge is likely needed (e.g., to understand data quality issues and how to 
best 
mange
 the data). The education needed for this role varies, and skill s
ets could be 
developed at both 2
- and 4
-year institutions
 (keeping in mind that 
a data science team would 
likely need to represent 
additional 
important skills, such as computing, continuous cross
-validation, and adoption of new modeling techniques or frame
works
).   Statistical modeling and machine learning. 
Experts in statistical modeling and machine 
learning interface with stakeholders to capture requirements and develop the scope of work 
for data science projects, 
undertake the data science analysis cycle
, and typically bridge the 
gaps among more narrowly focused data science roles. Written and oral communication skills 
are essential for this position
, as is experience with coordinating teams. Often these data 
scientists require considerable domain expertis
e in the field for which the data science models 
are being developed. For example, an individual developing a model for clinical trial analysis 
for drug development would need to have a significant understanding of pharmacology and 
clinical data collection
. Although data science skills 
required for this role are broad
, the 
disciplinary knowledge is highly specific. Owing to the breadth and complexity of this 
position, a 4
-year 
undergraduate 
program may be required to develop the level of proficiency 
necessa
ry for success. 
However, 
even
 4-year programs are unlikely to develop
 sufficient
 knowledge in a domain through exposure to a small number of courses (i.e., a second major, 
co-major, or minor may be necessary). All data scientists need to acquire domain kno
wledge, 
but it is particularly important for this role.
  Data visualization.
 Ideally
, data visualization experts combine development and design skills 
with the ability to understand the meaning of the underlying analyses. These data scientists 
are adept at 
visual storytelling with data. They can examine large data sets and create clear, 
efficient, compelling online layouts, images, dashboards, and interactive features that can 
stand on their own or complement narrative text. At their core
, they are effective
 translators 
between technical and statistical specialists and superior communicators with multiple 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-6  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  nontechnical audiences. They are 
well versed
 in the key elements of effective graphical 
displays as well as the pitfalls of misrepresenting data and results
. These data scientists 
combine knowledge of statistical analysis tools, libraries, and frameworks to complement a 
foundation in computational, statistical, and data management methods. They are 
well 
prepared
 to adjust quickly as new standards and tools be
come available. They can design for 
multiple formats and platforms and be grounded in user experience insights. They understand 
application programming interfaces
Šhow to parse them and, ideally, how to build them
Šand are closely aligned with the data manag
ement functions performed by others on a team.
 Both 2
- and 4
-year programs can help prepare students for this role.
  Business analysis.
 Growing numbers of positions involve making sense of and 
communicating about data without nec
essarily relying on 
programming
 skills. These jobs are 
built around assembling and prese
nting data to inform a decision
-making process. These data 
scientists are common in many business areas, have expertise in various domains, and can 
utilize skills developed in both 2
- and 
4-year programs.  
  There are many other types of data scientists today
, and the
ir roles
 will continue to change and 
expand in the future. Beyond the differences among them, there is considerable variance in the lower
-order and higher
-order knowledge and skills that some data science jobs require. 
There are also many 
commonalities among
 the
 varied types of
 data scien
tists
. All data scientists need to 
learn how to 
tackle 
questions with real data. It is insufficient for them to be handed a 
ﬁcanned
ﬂ data set and be told to analyze 
it using the methods that they are studying. Such an approach will
 not necessarily prepare them to solve 
more realistic and complex problems taken out of context, especially those involving large, unstructured 
data. Instead, they need repeated practice with the entire cycle beginning with ill
-posed 
questions 
and 
ﬁmessy
ﬂ data.
2 An effective data science workflow involves formulating good questions, considering whether 
available data are appropriate for addressing 
a problem, choosing from a set of different tools, 
undertaking analyses in a reproducible manner, assessing ana
lytic methods, drawing appropriate 
conclusions, and communicating results. Students need practice applying a unified approach to problem
 solving with data. Such an integrated approach needs to be introduced in their first courses and 
remain 
a consistent th
eme in subsequent courses. Students need to see that data science is 
not simply
 a collection of 
varied tools (or methods), but rather a general approach to problem solving. Many of the emergent data 
science programs at every academic level encourage studen
ts to assume that they will benefit from 
continuing professional education throughout their careers. All require that graduates have the capability 
to identify problems to be solved with data, determine and implement solutions, assess results, and 
communic
ate results and findings (UC Santa Cruz, 2018).
  Finding 2.1:
 Data scientist
s today draw largely from extensions of the 
ﬁanalyst
ﬂ of years past 
trained in traditional disciplines. As data science becomes an integral part of many industries and 
enriches research and development, there will be an increased demand for more holistic and more 
nuanced 
data science roles
.  Finding 2.2:
 Dat
a science programs that strive to meet the needs of their students will likely 
evolve to emphasize certain skills and capabilities. This will result in programs that prepare 
different types of data scientists.
                                                        2 A description of the importance of the multistep scientific process and how it relates to data analysis can be 
found in the 
Curriculum Guidelines for U
ndergraduate Programs in Statistical Science
 (ASA, 2014). 
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-7  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Recommendation 2.1: Academic institutions sho
uld embrace data science as a vital new 
field that requires specifically tailored instruction delivered through 
majors and minors in 
data science as well as the development of a cadre of faculty equipped to teach in this new 
field.
  Recommendation 2.2: 
Aca
demic institutions
 should provide and evolve a range of 
educational pathways to prepare students for 
an array of data science roles in the 
workplace
.   DATA ACUMEN
  Data science is a complex activity that requires specific skills, such as coding in 
advanced 
computer languages, and less well
-defined but equally crucial skills, including the ability to do the 
following:
   Combine many existing programs or codes into a 
ﬁworkflow
ﬂ that will accomplish some 
important task; 
  ﬁIngest,
ﬂ ﬁclean,
ﬂ and then 
ﬁwrangle
ﬂ data into reliable and useful forms; 
  Think about how a data processing workflow might be affected by data issues; 
  Question the formulation and establishment of sound analytical methods; 
and
  Communicate effectively about properties of computer co
des, task workflows, databases, and 
data issues. 
  Aspiring data scientists need to develop these skills in order to avoid conducting flawed or incomplete 
analyses. 
 In short, getting a useful answer from data requires many skills that are often not fully 
developed 
on their own in traditional mathematics, statistics, and computer science courses
Šalthough such fields 
certainly come closest today to providing mastery of the desired skill set. Donoho (2017) noted the need 
for data scientists who can face 
ﬁesse
ntial questions of a lasting nature and [use] scientifically rigorous 
techniques to attack those questions.
ﬂ  Students also need to learn how to 
ensure 
that outcomes are valid
Šextracting the right insights 
and having confidence that, start to finish, what 
one says is true, within some margins of error. Repeated 
exposure to the data analysis cycle (i.e., posing a question, finding data to answer it, wrangling that data, 
exploring relationships, fitting models, and assessing models) is needed to help hone the
 skills required to 
assess the data at hand, extract meaning from them, and communicate those findings to 
nonexperts. 
Students also need to consider 
the provenance of the data used
. Building on the work of De Veaux et al. (2017), the committee puts forth t
he following key 
concept areas
 for data science
: mathematical foundations, computational foundations, statistical 
foundations, data management and curation, data description and visualization, data modeling and 
assessment, workflow and reproducibility, com
munication and teamwork, domain
-specific 
considerations, and ethical problem solving.
 Experience and facility 
in these and other areas results 
are essential to building
 what this 
committee defines as 
ﬁdata acumen
.ﬂ Some exposure to key high
-level topics is
 needed by all students, 
while other students will require additional exposure or extended work to develop expertise. The process 
of starting students down the path toward data acumen is a chief objective of data science education.
  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-8  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Finding 2.3:
 A critical task in the education of future data scientists is to 
instill
 data acumen. This 
requires exposure to key concepts in data science, real
-world data and problems that can reinforce 
the limitations of tools, and ethical considerations that permeat
e many applications. Key concepts 
involved in developing dat
a acumen include the following:
   Mathematical foundations,
  Computational foundations,
  Statistical foundations,
  Data management and curation,
  Data description and visualization,
  Data modeling and 
assessment,
  Workflow and reproducibility,
  Communication and teamwork, 
  Domain
-specific considerations, and
  Ethical problem solving.
  Recommendation 2.3: To prepare their graduates for this new data
-driven era, academic 
institutions should encourage the 
development of a basic understanding of data science in 
all undergraduates
.   Mathematical Foundations
  Mathematics is essential to successful practicing data scientists. The questions 
concern
 how much 
and what type of mathematics 
are 
needed. Data scientis
ts need to know how to test hypotheses and 
determine why they do or do not align to real
-world problems. They need to be capable of assessing their 
data science models, determining when these models fail and how to make corrections that lead to 
scientific 
discovery. Tools (e.g., Wolfram Alpha) can be utilized and combined to produce an outcome 
(e.g., simulation or visualization) that reinforces 
data scientists
™ computational and statistical knowledge 
without demanding the study of calculus in full detail (s
ee Hardin and Horton, 2017).
 New
, more flexible pathways to help establish a mathematical foundation for data science are 
being developed. The University of Texas at Austin Dana Center
™s Mathematics Pathways
3 is one such 
program designed to increase opport
unities for students across the nation through mathematics and 
statistics education. This program instills confidence, advocates for degree or certificate completion, and 
provides students with the skills and tools to apply mathematical and quantitative re
asoning at home and 
in the workplace. The development of additional pathways to help students develop mathematical 
foundations would be beneficial for the field of data science.
 Key mathematical concepts/skills that would be important for all students in their data science 
programs and critical for their success in the workforce are the following: 
   Set theory and basic logic,
  Multivariate thinking via functions and graphical disp
lays,
  Basic probability theory and randomness,
  Matrices and basic linear algebra,
                                                       3 The website for the Dana Center™s Mathematics Pathways is http://www.utdanacenter.org/higher
-education/dcmp/, accessed January 18, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-9  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   Networks and graph theory, and
  Optimization.
  Some 
data scien
tists
 and programs require a deeper understanding of mathematical 
underpinnings. This might include the following
:   Partial derivatives (to understand interactions in a model),
  Advanced linear algebra (i.e., properties of matrices, eigenvalues, decompositions),
  ﬁBig O
ﬂ notation and analysis of algorithms, and
  Numerical methods (e.g., approximation and interpolation).
  While linear algebra and optimization may be particularly helpful in data science, the traditional 
mathematics curriculum has many courses that precede multivariate calculus and linear algebra. It may be 
the case that institutions need to develop a 
ﬁmath
 for data science
ﬂ class
4 to build these foundations 
without requiring multiple semesters of coursework. This could potentially serve as an accelerated course 
in relevant mathematical approaches for data science and possibly replace further coursework for 
some 
students.
   Computational Foundations
  Working with data requires extensive computing skills. Data science graduates need to be 
proficient in many of the foundational software skills and the associated algorithmic, computational 
problem
-solving 
skills
 associated with
 the discipline of computer science. A data science student needs to 
be prepared to work with data as they are commonly found in the workplace and research lab
oratorie
s. 
Accessing and organizing data in databases, scraping data from website
s, processing text into data that 
can be analyzed, ensuring secure data storage
, and protecting confidentiality 
all require extensive 
computing skills. Computational problem
-solving skills recur throughout the 
data scientist
™s workflow. 
As 
Wing
 (2006, p. 3
4) 
noted
, ﬁThinking like a computer scientist means more than being able to program 
a computer. It requires thinking at multiple levels of abstraction.
ﬂ  To be prepared for careers in data science, students also need facility with
 professional statistical 
analysis software packages and an understanding of the 
computational
 and algorithmic 
problem
-solving 
principles 
that underlie these packages.
 It is 
also 
important for data science students to be aware of the state of the art of information 
technology and f
or faculty to educate these students so that their knowledge on information technology 
will continue to evolve accordingly. 
Students will also benefit from instruction in aspects of data 
structures, object
-oriented programs, and workflow (i.e., aspects of 
a broader set of project management 
skills). 
The first pedagogical approach to achieving this understanding is to teach students how to think 
about algorithms. Students will need further skill development to be able to deepen their understanding of 
abstrac
tion and be able to learn new data technologies. It is more important for students to learn how to 
follow the information technology frontier than 
to 
master the details of today
™s information technology 
architecture.
 While it would be ideal for all data scientists to have extensive coursework in computer science, 
new pathways may be needed to establish appropriate depth in algorithmic thinking and abstraction in a 
streamlined manner. This might include the following: 
                                                       4 See Hardin and Horton (2017) for one suggested approach.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-10  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
    Basic abstractions,
  Algorithmic thinking,
  Programming concepts,
  Data structures, and
  Simulations.
   Statistical Foundations
  All data scientists need an understanding of basic statistical concepts, practice, and theory.
 According to De Veaux et al. (2017, p. 2.6), 
ﬁStudents should understand the basic statistical concepts of 
data collection, data wrangling, data analysis, modeling, and inference. A sound knowledge of basic 
theoretical foundations will help inform their an
alyses and identify the limits of their chosen models. 
Successful graduates should be able to apply statistical knowledge and computational skills to formulate 
problems, plan data collection campaigns or identify and gather relevant existing data, and then
 analyze 
the data to provide insights
.ﬂ  To avoid drawing invalid or incorrect conclusions, data science students need to understand the 
concept of inference, including sampling and 
nonsampling errors. Owing to the nature of observational 
data as found art
ifacts (which may represent a 
non
random selection or include confounding factors), it is 
important for students to study confounding and causal inference early to make sense of the data around 
them. As a specific example, having 30 million credit card reco
rds can help identify a number of 
relationships in the observed data (e.g., people who shop at a particular retailer tend to exceed a certain 
income threshold), but those relationships will not necessarily hold in the next set of records. In addition
, othe
r measured or unmeasured factors may be important in determining causal conclusions (e.g., students 
could wrongly conclude that use of sunscreen is associated with skin cancer if the amount of sun exposure 
is not controlled for in an analysis).
 As for the 
previous areas
, work is needed to identify approaches to build a strong foundation in 
statistics. The American Statistical Association 
(ASA) 
guidelines for undergraduate programs in statistics 
(ASA, 2014) discusses important considerations for educating st
udents in statistical practice
, as do the 
Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Programs in Data Science
, which were endorsed by the 
ASA
 (De Veaux et al., 2017). Data science students need to know about randomized trials (commonly used in 
businesses running A/B comparisons) but need to quickly move to approaches that are applicable for 
nonrandomized studies. They need repeated practice of t
he whole data science analysis cycle with many 
loops and iterations. 
 Important statistical foundations might include the following:
   Variability, uncertainty, sampling error, and inference;
  Multivariate thinking;
  Non
sampling error, design, experiments (e.
g., A/B testing), biases, confounding, and causal 
inference;
  Exploratory data analysis;
  Statistical modeling and model assessment; and
  Simulations and experiments.
    Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-11  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Data Management and Curation
  At the heart of data science is the storage, preparation, and accessing of data. 
It is often said that a 
typical data analysis project is more than 70 percent data cleaning, merging, and marshaling. 
With the 
advent of large public databases with data of al
l kinds ranging from governmental to genomic, there has 
never been a better time to teach students about the many aspects of data management. The students can 
directly experience the many forms in which data can be found today, from spreadsheets and text f
iles to 
relational and 
nonrelational databases.
 One way in which data scientists 
succeed
 is by providing others a very clear understanding of the 
details of the data that went into a project, possibly also making the data
, or their derivatives,
 available t
o others. Throughout their coursework, students need to become facile with data of different types (e.g., 
relational, text, images).
 Key data management and curation concepts/skills that would be important for all students in 
their data science programs an
d critical for their success in the workforce are the following: 
   Data provenance
;  Data preparation, especially data cleansing and data transformation
;  Data management (of a variety of data types)
;  Record retention policies
;  Data subject privacy
;  Missing 
and conflicting data
; and
  Modern databases
.   Data Description and Visualization
  Many data scientists create value by creating 
ﬁdashboards
ﬂ that display some basic statistics and 
visualizations to monitor the contents of an evolving database or stream. In
 this 
way
, they provide 
situational awareness for 
decision makers
. Students who might be creators or users of such dashboards 
need to learn about traditional descriptive statistics for developing a feel of what is in a data set as well as 
about traditional
 graphics such as scatter and time series plots with decorations and modifications. This 
will 
help prepare them to present data in a clear and compelling fashion. After 
learning
 how to make basic 
displays, students then need to be taught how to use simple 
graphics to check data for artifacts, snafus, 
and inconsistencies. Then they can start to undertake exploratory data analysis.
 Data visualization is at the core of data science insight extraction, communication with others, 
and quality assurance. A key cha
llenge for data scientists is to be able to tell a story with data and 
translate key aspects of the 
data analysis cycle 
and outcomes of efforts to both users and leaders. It is 
crucial that data visualization training go
es hand
-in-hand with communication training, as a well
-chosen 
graph can efficiently convey to others some important feature of a data set that might otherwise be very 
difficult to capture in words. Such visual displays help to avoid a 
ﬁgarbage in, garbage ou
tﬂ situation 
where important outliers or incorrectly coded data lead to misleading conclusions.
 Key data description and visualization concepts/skills that would be important for all students in 
their data science programs and critical for their success in
 the workforce are the following:
   Data consistency checking,
  Exploratory data analysis,
  Grammar of graphics,
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-12  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   Attractive and sound static and dynamic visualizations, and
  Dashboards.
   Data Modeling and Assessment
  Data scientists have a rich and growing 
set of models and methods at their disposal. The 
challenge is how to identify which models are most appropriate for a given setting and assess whether the 
assumptions and conditions needed to apply that method are tenable.
 Key data modeling and assessment 
concepts/skills that would be important for all students in their 
data science programs and critical for their success in the workforce are the following:
   Machine learning,
  Multivariate modeling and supervised learning,
  Dimension reduction techniques and 
unsupervised learning,
  Deep learning,
  Model assessment and sensitivity analysis, and
  Model interpretation (particularly for black box models).
   Workflow and Reproducibility
  Modern data science has at its core the creation of workflows
Špipelines of processes that 
combine simpler tools to solve larger tasks. Documenting, incrementally improving, sharing, and 
generalizing such workflows are an important part of data science prac
tice 
owing to
 the team nature of 
data science and broader 
significance
 of scientific reproducibility and replicability. Documenting and 
sharing workflows enable others to understand how data have been used and refined and what steps were 
taken in an analys
is process. This can increase the confidence in results and improve trust in the process 
as well as enable 
reuse of analyses or results in a meaningful way. 
 Students need to be exposed to the concept of workflows and gain experience constructing them. 
Und
erstanding the end
-to-end structure of a workflow and being able to describe and document the 
workflow is important. Students need to learn about software systems that enable building workflows 
(e.g., R and Python) and 
how to 
document what they do (e.g., R
 markdown and Jupyter notebooks). 
Studying end
-to-end properties of workflows and then incrementally improving them in an evidence
-based fashion is important. Students need to learn about such practices and learn how to execute such 
practices autonomously.
 Providing experiential learning at multiple time points is important as students learn workflow 
processes and practice implementing and documenting steps within a workflow. Data science programs 
can provide multiple opportunities for students to exercise 
and refine these 
ﬁdata science practice
ﬂ skills. 
Students need practice developing a unified approach to analysis and integration of multiple methods 
applied to data sets in an iterative manner. Project management could be integrated into capstone 
experiences. Longer
-term projects involving inte
rim reports and evaluation are critical.
 Key workflow and reproducibility concepts/skills that would be important for all students in their 
data science programs and critical for their success in the workforce are the following:
   Workflows and workflow 
systems,
  Reproducible analysis,
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-13  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   Documentation and code standards,
  Source code 
(version) 
control systems, and
  Collaboration
.   Communication and Teamwork
  One major distinguishing attribute of the work of data scientists centers on their capacity to frame 
research questions well and then communicate the findings in writing, in graphical form, and in 
conversation. In many cases
, this involves coordinating among multidisciplinary actors, translating the 
interests of various parties, and then synthesizing the f
indings for 
nonexpert audiences. This requires 
competency in statistics, computer science, mathematics, coding, and domain
-specific interests. 
Graduates also need to write clearly, speak articulately, construct effective visual displays and compelling 
writ
ten summaries, and communicate complex data science results in basic terms to various stakeholders. 
 The development of responsible oral and written communication skills is also essential for 
productive collaboration in the classroom and in the workplace. 
The ability to work well in 
multidisciplinary teams is a key component of data science education that is highly valued by industry, as 
teams of individuals with particular skill sets each play a critical role in producing data products. 
Multidisciplinary c
ollaboration provides students with the opportunity to use creative problem solving 
and to refine leadership skills, both of which are essential for future project organization and management 
experiences in the workplace. Multidisciplinary teamwork also em
phasizes inclusion and encourages 
diversity of thought in approaching data science problems.
 Key communication and teamwork concepts/skills that would be important for all students in 
their data science programs and critical for their success in the workfo
rce are the following:
   Ability to understand client needs,
  Clear and comprehensive 
reporting
,  Conflict resolution skills,
  Well
-structured technical writing without jargon, and
  Effective presentation skills.
   Domain
-Specific Considerations
  To effectively apply data science to a domain requires knowledge of that domain. Grounding data 
science instruction in substantive contextual examples (which will require the development of judgment 
and background in those areas) will help ensure that data
 scientists develop the capacity to pose and 
answer questions 
with
 data. Reinforcing skills and capacities developed in data science courses in the 
context of a specific domain will help students see the entire data science process. This might include 
comp
letion of a track in a domain area, specialized connector courses 
that link data science concepts 
directly to students™ fields of interest 
to build data science skills in context, a minor in a domain area, or a 
co- or double
-major in an application area. 
Hopefully, such an interconnected appreciation for a domain 
and for data science methods will generalize to other domains and applications.
 Students who have completed 
the course 
Data 8: Foundations of Data Science at the University of 
California, Berkeley
, for example, have an opportunity to enroll in specialized connector courses 
that 
are 
offered by a variety of academic departments. Examples of these connector courses include Data Science 
for Smart Cities, Making Sense of Cultural Data, Data Science and 
the Mind, and Data Science, 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-14  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Demography, and Immigration.
5 Students at the University of Illinois, Urbana
-Champaign
, also have an 
opportunity to integrate their domain knowledge with data science concepts in the CS+X degree program. 
In this bachelor
™s degre
e program, students dedicate half of their coursework to the study of computer 
science and the other half to a specific discipline
Šcurrent selections include mathematics, statistics, 
anthropology, astronomy, chemistry, linguistics, music, philosophy, geosc
ience, crop science, 
and 
advertising.
6 Such approaches reinforce the integrative nature of data science, offering a comprehensive 
educational experience that better prepares students for the future workforce. The committee anticipates 
that the demand for i
nterdisciplinary experiences will increase as the field of data science continues to 
evolve. Additional interdisciplinary pairings
Šsuch as English and data science to prepare future data 
journalists
Šare likely to emerge. 
   Ethical Problem Solving
  As 
powerful analytical tools are growing to meet new possibilities of collecting data, students 
need to be aware of ethical challenges that can emerge. With this proliferation of data and advancement of 
innovation, data science practitioners may often be conf
ronted with decisions about whether they should 
take certain actions just because they have the ability and tools to do so.
 The explosion of data potentially 
raises the possibilities of new intrusions and interventions in people
™s lives
 and other previousl
y ﬁsafe
ﬂ and protected places. The misuse of data can pierce basic human dignities or thwart human agency and 
autonomy. Students working with data need to know the ways in which their findings might compromise 
people
™s dignity and their identities. Most di
sturbing of all, data can be misused in ways that are socially 
unjust. 
Students
 also need to be aware of legal requirements aimed at protecting 
individuals
™ privacy such 
as the European Union General Data Privacy Regulation, which aims to increase the rights of data 
subjects and provide
s penalties for individuals or organizations that violate them.
7 Ethical considerations, in other words, lie at the heart of 
data science. Unique ethical 
considerations arise in each step of and throughout the data science life cycle (i.e., when posing a 
question; collecting, cleaning, and storing data; developing tools and algorithms; performing exploratory 
analysis and visuali
zation; making inferences and predictions; making decisions; and communicating 
results). 
Stand
-alone
 courses on ethics could help students learn what intelligent systems and the tools of 
data science can and cannot do
. It is important to emphasize to stude
nts that this is not simply a case of 
ﬁdo it like it is done today
ﬂŠit is a case where ongoing improvement and elevation of standards is 
needed. Beyond the 
stand
-alone
 ethics course, students stand to develop a deeper understanding of the 
role that ethics 
play
s throughout the study and practice of the data science life cycle
 if ethical principles 
are incorporated into most of the courses in the data science curriculum
. Case studies may be an especially effective approach.
 For example, case studies could be 
used to 
show how vulnerable people can be exploited by means of their medical or behavioral data being shared. 
Through these case studies
, students could begin to develop a sense of awareness of the potential impacts 
on inequality of the misuse of data. In
 addition to learning about standards for responsible behavior 
through such case studies, students would also benefit from instruction in developing specific skills to 
navigate the challenging ethical problems with which data scientists struggle.
                                                       5 The website for the connector curriculum is https://data.berkeley.edu/education/connectors, accessed 
February 20, 2018.
 6 The website for the CS+X program is https://cs.illinois.edu/academics/undergraduate/degree
-program
-options/cs
-x-degree
-programs, ac
cessed February 20, 2018.
 7 The website for the European Union General Data Protection Regulation is https://www.eugdpr.org/, 
accessed March 29, 2018. 
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-15  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Key aspec
ts of ethics needed for all data scientists (and for that matter, all educated citizens) 
include the following:
   Ethical precepts for data science and codes of conduct,
  Privacy and confidentiality,
  Responsible conduct of research,
  Ability to identify 
ﬁjunk
ﬂ science, and
  Ability to detect algorithmic bias.
  Recommendation 2.4: Ethics is a topic that, given the nature of data science, students 
should learn and practice throughout their education. 
Academic institutions
 should ensure 
that ethics is woven into the data science curriculum from the beginning and throughout.
   A CODE OF ETHICS FOR
 DATA SCIENCE
  Other disciplines have benefited from publishing specific ethical guidelines by which their 
members agree to conduc
t themselves. 
Practitioners in the fields of medicine and engineering have long 
traditions of similar ethical guidelines. The 
AMA 
Code of Medical Ethics
 of the American Medical 
Association includes guidance on interactions between medical professionals and
 their patients; use of 
medical treatments, including those that rely on new technologies; and 
ﬁself
-regulation
ﬂ within the 
workplace (AMA, 2016). The 
ﬁIEEE 
Code of Ethics
ﬂ of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic 
Engineers encourages engineering prof
essionals to prioritize the safety of the public, avoid or disclose 
conflicts of interest, present evidence
-based claims, and maintain appropriate technical qualifications, for 
example (IEEE, 2017). 
 Considerable work in the study of ethical decision 
making for scientists has been undertaken by 
the Association of Computing Machinery
 (ACM)
 and the 
ASA
. The 
2018 ACM Code of Ethics and 
Professional Conduct: Draft 3
 (an update to 
the ACM™s 
1992 code of ethics) includes principles for 
moral conduct in addit
ion to leadership guidelines for computing professionals acting in the interest of the 
public good (ACM, 2018). The 
ASA
™s Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice
 presents guidelines 
pertaining to integrity and accountability in statistical work. It also details the various ethical 
responsibilities that statisticians have toward their research subjects, clients, employers, and colleagues 
(ASA, 2016). 
 These rules o
f conduct uphold specific ethical standards for professionals whose activities and 
practice can significantly impact the health and well
-being of people, society, and their profession. As an 
emerging discipline
, data science could benefit from having its o
wn ethical standards of conduct. There 
are many areas specific to data science that could be addressed, including the responsibility to protect 
privacy of personal data
, the responsibility to not misrepresent the data for personal gain
, the 
responsibility 
to ensure fairness in the use of machine learning algorithms and choice of training data
, and 
the responsibility to ensure that results produced by the analyst are reproducible. 
 Given the sensitive nature of certain
 types of
 data and the significant 
ethic
al 
implications of 
working with such data, efforts to establish a code of ethics for data scientists are under
 way throughout 
the field.
8 Data science ethics might be codified in an 
ﬁoath
ﬂ similar to the Hippocratic Oath taken by 
                                                      8 To read about other work in the development of data science codes of ethics, see, for example, 
https://datapractices.org/community
-principles
-on-ethical
-data
-sharing/, 
http://datafordemocracy.org/projects/ethics.html, http://www.datascienceassn.org/code
-of-conduct.html, 
http://www.rosebt.com/blog/open
-for
-comment
-proposed
-data
-science
-code
-of-professional
-conduct, 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-16  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  physicians as a way to cry
stallize what is being asked of them. 
Although the specific content and form of 
an oath may be controversial, it
 can also underline the importance of the commitment being made. A draft 
version of such an oath was presented in the interim report from this c
ommittee
, and 
a revised 
version 
appears 
in Appendix D
 of this report.
 The potential consequences of the ethical implications of data 
science cannot be overstated. 
  Recommendation 2.5: The data science community should adopt a code of ethics; such a 
code s
hould be affirmed by member
s of professional societies, 
included in professional 
development programs and curricula
, and conveyed through educational programs
. The 
code should be reevaluated often in light of new developments. 
   REFERENCES
  ACM (Association for Computing Machinery). 2018. 
2018 ACM 
Code of Ethics and Professional 
Conduct: Draft 3. 
https://ethics.acm.org/2018
-code
-draft
-3. Accessed February 6, 2018.
 AMA (American Medical Association). 2016. 
AMA
 Code of Medical Ethics.
 https://w
ww.ama
-assn.org/delivering
-care/ama
-code
-medical
-ethics. Accessed February 12, 2018.
 ASA
 (American Statistical Association)
. 2014. 
Curriculum Guideline
s for Undergraduate Programs in 
Statistical Science.
 http://www.amstat.org/asa/files/pdfs/EDU
-guidelines2
014
-11-15.pdf.
 ASA. 2015. 
ASA Statement of the Role of Statistics in Data Science.
 http://ww2.amstat.org/misc/DataScienceStatement.pdf.
 ASA. 2016. 
Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice.
 http://www.amstat.org/asa/files/pdfs/EthicalGuidelines.pdf.
 BHEF
 and PwC (Business Higher Education Forum and PricewaterhouseCoopers). 2017. 
Investing in 
America
™s Data Science and Analytics Talent: The Case for Action. 
http://www
.bhef.com/sites/default/files/bhef_2017_investing_in_dsa.pdf
. Butler, D. 2013. When Google got flu wrong. 
Nature 
494:155
-156. Chen, H., R.H.L. 
Chiang, and V.C. Storey. 2012. Business intelligence 
and analytics: From big data to 
big impact. 
MIS Quarterly 
36(4):1165
-1188. Chin, J.
, and L. Lin. 2017. China
™s all
-seeing surveillance state is reading its citizens™ faces
. Wall Street 
Journal
, June 26
. https://www.wsj.com/articles/the
-all
-seeing
-surveillance
-state
-feared
-in-the
-west
-is-a-reality
-in-china
-1498493
020. Codella, N.C.F., Q.B. Nguyen, S. Pankanti, D. Gutman, B. Helba, A.
 Halpern, and J.R. Smith. 2017. 
Deep learning ensembles for melanoma recognition in dermoscopy images. 
IBM Journal of 
Research and Development
 61(4)
:5.1
-5.15. Columbus, L. 2017. IBM 
pre
dicts demand for data scientists will soar 28% by 
2020. Forbes
, May 
13. CRA (Computing Research Association
). 2016. 
Computing Research and the Emerging Field of Data 
Science. 
https://cra.org/wp
-content/uploads/2016/10/Computing
-Research
-and
-the
-Emerging
-Field
-of-Data
-Science.pdf
. Danyllo, W.A., V.B. Alisson, N.D. Alexandre, LM.J. Moacir, B.P. Jansepetrus, and R.F. Oliveira.
 2013. 
ﬁIdentifying Relevant Users and Groups in the Context of Credit Analysis Based on Data from 
                                                                                                                                                                            https://dssg.uchicago.edu/2015/09/18/an
-ethical
-checklist
-for
-data
-science/, http://thedataist.com/a
-proposal
-for
-data
-science
-ethics/, https://
www.accenture.com/t20160629T012639Z__w__/us
-en/_acnmedia/PDF
-24/Accenture
-Universal
-Principles
-Data
-Ethics.pdf, accessed January 31, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    2-17  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Twitter.
ﬂ Paper presented at the 2013 IEEE Third International Conference on Cloud and Green 
Computing, September/October, Karlsruhe, Germany.
 De Veaux, R., M. Agarw
al, M. Averett, B.S. Baumer, A. Bray, T.C. Bressoud, L. Bryant, et al. 2017. 
Curriculum 
guidelines for 
undergraduate 
programs in 
data 
science. 
Annual Review of Statistics 
and Its 
Applications
 4:2.1
-2.6. Donoho, D. 2017. 50 years of data science. 
Journal of
 Computational and Graphical Statistics
 26(4):
745
-766. Ernst and 
Young
. 2017. ﬁData and Advanced Analytics: High Stakes, High Rewards.
ﬂ Forbes Insights
, February. 
https://www.forbes.com/forbesinsights/ey_data_analytics_2017/. Accessed February 
13, 2018. Hardin, J.S., and N.J. Horton. 2017. Ensuring that mathematics is relevant in a world of data science. 
Notices of the AMS 
64(9):986
-990. https://www.ams.org/publications/journals/notices/201709/rnoti
-p986.pdf. Hvistendahl, M. 2016. Can 
ﬁpredictive policing
ﬂ prevent crime before it happens?
 Science, 
October 5.
 http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/09/can
-predictive
-policing
-prevent
-crime
-it
-happens.
 IEEE (
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
). 2017. 
ﬁIEEE Code of Ethics.
ﬂ  https://www.ieee.org/abou
t/corporate/governance/p7
-8.html. Accessed February 12, 2018.
 Jordan, M. 2013. On statistics, computation and scalability. 
Bernoulli
 19(4):1378
-1390. Kitchin, R. 2014. The real
-time city? Big data and smart urbanism. 
GeoJournal
 79:1
-14. Miller, S., and D. 
Hughes. 2017. 
The Quant Crunch: How the Demands for Data Science Skills 
Is Disrupting the Job Market. 
https://www
-01.ibm.com/common/ssi/cgi
-bin/ssialias?htmlfid=IML14576USEN&. Accessed June 21, 2017.
 NRC (National Research Council). 2013. 
Frontiers in Mass
ive Data Analysis
. Washington, D
.C.: The 
National Academies Press. 
 NRC. 2014. 
Training Students to Extract Value from Big Data
: Summary of a Workshop
. Washington, 
D.C.: The National Academies Press.
 Pratt, M.K. 2016. Big 
data™s big role in humanitarian 
aid
. Computer World
, February 8. 
http://www.computerworld.com/article/3027117/big
-data/big
-datas
-big
-role
-in-humanitarian
-aid.html. Accessed June 21, 2017.
 UC Santa Cruz
 (University of California, Santa Cruz)
. 2018. ﬁProgram Learning Outcomes: Programs, 
Curriculum Alignment, 
and 
Assessment Plans. Jack Baskin School of Engineering.
ﬂ https://www.soe.ucsc.edu/departments/computer
-science/program
-learning
-outcomes
. Accessed 
January 18, 2018.
 Wing, J.M. 2006. Computational thinking. 
Communications of the ACM
 49(3):33
-35. Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
       3 Data Science Education
  Data science educational opportunities for students are rapidly growing. Universities, colleges, 
community colleges, and other organizations are starting to offer a range of programs for students with 
different interests and backgrounds. This chapter provi
des an overview of the current landscape of classes 
and programs and identifies some of the key challenges facing those who 
aim 
to develop a 
data science 
program.
    UNDERGRADUATE MODALI
TIES
  Undergraduate data science education is currently offered in man
y forms, and this variability is 
expected to continue in the near future. 
Common modalities include
 the following: 
   Introductory exposure to data science, through a single inspirational course
 that could satisfy 
a general education requirement; 
  Major in 
data science, including advanced skills, as primary field of study;
  Minor or track in data science, where intermediate skills are connected to major field of 
study;
  Two
-year 
degrees and certificates
;  Other c
ertificates; 
  Massive open online courses 
(MOOCs), which can engage large numbers of students at a 
variety of levels; and
  Summer programs and boot camps, which can serve to supplement academic or on
-the
-job 
training.
  As academic institutions add courses and programming around undergraduate data 
science, they will
 need 
to decide what modalities are
 institutionally appropriate, considering many factors such as student 
demand, faculty and institutional strengths and resources, and curricular fit. These choices may also be 
influenced 
by the existence
 of graduate programs in data science at the institution. Each of these 
modalities
Šwith its strengths, limitations, and possible areas for improvement
Šis 
discussed in more 
detail in the following sections. 
    Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  Introductory Exposure to Data Science
  Several
 4-year and, increasingly, 2
-year academic institutions have some type of introductory 
data science course or 
sequence 
to educate students, and many more institutions will likely develop these 
courses in years to come, especially as degree programs are dev
eloped for students. These 
stand
-alone
 courses and 
sequences 
provide interested students with an introduction to data science, attract students to 
data science majors or minors (if applicable), and broadly prepare students for an increasingly data
-driven 
world.
 Some institutions are implementing a general education offering or requirement in data science, 
which may be taught by multiple departments and offered via semester
-long courses, modules, virtual 
sessions, self
-guided instruction, or MOOCs. This flex
ibility ensures that data science may be integrated 
into other programs of study. Other institutions are providing introductory courses to meet the demands of 
interested students and to better prepare them to live and work in a world in which it is essenti
al to know 
how to engage with data critically and carefully. Transferable data science skills include descriptive 
statistics, visualization, sampling, programming, 
managing 
databases, inference, and business analytics. 
Students from various disciplines see
m eager to enroll in data science courses in part because the content 
may add value to their degree
s.  The following are a few examples of institutions that provide an introductory data science 
experience
:    The University of California, Berkeley, a public
 research university, offers an introductory 
data science course, Data 8: Foundations of Data Science.
1 This semester course is open to all 
students, regardless of educational backgrounds or majors, and there are no prerequisites
 to 
enroll
, beyond those re
quired for entry to the university. The course is cross
-listed in the 
Department of Computer Science, the Department of Statistics, and the School of Information 
and is taught by an interdisciplinary team of faculty. Reflecting the level of student interes
t, it 
has grown from a pilot of less than 100 students in Fall 2015 to over 1,100 in Spring 2018, 
drawing from over 70 different majors
 (UC Berkeley, 2018)
. Each term, about a dozen wide
-ranging 
ﬁconnector courses
ﬂ are offered concurrently with the 
introdu
ctory 
course to connect 
it with areas of student interest, such as legal studies, cognitive neuroscience, geography, 
history, civil engineering, immunology, demography, psychology, business
, and others.
2 To 
further increase accessibility, the entire course
 experience is through Python notebooks in the 
cloud, so students need only a
 web
 browser to participate fully. 
  Amherst College, a private liberal arts college in Massachusetts, also offers an introductory 
data science course through its 
Mathematics and S
tatistics 
Department
, STAT
-231: Data 
Science.
3 The course 
ﬁprovides a practical foundation for students to think with data by 
participating in the entire data analysis cycle. Students will generate statistical questions and 
then address them through data a
cquisition, cleaning, transforming, modeling, and 
interpretation
 . . . [and will use and apply] tools for data management and wrangling that are 
                                                      1 The website for Data 8: Foundations of Data Science is http://data8.org, accessed January 25, 2018.
 2 The website f
or the UC Berkeley connector courses is https://data.berkeley.edu/education/connectors, 
accessed February 12, 2018.
 3 The website for STAT
-231 is 
https://www.amherst.edu/academiclife/departments/courses/1718F/STAT/STAT
-231-1718F, accessed January 
25, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-3  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  common in data science .
 . . to real
-world applications
ﬂ (Amherst College, 2017). The course 
has a prerequisite
 of some background in statistics and computer science. 
  Carnegie Mellon University
, a private research university in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
offers 
Reasoning with Data, a first course in statistics and data science focusing on concepts, 
interpretation, 
and communication
. It is part of the required general education curriculum for 
all students in the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences. Students use an 
interactive platform that allows for analysis without using a specific programming langua
ge. 
The coursework includes 
several
 student
-driven data analysis projects.
4   The University of Washington
, a public research university in Seattle, 
offers
 Introduction to 
Data Science
, which
 is cross
-listed in the Department of Statistics, the Department of 
Computer Science and Engineering, and the Information School.
5 It uses the interactive 
textbook 
Computational and Inferential Thinking: The Foundations of Data Science
 (Adhikari and DeNero
, 2018) 
and the Python
-based notebook environment of the University 
of California, Berkeley
, course Data 8: Foundations of Data Science. Introduction to Data 
Science requires only precalculus as a prerequisite, and it addresses data collection and 
manageme
nt, summary and visualization of data, basic statistical inference, and machine 
learning.
  Winona State University, a public 
university 
in Minnesota, offers an introductory data 
science course, DSCI 210: Data Science, that allows students to explore methods
 and 
techniques commonly used by data scientists. Participants have an opportunity to learn about 
data management, preparation, analysis, visualization, and modeling as well as to complete a 
data science project. Students are required to complete an introd
uctory computing course as a 
prerequisite to enrolling in this class. DSCI 210 serves as an introduction to data science for 
nonmajors, but it also counts toward the requirements for Winona State
™s B.S. in data 
science.
6   The computer science department at
 St. Olaf College, a private liberal arts college in 
Northfield, Minnesota, hosts the introductory course CSCI 125: Computer Science for 
Scientists and Mathematicians.
7 In this course, students discuss how to handle, visualize, find 
patterns in, and commun
icate about data. Students have the opportunity to learn how to use 
common data science tools (e.g., Python and R) while working collaboratively on real
-world 
problems. To enroll in the course, students need to have previous coursework in calculus.
  Montgom
ery College, a public 2
-year college with campuses across Maryland, offers DATA 
101: Introduction to Data Science.
8 Students are required to have taken one of four approved 
statistics courses as a prerequisite to enroll in this course. Throughout the cours
e, students 
                                                      4 To view a sample syllabus from Reasoning with Data, see 
http://www.stat.cmu.edu/~rnugent/PUBLIC/teaching/200syllabus.pdf.
 5 To view a sample syllabus from Introduction to Data Science, see 
https://wstuetzle.github.io/IDS
-syllabus
-11-14-2017.html
, accessed February 20, 2018.
 6 The website for DSCI 210 and the B.S. in data science at Winona State is 
https://catalog.winona.edu/preview_program.php?catoid=10&poid=2474&returnto=958, ac
cessed February 1, 
2018. 7 The website for St. Olaf College™s computer science department is http://catalog.stolaf.edu/academic
-programs/computer
-science/, accessed February 1, 2018.
 8 The website for DATA 101 is 
http://catalog.montgomerycollege.edu/previe
w_course_nopop.php?catoid=8&coid=11413, accessed February 1, 
2018. Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-4  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  explore methods to collect, organize, manage, examine, prepare, analyze, and visualize data. 
This introductory course can also be used to satisfy one of the requirements for Montgomery 
College
™s Data Science Certificate, which adds courses on w
riting and communicating about 
data and using statistical methods, as well as a capstone experience. 
  Introductory data science experiences can also attract students to other data science programs 
offered by the institution, such as majors, minors, tracks
, and certificates. These students include 
members of other disciplines, such as the humanities, social sciences, and the arts, as well as members of 
populations underrepresented in 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
 fields. Introductory 
dat
a science courses offer a low
-stakes opportunity (i.e., without barriers related to previous training or 
expertise) to investigate the field of data science and to be exposed to the skills and experiences that 
would be applicable to a wide range of future 
careers. Introductory courses serve as a possible gateway to 
degrees or specializations in data science
, as they motivate students to see the valuable role that data 
science expertise will play in the future workforce. 
 Developing, implementing, and delive
ring an introductory data science course is not without its 
challenges, however. For example, while the prospect of offering introductory courses without 
prerequisites is most attractive for the purposes of broadening participation in data science, 
unrestr
icted
 enrollment 
must be reconcil
ed with
 classroom capacit
y and instructor availabilit
y. Content is also likely 
to vary by course, owing to instructor expertise and interest and by student knowledge; this variability 
may create issues for students in terms
 of consistent preparation for future courses. These issues also 
confront developers of upper
-level elective courses or of courses relating to a data science major, as it 
could be difficult to prepare content and develop learning outcomes for a population 
of students with such 
vari
ed levels of knowledge and experience. 
 Introductory data science courses will continue to evolve and improve over time with innovative 
curriculum development that emphasizes real
-world experiences and connections, ongoing faculty 
development opportunities, and cross
-disciplinary collaboration a
mong a wider spectrum of disciplines. 
   Major in Data Science
  Data science majors are emerging across academic institutions and will continue to do so in years 
to come. Similar to data science minors and introductory data science experiences, there is 
significant 
variation in program structure, goals
, and content in these majors as well. Some data science majors are 
emerging as independent programs that interface with specific domain areas
, while others are emerging as 
specializations within a given dom
ain area.
 The most common features of current data science 
majors 
include required courses in 
math
ematics
, statistics, and computer science. Within math
ematics
 departments, common requirements 
include linear algebra, calculus, and discrete structures. The 
most common courses in statistics include 
introductory
-level courses, probability, and various kinds of applied statistics. Computer science courses 
are typically included in the curriculum for data science majors, with the most common topics including 
dat
abase systems, programming, data structures, algorithms, and machine learning. Some majors have 
courses listed as 
ﬁdata science,
ﬂ including cross
-listed courses with statistics and computer science, while 
other data science majors draw entirely upon course
s from connected departments. Common topics taught 
under the 
ﬁdata science
ﬂ listing include advanced data analytics, big data, data mining, simulation 
modeling, and computational thinking. Many data science majors include required or elective courses 
from 
outside the core departments
Šcommonly economics, business, psychology, biology, and geography 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-5  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  or geosciences. Many data science 
majors 
also require a hands
-on practicum or capstone course to help 
reinforce skills.
 Currently, many 4
-year majors fall into 
one of 
three categories: 
(1) 
data science majors housed 
within a college or school of business 
(i.e., 
programs in business analytics
, which usually involve more 
marketing and finance classes and fewer computational and mathematics courses
); 
(2) 
data 
science/
analytics 
majors 
housed in a mathematics 
or statistics 
department (i.e., above
-average 
mathematics 
or statistics 
requirements with fewer 
ﬁcore
ﬂ social science or computational courses
); 
and 
(3) 
data science programs housed in a computer science department as either a 
stand
-alone
 major or as a 
concentration to information technology (i.e., more computational courses, but potentially fewer 
ﬁcore
ﬂ mathematics courses). Variations in courses offered 
and required within similar
ly 
labeled majors at 
different institutions are notable. A few 4
-year undergraduate data science 
majors 
are hybrids of these 
three models, being administered jointly by multiple departments. The following list includes a variety 
of 
approaches to data science majors:
   The University of Michigan, a public 
research 
university
 in Ann Arbor
, launched a major in 
data science in Fall 2015. This major is a joint program offered by two departments in two 
different colleges: computer scienc
e in the College of Engineering and statistics in the 
College of Literature, Sciences, and the Arts (LSA).
9 The 
major 
requirements consist of a 
core of five courses: discrete math
ematics
, programming, data structures, probability and 
statistics, and applie
d regression. In addition to satisfying the core requirements, 
students 
select at least one course from each of three areas: machine learning, data management, and 
data science applications. Engineering students majoring in data science
 also
 take a compute
r professionalism course. Both LSA and engineering data science majors participate in a 
capstone experience, typically during their senior year.
  Smith College, a private liberal arts institution in Northampton, Massachusetts, began 
offering a major in stat
istical and data sciences in Fall 2017.
10 Interestingly, the program
 is 
not hosted 
by one campus department; instead, it draws on faculty and 
disciplines 
from across 
the 
college
. The major requires 10 courses, including 
courses 
in statistics, computer science, 
data science, communication, and a domain area. 
  Virginia Tech, a public 
research and land
-grant 
university in Blacksburg, offers a major in 
computational modeling and data analytics 
in its College of Science.
11 The major in
cludes 
courses in mathematics, statistics, computer science, and data science, as well as a capstone 
experience. 
  The University of California, San Diego, a public 
research 
university, launched a B.S. in data 
science in Fall 2017 through its departments of
 cognitive science, computer science and 
engineering, and mathematics.
12 The major consists of a technical lower division comprising 
mathematics (16 units), computer science and engineering (8 units), natural sciences (12 units 
                                                      9 The websites for the joint program at the University of Michigan are 
https://www.eecs.umich.edu/eecs/undergraduate/data
-science/ and https://lsa.umich.edu/stats/undergraduate
-students/und
ergraduate
-programs/majordatascience.html, accessed February 12, 2018.
 10 The website for the Smith College major in statistical and data sciences is 
https://www.smith.edu/statistics/about.php, accessed January 25, 2018.
 11 The website for the Virginia Tech 
major in computational modeling and data analytics is 
https://www.ais.science.vt.edu/programs/cmda.html, accessed January 25, 2018.
 12 The website for the University of California, San Diego, data science major is http://dsc.ucsd.edu, accessed 
January 25, 2
018. Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-6  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  of biology, chemistry, and ph
ysics), and five specific data science courses. The upper division 
has 32 units of core mathematics, computer science, and data science; 20 units of elective 
computer science and mathematics; and a senior project.
13 On 
completion of the major, 
students need
 to be 
ﬁversed in predictive modeling, data analysis and computational 
techniques
 . . . 
[and have developed] undergraduate
-level expertise in a specific subject area 
outside of data science
ﬂ (UC San Diego, 2017). 
  At the University of Rochester, a private 
university in New York
 state
, the Goergen Institute 
for Data Science offers a major in data science in the form of either a B.A. or a B.S.
14 While 
this major includes studies in computer science and statistics, as well as a capstone 
experience, it also allo
ws students to take upper
-level coursework in a focused domain area 
such as business, environmental science, biology, or political science, for example. 
  The Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a private 
research 
university
 in Cambridge
, introduced a 
B.S. in 
computer 
science, 
economics, and 
data 
science. It seeks to equip students 
with a foundational knowledge of economic analysis, computing, optimization, and data 
science, as well as hands
-on experience with empirical analysis of economic data to identi
fy, 
analyze, and solve real
-world challenges in real and virtual settings.
15 Required courses are 
drawn from lists of 
pre
existing courses in mathematics, electrical engineering and computer 
science, and economics covering linear algebra, discrete mathematic
s, probability and 
statistics, computation and algorithms, data science, intermediate economics, elective subjects 
from data science and economics theory, and communications practice.
  The University of California, Irvine
, a public research university, hous
es a B.S. in
 data 
science 
in its
 Statistics Department
, within the Bren School of Information and Computer 
Sciences. It consists of 16 lower division quarter courses in computer science (9 courses), 
mathematics (4 courses), and statistics (3 courses). Two 
of the three statistics courses are 
specifically related to data science; the rest are fairly standard statistics courses. The upper 
division has seven statistics courses, three computer science (including machine learning) 
courses, one writing course, one
 visualization course, three elective courses from a 
mathematics/computer science/information list, and a two
-quarter capstone.
16   The New York University School of Professional Studies offers a B.S. in applied data 
analytics and visualization. Its core cur
riculum consists of general education courses (e.g., 
writing, critical thinking, quantitative reasoning, scientific issues, and history, art, and 
culture) and liberal arts electives, with entirely prescribed major requirements: mathematics 
(i.e., precalcul
us, calculus, and linear algebra), statistics, computer science (i.e., 
fundamentals, database design, networking, and systems analysis), eight specific data science 
                                                      13 The website describing the course requirements for the B.S. in data science is http://dsc.ucsd.edu/node/7
, accessed February 12, 2018.
  14 The website for the Goergen Institute for Data Scienc
e is 
http://www.sas.rochester.edu/dsc/undergraduate/index.html, accessed January 25, 2018.
 15 The website for the MIT B.S. in computer science, economics, and data science is 
https://www.eecs.mit.edu/academics
-admissions/undergraduate
-programs/6
-14-computer
-science
-economics
-and
-data
-science, accessed February 20, 2018.
 16 The website for the University of California, Irvine, data science degree is 
http://www.ics.uci.edu/ugrad/degrees/degree_datascience.php
, accessed February 20, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-7  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  and visualization courses, three electives in applied analytics and visualization, and a 
graduation project.
17  Challenges in forming a major program include constructing gateways from established lower 
division courses to the advanced courses in the major, forming a set of upper division courses that covers 
the essentials of data science without essentially forming
 a double or triple major, incorporating a domain 
of application, addressing ethical issues and social implications, and considering a hands
-on practicum or 
capstone integrative experience. 
Pre
existing courses from computer science, statistics, applied 
mat
hematics, operations, and information management typically cover essential material but do so in the 
context of those majors. Forming new courses that integrate segments of several such courses may 
streamline the data science major but 
may 
overlap
 to 
some 
extent 
with existing course offerings
. Thus
, it 
is particularly important that the unique data science character be brought out when forming such 
amalgams.
 Several institutions have developed courses that address these challenges in various ways. For 
examp
le, Carnegie Mellon University
™s statistics program builds on its introductory Reasoning with Data 
course with Methods for Statistics and Data Science.
 It focuses on regression and 
nonparametric methods, 
while requiring the use of R Markdown
 and 
GitHub in 
structured coding templates. Students design data 
analysis projects and write reports. Carnegie Mellon University
™s computer science program offers an 
independent 
course, 
Practical Data Science
,18 focused on data collection and processing, data 
visualizatio
n and presentation, statistical model building using machine learning, and big data techniques 
for scaling these methods.
 Another example is from the University of California, Berkeley, which introduced 
the
 junior
-level Principles and Techniques of Data Sc
ience
,19 which
 seeks to provide a second integrated experience 
of computational and inferential thinking 
that 
build
s on the introductory foundation
al courses and 
adds 
mathematics background. The course is oriented around the data science life cycle: 
question, data 
collection/cleaning, exploratory analysis and visualization, inference and prediction, and decision making. 
Rather than relying on the tool
- and environment
-agnostic pedagogy at the introductory level, this more 
advanced course provides dire
ct exposure to the state of data science technology. It also seeks to provide 
background necessary for students to take advanced computer science and statistics courses that are 
particularly relevant to data science, without all of the conventional prerequ
isites of those majors. Topics 
include languages for transforming, querying, and analyzing data; algorithms for machine learning 
methods including regression, classification, and clustering; principles behind creating informative data 
visualizations; stati
stical concepts of measurement error and prediction; and techniques for scalable data 
processing.
   Minor or Track in Data Science
  For those undergraduate students who are not interested in or do not have the time to complete a 
4-year 
major 
in data scienc
e, a minor or track in data science offers a useful alternative for introductory 
                                                      17 The curriculum for th
e New York University B.S. in applied data analytics and visualization can be found at 
http://www.sps.nyu.edu/academics/departments/mcghee/undergraduate/bachelors/bs
-applied
-data
-analytics
-and
-visualization/core
-major
-curriculum.html, accessed February 12,
 2018.
 18 The website for Practical Data Science is http://www.datasciencecourse.org/, accessed February 20, 2018.
 19 The website for Principles and Techniques of Data Science is http://www.ds100.org/, accessed February 20, 
2018. Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-8  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  skill development. This may be a good approach for students in other domain
-specific programs who 
want to gain data science expertise while remaining firmly in their chosen do
main. In such programs
, students are exposed to data science concepts, tools, and techniques that are related to their chosen 
discipline. A number of academic institutions offer minors or tracks in data science; 
the following 
is only 
a small selection of t
hese programs:
   The Georgia Institute of Technology, a public 
research university
 in Atlanta, offers a minor in 
computational data analysis through its College of Computing.
20 Required courses include 
Introduction to Computing for Data Analysis, Data and Vi
sual Analytics, an approved 
introductory probability and statistics course, an approved computational methods course, 
and an approved computational data analysis elective.
  The University of Massachusetts Amherst, a public 
research university
, offers a B.A.
 track in 
informatics in data science through its College of Information and Computer Sciences.
21 Required courses include Mathematical Foundations of Informatics, an approved introductory 
statistics course, Problem Solving with Computers, Networked World, 
Human Computer 
Interaction, Web Programming, Databases, Informatics, Using Data Structures, Data Science, 
and approved electives in statistics, data science, social science, and/or business.
  The University of Washington offers a Data Science Option
22 within
 several undergraduate 
programs, where each department may specialize its option within a common template. An 
option includes one course each in programming, machine learning, and societal implications 
of data science, as well as a course in two of three a
reas: data management, data visualization 
and communication, and advanced statistics and probability. Optionally, it may require 
Introduction to Data Science. 
  Westminster College, a private liberal arts institution in Salt Lake City, Utah, offers a data 
science minor out of its 
Data Science D
epartment.
23 Required courses include Linear 
Algebra, Introduction to Statistics, either Introduction to Computer Science or Scientific 
Computing, Explorations in Data Science, two approved electives (both from mathemat
ics, 
computer science, or statistics), and a capstone.
  Miami University of Ohio, a public 
research university 
in Hamilton, offers a business 
analytics minor hosted by its business department.
24 Required courses include Business 
Statistics, Applied Regressio
n and Analysis in Business, IT and the Intelligent Enterprise, 
Database Systems and Data Warehousing, Business Intelligence and Data Visualization, and 
two approved electives from data science, social science, and/or statistics.
                                                       20 The website for the Georgi
a Tech minor in computational data analysis is 
https://www.cc.gatech.edu/content/minor
-computational
-data
-analysis, accessed January 25, 2018.
 21 The website for the University of Massachusetts Amherst track in informatics is 
https://www.cics.umass.edu/informatics, accessed January 25, 2018.
 22 The website for the Data Science Option is https://www.cs.washington.edu/academics/ugrad/courses/data
-scie
nce, accessed February 20, 2018.
 23 The website for the Westminster College data science minor is 
https://catalog.westminstercollege.edu/undergraduate2016
-2017/data
-science
-data/, accessed January 25, 2018.
 24 The website for the Miami University of Ohio bus
iness analytics minor is 
https://miamioh.edu/fsb/academics/isa/academics/minors/business
-analytics/index.html, accessed January 25, 
2018. Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-9  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
   The Rose
-Hulman Institute o
f Technology, a private 
college 
in Terre Haute, Indiana, offers a 
multidisciplinary minor in data science.
25 Required courses include an approved introductory 
statistics course, Introduction to Software Development, Object
-Oriented Software 
Development, and four electives from an approved list of statistics, computer science, and 
data science courses.
  Louisiana 
Tech University, a public 
research university 
in Ruston, offers a B.S. track in 
computer science, cloud computing, and big data through its College of Engineering and 
Science.
26 Required courses include Calculus, Discrete Mathematics, Statistical Methods, 
Science of Computing, Systems Programming, Digital Design, Operating Systems, Theory of 
Computing, Data Structures, Advanced Data Structures and Algorithms, Programming 
Languages, Computer Architecture, Database Management Systems, Software Design and 
Engin
eering, Distributed and Cloud Computing, Computer Networks or Artificial 
Intelligence, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 
and 
Advanced Data Mining, Fusion, 
and Application, 
plus 
approved electives in computer science and a capstone course.
  Minors or tra
cks in data science give students a wider knowledge base, thus making them more 
marketable candidates for the future workforce
Šnot only do these students have expertise in a particular 
domain area, but they also have valuable data science skills and experi
ence that can be applicable to a 
variety of emerging career paths. Although the minor or track in data science is an attractive option for 
certain populations of students, such programs may be limited by time and space in their ability to help 
students dev
elop data science foundations and skills in 
sufficient
 depth. 
   Two
-Year 
Degrees and Certificates
  Many 2
-year institutions are starting data science programs using a wide variety of educational 
approaches, ranging from a few courses leading to a certific
ate to a full associate
™s degree requiring 
2 years of study. The blend among statistics, computer science, and applications is highly variable 
depending on the program. These programs will often simultaneously serve to (1) be an entry point to 
inspire and 
attract a wide variety of student populations to data science; (2) permit existing members of 
the workforce to retrain or obtain specific new skill
 sets to complement their education and experience; 
(3) create mechanisms by which students can certify speci
fic or general skill sets with certificates or 
associate
™s degrees; (4) build foundational, translational, ethical, and professional skills to support 
matriculation into 4
-year data science programs; and (5) provide opportunities for advanced high school 
students to begin data science training early and often. The majority of these purposes support 
undergraduate education objectives, while also targeting the specific needs of industry. For example, a 
data management program may focus largely on data systems
, collection, and curation; a data analytics 
program may focus more on algorithms, statistics, and machine learning; and a business analytics 
program may focus on business and supply chain issues. Currently, most programs offer courses on data 
visualizatio
n, but relatively few programs offer courses on writing about data (communication in data 
science). A few of these programs are 
online only
, while most have some online component. More than 
                                                      25 The website for the Rose
-Hulman multidisciplinary data science minor is https://www.rose
-hulman.edu/academics/course
-catalog/current/special
-programs.html#multi
-disc
-minor
-data
-science, accessed 
January 25, 2018.
 26 The website for the Louisiana Tech track in computer science, cloud computing, and big data is 
http://catalog.latech.edu/preview_program.php?catoid=3&poid=91
3, accessed January 25, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-10  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  half of the 
2-year institutions
 on the list studied have their own
 unit of data science offering the data 
science associate
™s degree or certificate, while programs that are hosted by other departments are typically 
in mathematics, business, or computer information systems. Some programs focus on training to acquire 
techn
ical skills for industry and research through data science certificates (
e.g., 
Montgomery College,
27 Normandale Community College,
28 Washtenaw Community College
29). Others offer 2
-year associate
™s degree programs in data science that prepare students to 
transfer into 4
-year programs. Two examples of 
the latter are the following:
   The Community College of Allegheny County, with multiple Pennsylvania campuses, offers 
an associate
™s degree in data analytics technology
30 and 
prepares students to transfer to a 
4-year institution with a data analytics bachelor
™s degree program 
or pursue employment 
in a 
variety of data science roles
. Upon completion of their coursework
, students need to be able 
to 
ﬁidentify and define data challenges in a variety of industries, co
llect and organize 
information from many sources, discover patterns and relationships in large data sets 
applying statistical tools, resolve business questions and make recommendations through data 
mining techniques, and communicate tactical and strategic 
objectives utilizing data 
visualization techniques
ﬂ (CCA
C, 2018).
   Nashua Community College, located in New Hampshire, offers an associate
™s degree in 
foundations of data analytics.
31 This degree program is also designed for students who 
want 
to pursue a ba
chelor
™s degree in data analytics at a 4
-year institution. Upon completion of this 
degree
, students are expected to be able to 
ﬁdemonstrate technical proficiency and effective 
problem
-solving
 ability in completing mathematical processes; identify the benef
its of 
quality, timeliness, and continuous improvement in regards to software development; apply 
critical
-thinking skills to identify, analyze, and solve problems; apply mathematical concepts 
to other disciplines including business, economics, social scien
ces, and the natural sciences; 
demonstrate the ability to follow a systematic progression of software development and 
refinement when designing and developing software for a project; participate effectively as a 
member of a team; articulate an understandin
g of the need for lifelong learning; demonstrate 
an understanding of diversity through interaction with project teammates; and develop 
software programs that reflect the application of up
-to-date tools and techniques of the 
discipline
ﬂ (Nashua Community College, 2018).
   Two
-year institutions throughout the United States
 have created certificate programs in data 
science. For instance, Maryland
™s Montgomery College (2018) has recently built a 2
-year certificate 
program around courses in 
mathematics and statistics; fundamental
s of
 coding, writing, and 
                                                      27 The website for the Montgomery College data science certificate is 
https://cms.montgomerycollege.edu/datascience/, accessed February 12, 2018.
 28 The website for the Normandale Community College certificate in data analysis is 
http://www.normandale.edu/continuing
-education/data
-analysis, accessed February 12, 2018.
 29 The website for the Washtenaw Community College certificate in applied data scienc
e is 
http://www.wccnet.edu/academics/programs/view/program/CTADS/, accessed February 12, 2018.
 30 The website for the Community College of Allegheny County data analytics technology program is 
https://www.ccac.edu/Data_Analytics_Technology.aspx, accessed Fe
bruary 1, 2018.
 31 The website for the Nashua Community College foundations of data analytics program is 
http://www.nashuacc.edu/academics/associate
-degrees/stem
-and
-advanced
-manufacturing/398
-foundations
-in-data
-analytics, accessed February 1, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-11  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  communication in data science; and a capstone project applying Cross
-Industry Standard Process 
for 
Data 
Mining methodology to create 
ﬁoriginal yet reproducible analyses in a variety of format
s for the general 
public and for members of the data science community.
ﬂ Outcomes from this program include a student™s 
ability to do the following:
   Assess different analysis and data management techniques and justify the selection of a 
particular model o
r technique for a given task,
  Execute analysis of large and disparate data sets and construct models necessary for these 
analyses,
  Summarize findings of complex analyses in a concise way for a target audience using both 
graphics and statistical measures, a
nd  Demonstrate competency with programming languages and environments for data analysis 
(Montgomery College, 2018). 
  Although 2
-year institutions confront many of the same obstacles in curricular and programmatic 
development as 4
-year institutions, they also face many unique challenges. Administrators and faculty 
need to consider how best to develop content that will sat
isfy the needs of both students who may be 
interested in enrolling in 
only 
one course and those who plan to embark on a certificate program or an 
entire degree program. Furthermore, 2
-year curricula are expected to engage students who seek an 
associate
™s degree and specific workforce training as well as students who need to develop a broader skill 
set and knowledge base in order to transfer to a 
4-year 
bachelor
™s degree program. Two
-year college 
faculty and administration also have to be continuously aware 
of and responsive to the demands of the 
local workforce 
to be prepared to upskill both their transient students and established professionals as 
efficiently and as appropriately as possible. 
   Other 
Certificates
  Other c
ertificates in data science are 
proliferating across academic institutions and industry, 
including at the undergraduate level (e.g., the University of Georgia Applied Data Science Certificate 
Program;
32 the Temple University C
ertificate in Data Science: Computational Analytics;
33 the Unive
rsity 
of Missouri,
 St. Louis, C
ertificate i
n Data S
cience;
34 the 
Johnson County Community College
 Data 
Analytics Certificate;
35 and the Great Bay Community College Certificate in 
Practical Data Science
36);                                                       32 The 
website for the University of Georgia Applied Data Science Certificate Program is 
https://csci.franklin.uga.edu/certificate
-applied
-data
-science, accessed February 6, 2018.
 33 The website for the Temple University Certificate in Data Science: Computational 
Analytics is 
http://bulletin.temple.edu/undergraduate/science
-technology/computer
-information
-science/data
-science
-computational
-analytics
-certificate/, accessed February 6, 2018.
 34 The website
 for the University of Missouri, St. Louis, Certificate in Data
 Science is 
https://www.umsl.edu/mathcs/undergraduate
-studies/certificatedatascience.html, accessed February 6, 2018.
 35 The website for the Johnson County Community College Data Analytics Certificate is 
http://catalog.jccc.edu/degreecertificates/computerin
formationsystems/dataanalyticscert/, accessed February 6, 
2018. 36 The website for the Great Bay Community College 
Certificate in 
Practical Data Science is 
http://greatbay.edu/courses/certificate
-programs/data
-practical
-data
-science, accessed February 12, 2
018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-12  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  the graduate level (e.g., Georgetown University™s cer
tificate in data science,
37 the University of Michigan 
certificate in data science,
38 and others
39); 
and the executive level (e.g., Columbia University
40 and 
Kellogg Executive Education at Northwestern University
41). Online certificate options are also becoming
 common (e.g., edX MOOC
42 and Coursera
43) and offer an accessible alternative to in
-person learning. 
(MOOCs are discussed more in the next section.)
 While certificate programs can be a valuable resource in upskilling current members of the 
workforce and supp
lementing other existing educational modalities, the program offerings are varied and 
often difficult to compare. Some certificates are granted after the successful completion of a single 
course, while others require the completion of a 
multi
course series.
 The lack of standardization can make 
it challenging for employers and prospective students to assess what the certificates represent and how 
they may fit within
 their
 data science education and training goals.
   Massive Open Online Courses
  Several data science courses and programs are burgeoning as online courses or MOOCs. These 
offerings come in many forms, including 
stand
-alone
 courses and series of multiple linked courses. Some 
MOOCs can provide certificates to demonstrate completion of a
 course or series. 
 Coursera,
44 edX,
45 and others provide offerings in data science. For example, 
data science 
offerings from 
edX 
include
 the following
 programs
:   A Microsoft Professi
onal Program in Data Science 
built on nine courses, starting from Excel, 
expanding to R and Python, and leading into a project.
46                                                        37 The website for the Georgetown University certificate in data science is 
https://scs.georgetown.edu/programs/375/certificate
-in-data
-science/?utm_source=Google&utm_medium=Search&utm_campaign=FY18_Search_Professional_Certificates
&gclid=CjwKCAiAksvTBR
BFEiwADSBZfI934rB_0ubuN0Zzmjr4xGtGmDLbei9zB5L8HN4MiLIzWEZN1B
iKXBoC4ZIQAvD_BwE, accessed February 12, 2018. 
 38 The website for the University of Michigan certificate in data science is http://midas.umich.edu/certificate/, 
accessed February 18, 2018.
 39 For a
n online directory of graduate
-level certificates in data science, see 
http://www.mastersindatascience.org/schools/certificates/, accessed February 12, 2018.
 40 The website for the Columbia University Data Science Institute is 
https://industry.datascience.c
olumbia.edu/executive
-training, accessed February 12, 2018.
 41 The website for the Kellogg Executive Education programs is 
http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/executive
-education/individual
-programs/executive
-programs/bigdata.aspx, accessed February 12, 201
8. 42 The website for the edX Data Science for Executives program is https://www.edx.org/professional
-certificate/data
-science
-executives, accessed February 12, 2018.
 43 The website for the Coursera Executive Data Science Specialization is 
https://www.course
ra.org/specializations/executive
-data
-science, accessed February 12, 2018.
 44 The website for the Coursera data science offerings is 
https://www.coursera.org/browse/data
-science?languages=en
, accessed February 20, 2018.
 45 The website for the edX data scienc
e offerings is 
https://www.edx.org/course/subject/data
-analysis
-statistics/data
-science
-courses
, accessed February 20, 2018.
 46 The website for the Microsoft Professional Program in Data Science is 
https://www.edx.org/microsoft
-professional
-program
-data
-sci
ence
, accessed February 20, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-13  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
   A MicroMasters in data science by the University of California, San Diego
, consists of four 
courses: Python for Data Science, Statistics and Probability for Data Science using Python, 
Machine Learning 
Fundamentals, and Big Data Analytics using Spark.
47  A MicroMasters in 
big 
data by the University of Adelaide consists of five courses focusing 
on programming, computational thinking, big data fundamentals and analytics, and a 
capstone project.
48  A version of
 the 
University of California, 
Berkeley
, introductory course Data 8: Foundations 
of Data Science is offered as three 5
-week courses forming a professional certificate: 
Computational Thinking with Python, Inferential Thinking by Resampling, and Prediction 
and Machine Learning.
49   Coursera offerin
gs include the following:
   A data 
science 
specialization, created by Johns Hopkins University with industry partnership 
from SwiftKey and Yelp, is made up of 10 courses designed to expose students to the full 
data science life cycle and concludes in a caps
tone project.
50  A specialization in probabilistic graphical models, created by Stanford University, requires a 
total of three 5
-week courses in representation, inference, and learning.
51   A specialization in business statistics and analysis, created by Rice 
University with industry 
partner BaseMetrics, provides an overview of the tools and techniques used by data analysts 
in the business world via four courses and a capstone experience.
52   A specialization in data analysis and interpretation, created by 
Wesleyan University in 
partnership with DRIVENDATA and The Connection, teaches the fundamentals of data 
science through four project
-based courses, using either SAS or Python, and a capstone 
experience.
53   MOOCs can be valuable resources for fast on
-rampin
g, supplementing curriculum, and educating 
the citizen scientist in data science
, albeit with low completion rates
 (Chuang and Ho, 2016)
. They can 
also provide content that can be utilized in traditional classroom settings; however, limitations exist. In 
order for MOOCs to succeed, they need to be organized, cohesive, thorough, and interactive. MOOC 
developers, like any curriculum developers, will also confront the challenge of keeping pace with quickly 
evolving data science topics.
                                                        47 The website for the MicroMasters in data science is 
https://www.edx.org/micromasters/data
-science
, accessed February 20, 2018.
 48 The website for the MicroMasters in big data is 
https://www.edx.org/micromasters/big
-data
, accessed 
February 20, 2018.
 49 The website for the Data 8: Foundations of Data Science MOOC is 
https://www.edx.org/professional
-certificate/berkeleyx
-foundations
-of-data
-science
, accessed February 20, 2018.
 50 The website for the Coursera data science specia
lization is 
https://www.coursera.org/specializations/jhu
-data
-science#about
, accessed February 20, 2018.
 51 The website for the Coursera specialization in probabilistic graphical models is 
https://www.coursera.org/specializations/probabilistic
-graphical
-mod
els, accessed February 14, 2018.
 52 The website for the Coursera specialization in business statistics and analysis is 
https://www.coursera.org/specializations/business
-statistics
-analysis, accessed February 14, 2018.
 53 The website for the Coursera speciali
zation in data analysis and interpretation is 
https://www.coursera.org/specializations/data
-analysis, accessed February 14, 2018,
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-14  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
    Summer Programs and B
oot Camps
  Summer programs and boot camps provide students the opportunity for focused data science 
experiences, which can supplement their formal education and on
-the
-job training. 
   Summer Programs
 Currently, there are relatively few data science
-focused summer programs targeted toward 
undergraduate students
Šfar fewer than those aimed at graduate students
Šbut this is likely to change in 
the future as more undergraduate students are exposed to data sc
ience topics. The majority of these 
programs are organized by 
academic institutions
 and are designed to fast
-track undergraduate students 
into data science by balancing experiential learning, projects with real data, and team building with some 
course inst
ruction. Current programs tend to be small (from 8 to 40 students), which allows many to fully 
fund students through fellowships and scholarships. The programs are of varying durations, ranging from 
1 week to 12 weeks.
 Summer programs are often driven by a
 theme and target specific types of students
Šengineering/mathematics/computer science research
-bound students (
the 
Iowa State University Midwest 
Big Data Summer School
54), underrepresented students from a broad spectrum of majors (
the 
Microsoft 
Research Dat
a Science Summer School in New York City
55), students interested in societal impact (
the 
University of Chicago Data Science for Social Good
56), or students interested in health applications (
the 
University of Michigan Big Data Summer Institute
57). Testimonial
s from students in the longer
-duration 
summer schools indicate that they benefit from the long
-term immersive environment
, where they have a 
chance to develop community, communication, and teamwork. These immersive programs can be life 
changing, altering s
tudents
™ academic and career pathways and
 often
 motivating them to go to graduate 
school.
 Summer programs are an effective mechanism for student on
-ramping that can energize students 
to develop a passion for data science. However, they are currently reachi
ng 
only 
the relatively small 
number of students 
who 
are prepared for an intensive and sometimes stressful, fast
-paced program. By 
their very nature
, these programs work best when the small groups of students are together long enough to 
benefit from the imm
ersive summer school experience, actively collaborating on learning, solving
 problems
, and forming bonds of friendship. Scaling summer programs so that they reach a larger number 
of students faces several challenges. Developing a summer school 
demands 
a considerable amount of 
effort for faculty, requiring careful orchestration of a challenging quick
-delivery curriculum accompanied 
by hands
-on projects and other activities. There is scant availability of grant funding for development of 
the unique, multidisc
iplinary curriculum of data science, and there are not many funding sources for 
scholarships for students in need of financial aid. Furthermore, keeping the student
-to-teacher ratio small 
                                                      54 The website for the Iowa State University Midwest Big Data Summer School is 
http://mbds.cs.iastate.edu/2017/, accessed Febru
ary 12, 2018.
 55 The website for the Microsoft Research Data Science Summer School is https://ds3.research.microsoft.com/, 
accessed February 12, 2018.
 56 The website for the University of Chicago Data Science for Social Good program is 
https://dssg.uchicago.
edu/, accessed February 12, 2018.
 57 The website for the University of Michigan Big Data Summer Institute is https://sph.umich.edu/bdsi/, 
accessed February 12, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-15  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  will require additional resources for faculty and graduate teaching 
assistants that may not be available to 
colleges and universities. There is evidence that programs can be more effective when they include a mix 
of highly motivated students that includes, but is not exclusively, underrepresented minorities or 
economically
 disadvantaged students (Fine and Handelsman, 2010). An additional challenge is 
maintaining a healthy learning environment for students as they struggle to understand concepts in these 
fast
-paced programs. Established academic and industry partnerships on 
data science summer programs 
are rare but would be worthwhile.
   Boot Camps
 Many
 data science boot camps offered today are for
-profit ventures that aim for professional 
development, corporate training, and continuing education (i.e., training and preparati
on of the data 
science workforce). They aim to teach large numbers of students. To do this
, they frequently blend online 
and on
-site learning, with the principal instructors online and local instructors on site to reinforce training. 
The programs last from 1 weekend to 12 weeks and are organized into modules tightly coupled to 
workforce skills g
leaned directly from industry. Many cover advanced topics like deep learning and 
recommender systems. These boot camps often have tracks that distinguish among subspecialties of data 
science, such as data engineering, data analytics, or data science for bu
siness. 
 Boot camps are often run by instructors who are practicing data scientists in industry. They can 
teach students to use a wider range of tools than students may experience in the classroom
, and course 
content can quickly evolve as new tools emerge.
 Current tools include Pandas, BeautifulSoup, Seaborn, 
D3.js, R, and Python; however, data 
management
, visualization, and analysis tools are continuously 
evolving. Boot camp participants may also have the opportunity to explore the data science life cycle 
in 
greater depth with student
-driven projects: students may pose their own questions and collect their own 
data rather than starting projects after data ha
ve already been collected. With their deeper contacts with 
industry, boot camp instructors can offer 
direct links to the broader data science community. Many boot 
camps offer career advising, job placement, and networking opportunities as well.
 Founded in 2013, Metis
58 is a boot camp with locations in New York, California, Illinois, and 
Washington. Metis o
ffers 12
-week boot camps that bridge the gap between industry and academia and 
serve as a complement to other learning mechanisms. Participants learn a combination of theoretical 
concepts and applications including how to ask a solvable question, scope pro
jects, collaborate and 
communicate with multidisciplinary groups, and use emerging tools and technologies. 
 Another example of a data science boot camp is that provided by General Assembly, with 
locations throughout the United States and abroad. Its 12
-wee
k immersive program in data science,
59 described as a 
ﬁcareer accelerator,
ﬂ includes units on Git, UNIX, and relational databases; data analysis 
and Python; machine learning, modeling techniques, and big data; critical thinking and synthesis; and 
visualizat
ion, presentation, and reporting. 
 DataCamp
60 offers a unique boot camp experience in that all of its coursework is provided in an 
online learning environment. Twenty different 
ﬁtracks
ﬂ are offered, depending upon whether the 
participant 
wants 
to develop particular skills or to train for a new career, or whether the user wants to 
develop expertise in R or Python, for example. A number of 
ﬁproject
ﬂ courses have been created to help 
refine and integrate earlier knowledge.
                                                       58 The website for Metis is https://www.thisismetis.com/data
-science
-bootcamps, accessed January 25, 2018.
 59 The website for 
General Assembly
™s immersive experiences is https://generalassemb.ly/education/data
-science
-immersive, accessed February 1, 2018.
 60 The website for DataCamp is https://www.datacamp.com, accessed February 1, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-16  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  While these 
boot camp 
exp
eriences can be positive for students, they also tend to be very 
expensive and therefore out
-of-reach for many undergraduate students. Many boot camps are specifically 
designed for recent graduates or professionals seeking a career change and thus may not 
be appropriate 
for undergraduate students. The immersive experience that a boot camp offers may also not be the right 
model for certain people, depending on their schedules, their career 
or educational 
goals, their learning 
styles, and their previous train
ing (Feldon et al., 2017). 
 However, the unique position of these boot camps at the interface between education and industry 
could offer lessons for data science undergraduate
-focused boot camps and on
-ramping activities. Their 
ability to adjust in real ti
me to industry demands, their intent to deliver sustainable fundamental data 
science skills, and their emphasis on project
-based experiences would be applicable and beneficial in 
other settings and will continue to serve as a complementary activity to onli
ne courses, advanced degrees, 
and hackathons.
 An alternative model to the mostly for
-profit boot camps discussed above is the workshop 
approach that has been extensively developed by the non
-profit Carpentries
61 and given to thousands of 
participants worldw
ide. This organization has motivated a large number of students and researchers to 
receive training, initially focused on effective and quality software development through Software 
Carpentry and more recently on fundamental data skills through Data Carpen
try. Their workshops are 
typically a few days in length and hosted by institutions and partners desiring a domain
-specific 
introduction to basic data science for graduate students, faculty
, and local researchers. The Carpentries 
accomplish this at low cost
 through volunteer instructors who complete an extensive training program. 
Although much of this enterprise has focused on more advanced students with explicit domain knowledge 
but little prior computational experience, the approach could be expanded to fo
cus on undergraduates.
  Finding 3.1:
 Undergraduate education in data science can be experienced in many forms. These 
include the following:
   Integrated introductory courses that can satisfy a general education requirement; 
  A major in data science, including advanced skills as primary field of study; 
  A minor or track in data science, where intermediate skills are connected to 
major field of study; 
  Two
-year 
degrees and certificates
;  Other c
ertificates, often requiring fewer 
courses than a major but more than a 
minor; 
  Massive open online courses, which can engage large numbers of students at a 
variety of levels
; and
   Summer programs and boot camps, which can serve to supplement academic or 
on-the
-job training. 
  Recommendatio
n 3.1: Four
-year and 
two
-year institutions should establish a forum for 
dialogue across institutions on all aspects of data science education, training, and workforce 
development.
                                                          61 The website for the Carpentries is 
https://carpentries.org/
, accessed April 23, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-17  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
    MIDDLE AND HIGH SCHO
OL EDUCATION
  There is 
considerable
 potential to infuse data science education into middle school and high 
school curricula, particularly in laying the groundwork for many of the aspects of data acumen discussed 
in the previous chapter (Finzer, 2013). There is an opportunity for college
-lev
el courses to drive data 
science content down into middle and high school curricula.
 For example, the curriculum from Jevin 
West
™s and Carl Bergstrom
™s course at the University of Washington, Calling B.S.: Data Reasoning in a 
Digital World, is being adapted by and adopted in high school classrooms across the country (UW, 2017). 
High school teachers have found the curriculum to provide an innovative meth
od to teach students how to 
analyze information responsibly. Having such experiences at the high school level better prepares 
students both for postsecondary curricula and for the data
-driven workforce that awaits them. 
For 
example, t
he New York Hall of Sc
ience
62 provides an opportunity for children, young adults, and their 
families to increase their understanding of data science through various interactive museum exhibits, data 
fests, and mobile city science programs. Such programs appeal to many students 
and community 
members 
as they offer an engaging alternative to traditional classroom learning. 
 However, infusing data science into the middle and high school curriculum is not a simple task, 
especially with changes in mathematics education as a result of t
he Common Core State Standards.
63 Although, as of early 2018, 42 states and the District of Columbia 
have adopted their academic standards 
to be aligned with the Common Core (for some states with modifications), there are still some states that 
have not. Th
is means that there is still variability across states in terms of the progression and coherence 
of learning opportunities that students are presented with for mathematics instruction. Teachers, 
particularly middle school educators, have expressed feeling 
overburdened with the standards as the 
development of curricular materials has lagged and guidance is still needed with respect to classroom 
implementation (Bay
-Williams
, Duffett, and Griffith, 2016). Whereas this could be viewed as a 
complication for a si
mple infusion of data science into at least the middle school classroom, it could also 
be presented as an opportunity given the need to generate materials instead of overhauling existing ones.
 Course sequencing issues that are prevalent at the middle
 schoo
l level also exist at the high
 school 
level, although such issues can be heightened 
owing to
 limitations in the organizational structure of high 
school mathematics curricula. Specifically, some courses become 
ﬁgatekeepers
ﬂ to more rigorous 
mathematics cour
ses, and students who are 
ﬁtracked
ﬂ through a particular sequence of courses may not be 
presented with the opportunity to develop strong postsecondary mathematical skills (Gamoran, 20
09; Lucas, 1999; Lucas and Berends, 2002; Oakes, 2005). These issues can 
be compounded by issues of 
equity and access (Cha, 2015; Dondero and Muller, 2012; Lleras, 2008), which could have implications 
for students
™ access to 
any
 data science instruction in middle and high school. Therefore, careful 
consideration is needed to en
sure that the infusion or placement of data science into the mathematics 
curriculum for middle and high school allows for equitable access and opportunities for a broad spectrum 
of students.
 Interested educators at both the middle and high school levels would benefit from access to more 
resources that will allow them to integrate data science concepts into their classroom teaching, especially 
                                                      62 The website for the New York Hall of Science is 
https://nysci.org/
, accessed February 
22, 2018.
 63 The website for the Common Core State Standards Initiative is 
http://www.corestandards.org/standards
-in-your
-state/
, accessed February 23, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-18  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  as curriculum materials are still being developed.
64 The data science community, perhaps through a future 
professional society (discussed in Chapter 5 of this report), has an opportunity to better engage middle 
and high school educators through national conferences and online information sharing mechanisms.
 Special consideration and outreach to schools with students from predominantly underrepresented 
backgrounds may allow for increased opportunities for access to data science concepts. 
   REFERENCES
  Adhikari, A., and J. DeNero. 2018. 
Computational and Infe
rential Thinking: The Foundations of Data 
 Science. 
https://www.inferentialthinking.com/
. Accessed April 17, 2018.
 Amherst College. 2017. 
ﬁData Science.
ﬂ https://www.amherst.edu/academiclife/departments/courses/1718F/STAT/STAT
-231-1718F. 
Accessed January 2
5, 2018. Bay
-Williams
, J., 
A. 
Duffett, and 
D. 
Griffith. 2016. 
ﬁCommon Core Math in the K
-8 Classroom: Result
s from a National Teacher Surve
y.ﬂ https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED570138
. Accessed March 29, 2018.
 CCAC (Community College of Allegheny County). 2018. 
ﬁData Analytics Technology (788): Associate 
of Science.
ﬂ https://www.ccac.edu/Data_Analytics_Technology.aspx
. Accessed March 29, 2018.
 Cha, S.
-H. 2015. Exploring disparities in taking high level math courses in public high schools. 
KEDI 
Journal of Education
al Policy
 12(1)
:3-17. Chuang, I
., and A. Ho. 2016. 
ﬁHarvardX and MITx: Four Years of Open Online Courses
ŠFall 2012
-Summer 2016.
ﬂ http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2889436. Accessed April 1, 2018.
  Donder
o, M., and 
C. Muller
. 2012. School stratification in new
 and established Latino destinations. 
Social 
Forces
 91(2):477
-502.  Feldon, D.F., S. Jeong, J. Peugh, J. Roksa, C. Maahs
-Fladung, A. Shenoy, and M. Oliva. 2017. Null 
effects of boot camps and short
-format training for PhD students in life sciences. 
PNAS
 114(37):9854
-9858.  Fine, E., and J. Handelsman. 2010. 
ﬁBenefits and Challenges of Diversity in Academic Settings.
ﬂ Brochure prepared for the Women in Science and Engineering Leadership Institute. 
http://wiseli.engr.wisc.edu/docs/Benefits_Challenges.pdf.
 Finzer
, W. 2013. The 
data 
science 
education 
dilemma. 
Technology Innovations in Statistics Education
 7(2)
:1-9.  Gamoran, A. 20
09. Tracking and inequality: New directions for research and practice. 
Pp. 213
-228 in The 
Routledge International Handbook of the S
ociology of Education
, eds. M.W. Apple, S.J. Ball, and 
L.A. Gandin. New York: Routledge
.  Jones, C. 2018. 
ﬁBig 
data
ﬂ classes a big hit in 
California high schools
. EdSource
, February 19. 
https://edsource.org/2018/big
-data
-classes
-a-big
-hit
-in-california
-high
-schools/593838
. Accessed 
March 22, 2018.
 Lleras, C. 2008. Race, racial concentratio
n, and the dynamics of educational inequality across urban and 
suburban schools. 
American Educational Research Journal
 45(4):223
-233. Lucas, S.R. 1999. 
Tracking 
Inequality
: Stratification and 
Mobility 
in American 
High 
Schools
. New York: 
Teacher
™s College P
ress.
                                                       64 Dozens of high schools in California are already offering data science classes for eleventh and t
welfth 
graders that combine statistics and programming instruction through hands
-on activities. For more information, 
see Jones (2018). 
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     3-19  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL 
CORRECTION
  Lucas, S.R., and 
M. Berends
. 2002. Race and track location in U.S. 
public 
schools. 
Research in Social 
Stratification and Mobility
 25:169
-187. Montgomery College. 2018. 
ﬁData 
Science Certificate: 256.ﬂ
 http://catalog.montgomerycollege.edu/preview_program.php?catoid=8&poid=1877&returnto=13
22. Accessed January 25, 2018.
 Nashua Community College. 2018. 
ﬁWhy Choose Foundations in Data Analytics?
ﬂ http://www.nashuacc.edu/academics/associate
-degrees/stem
-and
-advanced
-manufacturing/398
-foundations
-in-data
-analytics
. Accessed March 29, 2018.
 Oakes, J. 2005. 
Keeping 
Track
: How 
Schools 
Structure 
Inequality
. New Haven, 
Conn.
: Yale University 
Press.
 UC Berkeley
 (University of California, Berkeley)
. 2018. 
ﬁData 8: Fou
ndations of Data Science.
ﬂ http://data8.org. Accessed January 25, 2018.
 UC San Diego
 (University of California, San Diego)
. 2017. 
ﬁData Science Undergraduate Program.
ﬂ http://dsc.ucsd.edu. Accessed January 25, 2018.
 UW (University of Washington). 2017. 
ﬁCalling Bullshit
ﬂ makes an impact at schools across the country
. https://ischool.uw.edu/news/2017/10/calling
-bullshit
-makes
-impact
-schools
-across
-country.
 Accessed February 22, 2018.
   Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
         4 Starting a Data Science Program
   Starting a new data science program is challenging, to say the least. As with any new academic 
program, a curriculum needs to be determined, resources and faculty need to be found, and some means 
of assessment needs to be 
implemented
. However, data science
 programs pose particular challenges 
owing to
 their interdisciplinary nature, the broad set of topics they encompass, and the acquisition of data 
and large
-scale computational infrastructure they require. 
 Thus
, launching a new undergraduate program in dat
a science may be a significant undertaking in 
many institutions. 
Administrators and program developers 
will face
 myriad decisions
. Should a new 
department be created to support this program? Or should existing departments take on the challenge? 
Solely, or 
in collaboration with other departments? What content/level of high school knowledge will be 
useful or required of students entering the data science program? How will data science be integrated into 
the curriculum? Should it be included at the very beginn
ing of a student
™s coursework? After some 
prerequisite coursework? Or as a capstone? Will it be a major, a minor, a general education requirement, 
or all of the above? Which mathematics, statistics, and computer science courses should be required of 
data s
cience students? Should these be taught as separate courses? Or should the content be integrated? 
How might institutions appropriately utilize the collections of online resources available and 
ﬁdownscale
ﬂ these to appropriate levels if they are focused on 
more advanced training? Institutions developing 
undergraduate programs will also need to consider how ethics and communication will be included in the 
curriculum, as well as how to ensure that the program is accessible to students from varied backgrounds.
 New 
data science 
programs require resources
, broad discussions with 
faculty
 and leadership
 across the institution
, and perhaps approval through formal bodies
. The backing of the administration as 
well as broad support from multiple departments is typically
 necessary, and attention to the costs and 
funding model from the outset can greatly increase the chance of success.
 As institutions examine how best to provide data science education to their students, one solution 
may be to reconstitute, combine, or 
reenvision already existing curricul
a. Much of the research on how 
best to teach 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
 (STEM
) concepts will be readily 
applicable. (See the discussion of data acumen attributes in Chapter 2 of this report for example
s of 
introductory and advanced concepts.) While some coursework could be immediately swapped into a data 
science program, it is likely that this will take more forethought and planning to appropriately consider 
the learning outcomes and content knowledge d
ata science students need to have. In a number of 
programs (see Chapter 3), the first official data science offering is a brand
-new class, meant to serve as a 
rich introduction to what it means to practice data science. In institutions with less funding or
 expertise 
for course development, the need to get a program up and running may push toward more borrowing of 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  content if not whole courses. However, a strong data science program is likely to need eventually to move 
beyond 
ﬁpatching together
ﬂ a curriculum 
or class. 
 In this section
, the committee describes the key challenges that academic institutions will face as 
they set up a program. But this section begins with an opportunity: 
an important element of program 
design is ensuring that the program is welcom
ing and inclusive to all students, regardless of their identity
-related characteristics or educational background and attainment. 
   ENSURING BROAD PARTI
CIPATION
  According to the South Big Data Innovation Hub
™s Keeping Data Science Broad
, ﬁthe variety of 
perspectives 
such
 diversity [in terms of race, gender, religious affiliation, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, 
and first
-generation status] provides is as essential as that provided by the transdisciplinary nature of data 
science for innovation and growth
 of the field
ﬂ (Rawlings
-Goss, 2018, p. 29). The report explains that the 
first step in creating a more inclusive environment is to ensure that students and faculty alike
Šat 
all
 types 
of educational institutions
Šhave 
equitable 
access to resources (e.g., hig
h-quality data, tools, technology, 
adaptable and appropriate 
curriculum, and advisors). Also
 crucial to retaining broad participation in data 
science were a 
ﬁculturally relevant curriculum,
ﬂ a more diverse faculty, and collaborations between 
majority
-servi
ng and minority
-serving institutions (Rawlings
-Goss, 2018, p. 31). 
 Thus
, it is the responsibility of academic institutions to ensure inclusion and broad participation 
and engagement in data science programs. Master (2017) suggests that data science programs at higher 
education institutions increase exposure to data science fie
lds, broaden beliefs about who belongs in these 
fields, challenge students
™ beliefs about fixed abilities, and show that data science can make a difference 
in society in order to broaden participation and engagement in data science. Williams (2017) suggest
s that 
faculty adjust curriculum to be more inclusive, create 
opportunities for students to engage in community 
data, affirm student ability, and create diverse teams of students. The efforts highlighted by Master and 
Williams not only lead to increased en
gagement, but they also stand to 
sustain
 participation of 
underrepresented populations in data science. If data science is to avoid a similar decrease in participation 
that occurred in the 1980s in computer science among female students, it is imperative t
hat 
underrepresented students are supported both academically and through mentorship, recognizing the 
opportunities that the field of data science presents and the value they can add to it.
 Some of the introductory data science courses described in this re
port have made inclusion and 
broad participation a central goal, shaping pedagogy, technical infrastructure, and staffing. Some notable 
steps include the following: 
   Designing the material to avoid the need for mathematics, statistics, or programming 
prerequisites beyond that required for entry to the 
academic institution
, thereby avoiding 
demographic skews that such prerequisites might induce. 
  Using a computing infra
structure 
that does not rely
 on personal laptops or access to computer 
labs; possibly hosting the infrastructure entirely in the cloud so
 that
 it can be accessed 
through a 
web 
browser. 
  Providing teams of lab
oratory
 assistants and tutors 
to give 
additional
 support for students 
needing assistance. 
  Choosing project topics carefully to be of broadest interest and to raise awareness of social 
issues. 
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4-3  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   Operating a cohort
-based 
ﬁdata scholars
ﬂ program
1 in concert with the instructional program 
to address issues 
of underrepresentation. 
  Additionally, the huge opportunity of data science to be a gateway to STEM careers should be 
emphasized. The wide range of applications of data science to multiple fields, including humanities, 
social sciences, and the arts
, expands the reach of STEM into society. Couching data science in terms of a 
life skill and a cultural pursuit can help reshape the image of science and 
increase the number of students 
interested in
 STEM 
fields
. Therefore, use cases should be drawn
 not jus
t from other STEM or scientific
 disciplines
; they should also be drawn 
heavily 
from the arts
, humanities, social scienc
es, and popular 
culture to a
ttract 
new entrants to the field.
 As many data science programs are being freshly created, ample opportunity
 exists
 to build broad 
participation from the beginning. While not a panacea, there are several actions that data science 
programs can take to
 broaden participation
. The Joint Working Group on Improving Underrepresented 
Minority Persistence in STEM offered 
the following recommendations for broadening participation of 
underrepresented minorities in STEM programs (Estrada et al., 2016):
   Track and increase awareness of institutional progress toward diversifying STEM
;  Create strategic partnerships with programs
 that create lift
;  Unleash the power of the curriculum and active learning
;  Address student resource disparities
; and
  Stimulate students
™ creativity.
  The Joint Working Group points out that there are many programs that have been successful in 
attracting a
nd retaining underrepresented students in STEM disciplines. For example, in 2017, over half 
of the computer science graduates from Harvey Mudd College were women (Williams, 2017). Harvey 
Mudd has succeeded in attracting and retaining underrepresented stude
nts in part owing to its 
commitment to fostering a 
ﬁgrowth mindset
ﬂ in these students (Dweck, 2006). Harvey Mudd faculty teach 
problem
 solving using real
-world examples, offer four unique styles of one introductory computer science 
course based on student knowledge and interest, require students to work together in completing 
homework assignments, and actively encourage students to enroll
 in a subsequent computer science 
course (Williams, 2017). To engage potential future students in STEM, Harvey Mudd also hosts a 
conference 
at which African
 American and Hispanic middle and high school girls have the opportunity to 
build partnerships with 
professional women practicing in STEM fields. Data science programs may 
benefit from looking to these and other successful STEM initiatives as models for attracting and retaining 
underrepresented students. 
 The Joint Working Group also suggests that such p
rograms are most effective when coupled with 
assessment and evaluation data
 that 
ﬁclearly show the amount of progress or disparity that exists at the 
institutional level
ﬂ (Estrada
 et al., 2016, p. 8). Another way to increase participation is to avoid filte
r or 
gate
-keeping courses (especially early in the program) and replace them with courses that entice student 
participation through heightening the excitement and applicability of data science. It may also behoove 
data science programs to consider which fa
culty are teaching first
-year or introductory data science 
courses, ensuring that these faculty members can connect with and engage students.
 Data science programs also need to embrace multiple entrance points into the discipline
Šthink of 
the metaphor of a
 ﬁwatershed
ﬂ in which students from a variety of educational backgrounds and fields can 
enter, rather than a 
ﬁpipeline
ﬂ from one or more particular fields into data science. 
Varma
 (2006) agrees 
                                                      1 The website for the University of California, Berkeley, Data Scholars Program is 
https://data.berkeley.edu/education/
data
-scholars
, accessed February 20, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4-4  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  that the notion of the pipeline does not extend far enough, as
 underrepresented minority students face 
heightened entry and retention barriers. In combination with the recommendations from the Joint 
Working Group, increasing teacher assistant training, awareness for advising staff, communication 
between students and 
faculty, and partnerships with high school teachers could help postsecondary data 
science programs retain a more diverse student body (
Varma
, 2006). Curricular options such as minors or 
data science add
-ons to substantive disciplines are two possible ways 
to open the data science 
enrollments. In addition to focusing on programs in science fields and broadening participation there, 
programs in popular areas such as 
music or 
communications could be targeted for outreach.
  Finding 4.1: 
The nature of data scien
ce is such that it offers multiple pathways for students of 
different backgrounds to engage at levels ranging from basic to expert. 
  Finding 4.2:
 Data science would particularly benefit from broad participation by 
underrepresented minorities because of th
e many applications to problems of interest to diverse 
populations. 
  Recommendation 4.1: As 
data science 
programs develop, they should focus on attracting 
students with varied backgrounds and degrees of preparation and preparing them for 
success in a vari
ety of careers.
   ACADEMIC INFRASTRUCT
URE 
  The popularity of data science courses and programs will affect academic infrastructure in several 
ways
Šnotably
, in terms of who will 
ﬁown
ﬂ the program and how it will be delivered. Faculty and 
administrators will need to examine how the goals of data science education align with the institution
™s current infrastructure. What departments should be involved? What colleges? Because data science
 intersects with mathematics, statistics, computer science, and other domains, institutions need to consider 
whether data science needs to become a 
stand
-alone
 department or be integrated with other departments.
 Administrators will need to consider ways to
 motivate departments to work with one another across 
disciplines, and department chairs will need to consider ways to motivate their faculty to participate in the 
implementation of innovative new curricula, whether or not they are in the 
ﬁhome
ﬂ department
. This 
holistic approach toward data science education is crucial, particularly given the interdisciplinary nature 
of the field of data science.
 Further
more
, given its interdisciplinary nature, a new data science program at the undergraduate 
level needs to
 involve the collaboration of several disciplines and programs. However, few instructors are 
likely to be available 
who 
are equally able to teach classes in the full complement of fields. Initially, at 
least, creative ways of involving faculty from multipl
e departments is likely to be necessary, so that they 
can learn from each other and so that students get the broad view of data science that the committee 
envisions.
 However, cross
-departmental or institutional collaboration to develop data science program
s may 
prove easier in theory than in practice. In some colleges and universities
, academic tribalism and the 
increased importance of tuition generation might impede these programs from being truly 
interdisciplinary. Thus
, the flexibility to hire or train f
aculty in the multiple aspects of data science will be 
necessary to ensure that all programs still achieve their educational goals.
 As one example, consider Virginia Tech
™s solution to the organizational model. Virginia Tech 
offers a major in computational
 modeling and data analytics. The departments that host the major (i.e., 
computer science, statistics, and mathematics) span two colleges (i.e., the College of Engineering and the 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4-5  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  College of Science), making interdisciplinary communication and cooperation 
extremely important. To 
foster productive collaboration among and within its five interdisciplinary programs, the College of 
Science set up the Academy of Integrated Science, which is a department
-level organizational structure 
that helps interdisciplinary
 programs by managing budgets, undergraduate advising, student recruitment, 
and assessment. Having such a body in place allows faculty to focus solely on developing and delivering 
curriculum to the students. The Academy of Integrated Science also develops 
a memorandum of 
understanding for new faculty hires that establishes their roles in both their home departments and in the 
interdisciplinary programs (Embree, 2017).
 Such cross
-departmental collaboration requires new mechanisms for both funding and 
encoura
gement. Opportunities for a wide variety of faculty to participate in data science programs will 
need to be created
, as will incentives
 and rewards
 for those faculty teaching data science. Rewards 
systems more generally may need to adjust to place greater 
value on teaching more students, especially 
when that means there will be greater diversity in their level of preparation. As data science begins to 
enter conversations in many disciplines, educators and administrators will have to consider the roles of 
the humanities, social sciences, and arts programs. There are also opportunities for developing programs 
for students in non
-STEM fields, although there are risks that these become 
ﬁdata science
-lite
ﬂ programs 
that add limited marketable or intellectual valu
e to students. 
 Several specific hurdles to launching and sustaining data science programs have been 
encountered and to some extent overcome at various academic institutions. Some of these challenges are 
associated with growing pains of starting up any new
 program that is in high demand: 
   Overcoming initial resistance.
 One of the first challenges prospective programs have to 
overcome is initial resistance by established departments and programs to launching a new 
program that is in intellectual proximity and competes for tuition dollars
 and other resources
. This is espe
cially challenging for data science
, as it has a large footprint across many 
professional, scientific, and engineering disciplines.
  Recruiting and retaining faculty
. Another important challenge is recruiting faculty to create 
and teach integrative introduc
tory courses in data science and to serve as advisors and 
mentors for data science students. Departmentally centered tenure and promotion criteria may 
lead junior faculty to be reluctant to devote much time to launch
ing
 new programs. An 
additional challeng
e has been retention of data science faculty in an economic environment 
where faculty are increasing
ly lured away by industry.
  Developing curricula
. It is often challenging to develop a consensus on a core curriculum that 
best serves the various interests 
and backgrounds of data science students. In this era where 
many of the existing data 
science
-related courses are oversubscribed, other departments can 
be reluctant to enroll data science students in their popular courses (e.g., machine learning, 
data mini
ng, natural language, applied statistics) because doing so may take seats away from 
their own students. 
  Providing physical space.
 To be most effective, data science programs need flexible physical 
space to create the collaborative environment in which the
ir students thrive. Such well 
situated space is often scarce. 
  Facilitating interactive experiences
. There is a lack of sustainable and scalable models for 
capstone programs and similar experiential integrative experiences that have been shown by 
the Assoc
iation of American Colleges and Unive
rsities
 (2013) 
and others to be 
high
-impact 
educational practices.
  Encouraging industry partnerships
. With high turnover in the industry workforce, colleges 
are facing the challenge of building lasting industry relation
ships to keep education and 
training well matched to the needs of the rapidly evolving data science workforce. 
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4-6  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   Additional infrastructure considerations include enrollment budgets, strategies to build a data 
science major curriculum (i.e., prerequisites, 
introductory, advanced, applied, capstone), and ways to 
align general education requirements with data science. Institutions will need to consider how to provide 
and share resources for their varied data science experiences (e.g., textbooks, teaching mater
ials, open 
access, clearinghouse). Advising will also be important for the success of data science undergraduate 
programs. Formal evaluation methods will need to be implemented to gauge the success of these 
programs and improve them. The Moore
-Sloan Data S
cience Environments (2018) have put forth some 
suggestions on creating institutional change in data science, including establishing a neutral space for 
students and faculty to gather, providing access to professional data scientists and research software 
engineers who can assist and serve as role models, developing a data science consulting capability, 
considering the scalability of data science educational initiatives, encouraging software and data openness 
and reuse, and involving a wide range of people i
n data
-intensive discovery. 
 Another challenge will be that many fields involved with data science are themselves 
experiencing rapid change and evolution. As a consequence, data science curricula will also likely evolve 
rapidly, and programs need to be rea
dy and willing to adapt. This will undoubtedly lead to the same types 
of questions that have been explored in computer science and other rapidly evolving fields in past years. 
Last, it behooves institutions to consider the alternative pathways students mig
ht take into data science by 
removing obstacles and barriers for students who want to change their concentration to data science 
during the course of their studies or making it easier to add a data science minor. Overcoming these 
challenges will require in
stitutions to broker between competing interests, to recruit new faculty and staff 
in data science, and to make strategic long
-term investments to sustain the activity.
  Finding 4.3:
 Institutional flexibility will 
involve 
the development of curricula that 
take advantage 
of current course availability and will potentially be constrained by the availability of teaching 
expertise.
 Whatever organizational or infrastructure model is adopted, incentives are needed to 
encourage faculty participation and to overcom
e barriers.
   Computational Infrastructure
  A major driver of data science education has been the evolution of data and the infrastructure for 
accessing it and analyzing it. Hands
-on experience with the entire data 
science 
life cycle is an essential 
part of the training and education of data science students, regardless of the educational modality. In 
particular, students need to be taught how to handle large amounts of data and how to run scalable but 
sophisticated analysis
 software on the data
Šoften requiring distributed data storage, 
multi
core 
processing, and parallel computation. However, maintaining large complex data sets and high
-performance computing 
systems 
on college campuses strain
s the resources of educational ins
titutions. 
While several of the larger research universities retain high
-performance computing and 
large 
server 
facilities, most universities and colleges are in the process of transitioning their computing and storage to 
cloud service providers 
that provi
de 
students reliable access to their data and the computational resources 
to run algorithms against the data. Thus
, the cloud has played and will continue to play an important role 
in transforming data science education. A logical next step might be for co
lleges to band together to 
federate these cloud resources under an 
ﬁacademic cloud.
ﬂ2 Such a federated academic cloud could 
provide common platform
s for students across the nation, facilitating data integration and analysis, 
reducing costs to educational i
nstitutions, and balancing inequities in access to instructional resources.
                                                       2 The National Science Foundation, for example, invested $20 million in academic cloud computing in 2014 
(Boland, 2014).
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4-7  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   Finding 4.4:
 The economics of developing programs has recently changed with the 
shift to
 cloud
-based approaches and platforms.
   CURRICULUM
  As discussed in Chapter 2 of this repo
rt, there is a progression of topics and skill sets that will 
guide students to develop data acumen. Key concepts required to develop data acumen include 
mathematical foundations, computational foundations, statistical foundations, data management and 
cura
tion, data description and visualization, data modeling and assessment, workflow and reproducibility, 
communication, domain
-specific considerations, and ethical problem solving. These skills then become 
transferable into a range of data science 
positions 
in the workplace. 
 Each undergraduate modality discussed in Chapter 3 offers a unique pathway to various data 
science careers. The degree to which each concept or skill is emphasized in each modality depends upon 
the respective career trajectories. While a 
4-year data science degree may be most appropriate for some 
data scientists, a 2
-year associate
™s degree may be 
better 
suited for others. And while a boot camp may 
help prepare a business professional to incorporate data analytics in the workplace, a data 
science minor 
may offer valuable training for data
-driven decision makers in a variety of fields. It is important to note 
that, as the field of data science continues to evolve at a rapid pace, it will often be necessary to reevaluate 
the types of careers 
utilizing data science as well as the data science skill sets necessary to achieve 
success in those careers.
   FACULTY RESOURCES
  Mirroring the variety 
of pathways for data science education discussed in Chapter 3, there are a 
number of ways in which data science courses may be taught. Some data science courses, owing to their 
interdisciplinary nature, are taught either by a team of faculty or by two facult
y with the appropriate areas 
of expertise to cover multiple perspectives. Though this approach offers the most well
-rounded 
experience for students, it can be difficult to find the administrative support and additional resources 
needed. It remains challeng
ing to recruit 
appropriate 
new faculty to teach both introductory data science 
courses and courses for the data science major or minor. Faculty need to have multiple experiences with 
data science projects to develop the perspective to guide their students.
 These faculty need to be diverse 
and have the ability to serve as role models for future data scientists, while also meeting competencies in 
the practical data acumen areas discussed in the previous section and in Chapter 2 of this report. As the 
field of
 data science expands, faculty are likely to be needed in an even broader range of competencies. 
 Considerations for current faculty are also necessary, as many will need to be retrained in new 
data science methods and tools, both of which will continue to
 evolve rapidly in the coming years. 
Faculty will also benefit from professional development in new teaching approaches to best meet the 
needs, learning styles, and knowledge levels of future undergraduate students. Such training will be 
especially useful 
for faculty teaching introductory classes composed of students with various academic 
backgrounds and career interests. Funded by the National Science Foundation, Training a New 
Generation of Statistics Educators
3 is an example of a program that creates pro
fessional learning 
communities whose members participate in workshops, mentorship programs, and national conferences, 
all in an effort to increase their statistical content knowledge and improve their teaching. The current 
                                                      3 The website for this National Science Foundation
-supported project is 
https://www.nsf.gov/
awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1432251, accessed February 6, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4-8  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  program includes over 70 instruct
ors from 2
-year institutions across the United States
 (Posner, 2017)
. Some 
academic 
institutions have developed 
their own 
focus
ed data science 
education
 programs for their 
faculty; f
or example, the University of California, Berkeley, offers summer worksho
ps on the pedagogy 
and practice of data s
cience to engage faculty across the university.
4 Perhaps most challenging is retaining faculty in data science programs. Given their skill sets
, professors of data science domains are highly sought after throughout i
ndustry (Kaminski and Geisler, 
2012). While academic institutions are unlikely to have the resources to offer comparable salaries, they 
need to consider alternative incentives (e.g., opportunities for 
transdisciplinary collaboration
, for pursuing 
open
-ended 
research
 topics
, for developing curricula, and for
 professional stability 
[e.g., 
tenure
]) that will 
appeal to, entice, and retain data science faculty.
   ASSESSMENT
  In order for data science programs to flourish, the progress of data science 
students needs to be 
assessed early and often. Jordan (2017) asserts that assessment cannot be conducted without a clear 
understanding of the core skills for data science
Šcollection, analysis, visualization, and sharing
Šas well 
as a clear definition of stu
dent learning outcomes (perhaps inspired by Bloom
™s Taxonomy). She suggests 
the following 
8 steps to create and assess the data science education classroom: 
  1. Understand the audience to create an impactful and positive learning environment
;  2. Know what moti
vates the students
; 3. Develop a code of conduct
; 4. Create challenge questions and exercises
;  5. Incorporate qualitative mechanisms to improve teaching and quantitative mechanisms to 
gauge student learning
;  6. Design interventions around learning outcomes as well a
s around students
™ needs
; 
 7. Conduct long
-term follow
-up; and 
 8. Continue to build the data science community. 
   REFERENCES
  Association of American Colleges and Universities
. 2013. Capstones and integrated learning. 
Peer 
Review
 15(4).
 Boland
, R. 2014. NSF 
invests millions in academic cloud computing testbeds
. Signal
, August 21. 
https://www.afcea.org/content/nsf
-invests
-millions
-academic
-cloud
-computing
-testbeds.
 Accessed February 22, 2018.
 Dweck
, C. 2006. 
Mindset: The New Psychology of Success
. New York: 
Ballantine Books.
 Embree, M. 2017. 
ﬁForging Virginia Tech
™s CMDA Major Across Departments.
ﬂ Webinar Presentation 
to th
e Committee on
 Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective, 
October 10. http://www.nas.edu/envisioningDS. Acces
sed February 14, 2018.
 Estrada
, M., M. Burnett, A.G. Campbell, P.B. Campbell, W.F. Denetclaw, C. Gutiérrez, S. Hurtado, et al. 
2016. Improving underrepresented minority student persistence in STEM. 
CBE Life Sciences 
Education
 15(3):es5. 
                                                       4 An overview of a collection of pedagogy workshops can be found at https://data.berkeley.edu/news/2018
-data
-science
-education
-opportunities, accessed April 22, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   4-9  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Jordan, K. 2017. 
ﬁAssessing Data Science Learning Outcomes
.ﬂ Webinar
 Presentation to the Committee 
on Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective, October 24. 
http://www.nas.edu/envisioningDS. Accessed February 14, 2018.
 Kaminski, D., and C. Geisl
er. 2012. Survival analysis of faculty retentio
n in science and engineering by 
gender. 
Science
 335(6070):864
-866. Master, A. 2017. 
ﬁDiversity, Inclusion, and Increasing Participation in Data Science
.ﬂ Webinar 
Presentation to the Committee on Envisioning 
the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate 
Perspective, November 7. http://www.nas.edu/envisioningDS. Accessed February 14, 2018.
 Moore
-Sloan Data Science Environments. 2018. 
ﬁCreating Institutional Change in Data Science.
ﬂ White 
paper. 
http://msdse.or
g/files/Creating_Institutional_Change.pdf
.  Posner, M. 2017. 
ﬁGo to the People: Impactful Faculty Training in Data Science.
ﬂ Webinar 
Presentation 
to the Committee on Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective, 
September 26.
 http
://www.nas.edu/envisioningDS. Accessed February 14, 2018.
 Rawlings
-Goss, R. 2018. 
Keeping Data Science Broad: Negotiating the Digital and Data Divide Among 
Higher Education Institutions
. South Big Data Innovation Hub
. http://bit.ly/KeepingDataScienceBroad_Report
. Accessed March 28, 2018.
 Varma, R. 2006. Making computer science minority
-friendly: Computer science programs neglect diverse 
student needs. 
Communications of the ACM 
49(2):129
-134. Williams, T. 2017. 
ﬁDiversity and Inclusion in Data Science: Using Data
-Informed Decisions to Drive 
Student Success.
ﬂ Webinar Presentation to the Committee on Envisioning the Data Science 
Discipline: The Undergraduate Perspective, November 7
. http://www.na
s.edu/envisioningDS. 
Accessed February 14, 2018.
  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
       5 Evolution and Evaluation
   The variety of programmatic and curricular approaches described
 in the previous chapters point
s to numerous alternatives for development of data science learning in undergraduate programs. There are 
many different modalities for institutions to offer in data science education, as there have been in 
computer science an
d information science. Data science programs will continue to evolve within 
institutions and across the United States as driving factors
, including student perception of career 
opportunities and funding for training programs from industry and government,
 modify student demand 
and associated institutional response.
1 As befits a new and evolving discipline, pilot programs designed to 
address different needs will arise at different types of institutions. 
 Evaluation of a program relies upon assessing student
 learning and gauging how well the program 
meets market needs. Evaluations can be used to test what works for an institution
, given relevant 
constraints
, and suggest when these pilot
 program
s might be generalized for other contexts. It would be 
beneficial 
to use data science to continuously evaluate and evolve data science education (see Gertler et 
al., 2016). In 
particular,
 it would be useful to examine the 
impacts 
that different drivers of undergraduate 
programs have on the development of programs and the
ir evolution. In this way
, the programs would not 
evolve stochastically based upon particularities of the histories and personnel associated with the 
programs, but rather they would innovate based upon data and the drivers at the institution. 
 The continue
d evolution of programs would benefit from an efficient means to collect, compare, 
and share evaluation data. Such capabilities could be established through collaborative efforts across a 
number of the professional societies that operate in the data scienc
e space or possibly from 
subsocieties
 that cross the variety of disciplinary boundaries in data science as well as the variety of application 
domains
. Such collaborations
 could enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of educational programs by 
assisting i
n propagating methods for success. Eventually
, formal schemes for standards, and possibly 
accreditation, 
could emerge from
 the application of data science methods to the variety of programs 
that 
have 
evolve
d.                                                             1 See, for example, the 
Institute of Education Sciences What Works Clearinghouse, 
https://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/
, accessed February 20, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  EVOLUTION
  There are multiple pathways to
 developing programs in data science, each with its own 
challenges and opportunities. While other domains have started by implementing undergraduate programs 
and expanding upward to include master
™s degree programs, or with doctoral programs and expanding 
downward, data science has taken an unusual path to date
, as 
many master
™s degree programs have begun
 to be offered
 before undergraduate or doctoral programs
. This institutional structure is
 perhaps 
driven 
by 
the rapidly arising industry demand
 for data sc
ientists
. Th
is starting point influences how competencies 
are introduced into the curriculum. However, as Chapter 3 made clear, today different schools are 
developing multiple pathways from multiple starting points. This flexibility is beneficial, as the m
ultitude 
of educational pathways enables students to be equipped to fill
 various
 future data science positions.
 A 2015 National Science Board study described the importance of building a better understanding 
of the pathways taken by individuals to become p
art of the 
science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics
 (STEM
) workforce. It pointed out the need to 
ﬁmonitor and assess the condition of 
workforce pathways
ﬂ as well as to 
ﬁaddress roadblocks to the participation of groups traditionally 
underrepresent
ed in STEM
ﬂ (National Science Board, 2015).
 Reaching both of those goals requires 
building a model of the watershed of STEM
-trained individuals and empirically assessing demand for 
STEM
-trained employees (Metcalf, 2010). 
 In this section
, the committee con
siders how data science programs might evolve. That evolution 
will be driven by a broad range of factors, including the starting point, the students who are the target of 
the program, and the institution that is developing that program. This section focuse
s on the maturation 
process and on ensuring program success.
   The Maturation Process: Key Drivers of Change
  Once started
, programs will continue to evolve differently, based on the 
constraints of personnel 
and resources at the 
institution
, student 
perceptions of careers in the area, and external influences such as 
industry and government partnerships
. The long
-term goal of any undergraduate educational program in 
data science is 
to produce 
successful data science students. But what constitutes succe
ss? 
Obtaining 
a degree? 
Gaining employment
? Gaining
 satisfactory 
employment 
(i.e., a job that is 
monetarily or 
intellectually rewarding)? 
Securing a place in
 graduate school? The answers to these questions will be 
driven by the institution as well as by th
e evolution of the workforce and the economy. If jobs are the 
students
™ goals, and the institution sees itself as preparing them for the job market, then industry
™s needs 
will be paramount, and undergraduate programs will need to evolve to meet those needs
 as the needs 
themselves evolve. Likewise, the availability of graduate programs (and their evolution over time) can 
also change the content and learning outcomes of undergraduate programs
, which
 strive to ensure that 
their students have the right backgrou
nd to be admitted to 
these 
graduate programs.
 Many subtler influences based on educational style may also be expected. Some institutions will 
tend to stress an understanding of theoretical foundations; other programs will focus on hands
-on experience. The 
size of the school and popularity of the program will impact the types of opportunities 
available and the pedagogical style that may be appropriate. Over time
, any of these may change, 
resulting in 
changes 
to individual courses and overall programs.
 Since 
data sci
ence programs in general are 
new, there is little in terms of comprehensive data on 
general expectations for the undergraduates who enter them.
 Many programs that exist today were started 
as professional master
™s degree programs. Starting at the ma
ster
™s level presupposes knowledge and 
classes, usually with a specific disciplinary focus. There are also multiple possible pathways to data 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-3  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  science education at the doctoral level, perhaps a Ph.D. in data science or a Ph.D. in a domain area with a 
specia
lization in data science. Many students entering such programs may not have the necessary 
prerequisites, so it is important for institutions to consider how to upskill and thus prepare them quickly. 
 Programs certainly will have more tactical intermediate 
goals, such as simply attracting more 
students to the program, broadening participation, or increasing the understanding of data science on 
campus. Another goal might be increasing experiential learning in data science through coursework or 
internships. Pr
ogress toward these goals can be measured and serve to pave the way to success
Šthe 
percentage of various populations can be tracked, and delivery methods, classroom practices, or course 
content can be modified to attract a more diverse population as needed
.  For example, with support from the National Science Foundation, the College Board developed a 
new advanced placement course, Computer Science Principles. This course is specifically designed to 
engage more high school students in computer science, and t
hus better prepare them for future study of 
STEM disciplines, by demonstrating the power of computer science to solve real
-world problems through 
the use of a variety of computing tools and languages (NSF, 2014). Following the development of this 
new advan
ced placement course, pilot programs began at universities across the country (e.g., University 
of Washington
2 and North Carolina State University) to develop and offer a new introductory computer 
science curriculum, Th
e Beauty and Joy of Computing.
 This c
urriculum is targeted toward non
-computer 
science majors and centers around programming (using Snap!) and creating (UC Berkeley, 2018). 
Although such initiatives can be beneficial for students in affluent communities whose schools have the 
resources to off
er advanced placement curricula, students from high schools without advanced placement 
curricula in mathematics or science disciplines will enter their undergraduate experience at a significant 
disadvantage from some of their peers, thus widening the knowl
edge gap that currently exists across 
student populations. It is crucial that funding organizations and curriculum developers continue to 
consider approaches that will best prepare all students for potential future work in data science. Other 
more widely a
ccessible initiatives to attract diverse populations include efforts by Code.org to increase 
access to computer science in schools, especially for women and underrepresented minorities. The data 
collected from these and similar efforts, coupled with formal
 evaluation protocols (see 
the section 
ﬁEvaluation
,ﬂ later in this chapter
), can also guide the program evolution until the learning outcomes 
required to achieve success, however defined by a given program, are achieved.
  Finding 5.1:
 The evolution of data science programs at a particular institution will depend on the 
particular institution
™s pedagogical style and the students
™ backgrounds and goals, as well as the 
requirements of the job market and graduate schools.
   Path
way
s to Mat
uration
  Given these various drivers, how will programs evolve? Again, there will be multiple path
way
s, 
but maturation will occur in both individual courses and at the program level. As pathways are developed, 
attention will be needed to ensure that facult
y and students are upskilled, flexibility is preserved and 
supported, and efforts are sustained. As instructors rework individual classes based on 
outcomes and 
evaluation, it is likely that they will replace borrowed content from existing courses with orig
inal 
materials that fit together more naturally and better match personal educational styles or the culture of that 
institution or department. Materials will be tuned to meet the objectives and the abilities of the students. 
New units, emphases, or experie
nces may be added (e.g., to teach a broader range of skills).
                                                       2 The webpage for Computer Science Principles at the University of Washington is 
https://courses.cs.washington.edu/courses/cse120/, accessed
 March 29, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-4  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  At the program level
, there is likely to be an evolution in the courses over time, as well as in the 
responsibility or ownership of individual courses or even entire programs. Today, data scienc
e programs 
often originate in one existing department
Šfrequently statistics, computer science, mathematics, or 
business. However, a program, although 
ﬁowned
ﬂ by one department, may well be composed of classes 
from multiple departments. Over time
, that set 
of classes is likely to evolve as more custom data science 
classes are created. In some cases
, an existing class from one department may be adopted as part of 
another department
™s data science curriculum but may eventually be duplicated (perhaps with some 
tailoring) to be offered by both departments; alternatively, a course may be shifted from one department 
to another altogether.
  Recommendation 5.1: Because these are early days for undergraduate data science 
education, academic institutions should be prep
ared to evolve programs over time. They 
should create and maintain the flexibility and incentives to facilitate the sharing of courses, 
material
s, and faculty among departments and programs.
   Ensuring Success
  With the many ways that programs can evolve, academic and career advising 
are 
key components 
of a successful program. These are essential to sustain the viability of programs and pathways. Prior to 
launching a full
-fledged program, advisors will need to be
 trained to understand the program content, 
anticipated pathways, and outcomes. This cadre of advisors will include not only 
those
 specific to the new 
program but also advisors for existing programs who will need to field new questions and be able to 
posit
ion the new program for success. How is data science different from statistics? It is not, for example, 
computer science with a focus on machine learning. It is not applied mathematics. It is a truly 
interdisciplinary activity 
that 
brings together domain s
cientists with computer scientists, information 
scientists, and statisticians. What is the best way for students to meet their goals? If they are 
unsure of 
their goals, how best can they explore the alternatives?
 While institutions consider the many pathwa
ys available for their students, they will also need to 
consider who will develop and teach the general education and data science classes: teaching faculty, 
adjunct 
instructors, teaching assistants, or tenure track faculty. It is imperative that academic 
institutions 
have a balanced faculty with both domain knowledge and data science expertise so as to best deliver data 
science education that will prepare students for the varied and multidisciplinary workforce that lies ahead 
of them. As data science pedag
ogy teaches the appropriate skill sets, it may be wise for academic 
institutions to build up their graduate teaching assistantship programs so as to prepare more future data 
science educators. Both those who build the new curricula and those who teach it w
ill need to be 
supported (i.e., motivated, trained, and rewarded) and upskilled in a variety of ways. More work will be 
needed to 
ﬁteach the teachers
ﬂ the multidisciplinary fundamentals of data science. 
Faculty 
could benefit 
from shared teaching materials 
(e.g., course notes, software, data, and case studies), as well as short 
courses and boot camps adapted to non
-data scientists who will teach data science concepts. Course and 
curriculum builders could benefit from a roadmap on how to build curriculum and 
programs at all 
undergraduate levels, including what works (e.g., team teaching, student
-initiated groups, teaching in 
context) and what does not.
 Institutions that 
want 
to increase data science opportunities could consider the examples and 
lessons of inte
rdisciplinary programs at other institutions, as well as how these may be able to provide 
guidance on how data science programs might evolve. Programs can benefit greatly from sharing ideas 
and data with each other, given the rapid emergence and evolution 
of this field. For example, the 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-5  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  availability and usability (under a Creative Commons license) of the well
-packaged curriculum and 
materials from the University of California, 
Berkeley, course 
Data 8: Foundations of Data Science 
(discussed in Chapter 3) has
 enabled several universities to quickly roll out similar courses to benefit their 
students.
  Finding 5.2:
 There is a need for broadening the perspective of faculty who are trained in 
particular areas of data science to be knowledgeable of the breadth of a
pproaches to data science 
so that they can more effectively educate students at all levels. 
  Recommendation 5.2: During the development of data science programs, institutions should 
provide support so 
that 
the faculty can become more cognizant of the 
varied aspects of data 
science through discussion, co
-teaching, sharing of materials, short courses, and other forms 
of training.
  Finding 5.3:
 The data science community would benefit from the creation of websites and 
journals that document and make avail
able best practices, curricula, 
education research findings, 
and other materials related to undergraduate data science education.
   EVALUATION
  Regardless of what educational approach is taken, it is important that rigorous evaluation of the 
outcomes is conducted so that the field can evolve in response to data and evidence. This evaluation is 
needed both at the level of individual programs as wel
l as at the broader national level. The former 
could 
enable individual schools to continue to evolve their programs to better serve their students. The latter 
could 
enable the community to learn what works across many programs and eventually to evolve towa
rd a 
common set of pathways and curricula that optimize outcomes for their students.
 This could also foster 
the development of educational research for this highly interdisciplinary field to provide a basis for 
determining the effectiveness of alternative 
approaches.
 Figure 5.1 provides a simplified conceptual model that could underlie a process of evaluation at 
several hierarchical education levels. Obtaining and utilizing appropriate data at each step can help 
iteratively refine programs. 
Objectives, asso
ciated outcomes, metrics of success in reaching these 
outcomes, and the activities 
that 
impact these outcomes might be 
established 
at the level of a single 
program, at the level of an institution with multiple routes to success for data science students th
rough 
various majors or minors, or at broader national scales. 
   Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-6  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
     FIGURE 5.1
  Simplified example 
theory of 
change model for undergraduate data science programs. 
    Evaluation at the Level of an Individual Program
  In developing data science pathways that align with their capabilities, 
academic institutions 
need 
to think about how these pathways can be evaluated. Discipline
-based education research, which 
ﬁinvestigates learning and teaching in a [science or engineeri
ng] discipline using a range of methods with 
deep grounding in the discipline
™s priorities, worldview, knowledge, and practices . . . [and] is informed 
by and complementary to more general research on human learning and cognition,
ﬂ (NRC, 2012) can be 
used 
to inform both evaluation and revision of data science curricula to best meet student needs. Both 
computer science and statistics, for example, have 
robust 
education communities whose results may be 
leveraged to improve data science education. However, fur
ther interdisciplinary education research is 
essential, given the interdisciplinary nature of data science and the related challenges of developing and 
evaluating such programs. As data science programs evolve, it is reasonable to think about how these 
pro
grams could be accredited. However, it is premature for this committee to prescribe if or how 
accreditation should be done.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-7  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Evaluation using administrative records
3 has a long and distinguished history in education 
(Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander, 2007
; see 
Box 5.1). 
Academic institutions
 with data science programs 
may consider matching their administrative records to U.S. Census Bureau or state wage record data (see 
Box 5.2) to track the outcomes of students trained in data science relative to other fields. 
The potential for 
low
-cost evaluation is substantial. Administrative records cost pennies per record, versus several hundred 
dollars (at least) for high
-quality survey data. Administrative data also offer the potential to study 
population
-level data. Admin
istrative data sets are of a scale that make it possible to more precisely 
identify statistical relationships, detect rare events, create comparison groups, and examine the 
heterogeneous effects of educational policies and practice for different groups of 
individuals. This last
 opportunity
 is particularly important when trying to encourage the broad participation of underrepresented 
student populations
. Administrative data are also near real
 time in nature
Šit is possible to identify issues 
that may arise with particular interventions and adjust accordingly rather than waiting long after the fact. 
Last
, administrative data are often of higher quality than survey data. Rather than asking respond
ents to 
provide retrospective information, with obvious recall problems, the data exist within administrative 
systems. It is possible, through links to state wage record, Internal Revenue Service, or Census Bureau 
data
, to track the earnings and employment
 outcomes of individuals longitudinally with much less 
attrition (and cost) than surveys.
  Finding 5.4:
 The evolution of undergraduate education in data science can be driven by data 
science. Exploiting administrative records, in conjunction with other dat
a sources such as 
economic information and survey data, can enable effective transformation of programs to better 
serve their students.
    BOX 5.1 
 How Data Have Transformed the Study of Education
  The use of data science to study education is not new. Whi
le much education research has used 
survey data, the increase in cost and decline in quality of surveys (Japec et al., 2015), combined with the 
availa
bility of new types of data, have
 resulted in a transformation in education research. 
 Examples of the lar
ge number of questions on the impacts of various differences or interventions 
on student outcomes (Figlio, Karbownik, and Salvanes, 2016) are 
many:
 ﬁRegistry data have been used 
to study the introduction of new technologies to schools in England (Machin, M
cNally, and Silva, 2007
), experimental evidence on schools
™ influence on parents
™ involvement in education in France (Avvisati et 
al., 2014
), experimental evidence on gender differences in competitiveness and 
their 
consequences for 
educational choices in t
he Netherlands (Buser, Niederle, and Oosterbeek, 2014
), the role of school 
quality in Romania (Pop
-Eleches and Urquiola, 2013
), experimental evidence on learning incentives in 
Mexico (Behrman et al., 2015
), perceived effects of school quality on the 
housing market (Figlio and 
Lucas, 2004
), the role of peer effects utilizing student reshuffling 
owing to
 extreme events (Imberman, 
Kugler, and Sacerdote, 2012
), or the ability of principals to recognize effective teachers (Jacob and 
Lefgren, 2008)
ﬂ (Figlio
, Karbownik, and Salvanes, 2016)
. One of the most compelling results of using administrative data to trace education pathways is 
                                                      3 Administrative records could include student transcripts (with student demographic data, academic 
performance indicators, and scholarship, graduation, and curriculum information), enrollment statistics, 
budgetary plans, and personnel dem
ographic data.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-8  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  evident in the work of Stanford University
™s Raj Chetty. His work looking at the role of colleges in 
intergenerational mobility
,1 for example, could be replicated at a smaller scale, as his 
class
2 demonstrates.
  1 A list of Chetty
™s publications can be found at http://www.equality
-of-opportunity.org/documents/, accessed 
February 15, 2018.
 2 The website for Chetty
™s class is 
http://www.equality
-of-opportunity.org/bigdatacourse/, accessed February 15, 
2018.   Evaluation More Broadly
  Unfortunately, data that would allow the understanding of outcomes from multiple programs (or 
even, in fact, of a single program from outside that institution) have not previously existed in a 
readily 
available 
form. For example, even within an institution
 there are regular laments about the lack of 
tracking data 
about 
its 
graduates. Accessing the pathways that undergraduates or newly graduated 
students in data science follow would offer potential benefit not only for an institution, relative to the 
evaluat
ion criteria for its programs and institutional strategies, but also offer the possibility, when 
adequately shared, to evaluate 
broadly 
the impact of major national programs at the National Science 
Foundation and other agencies and private foundations (see
 Box 5.2). 
 Fortunately, new data have become available to permit, for the first time, the undertaking of rich 
analyses. The data also enable an entirely new approach to estimating the impact of labor market demand 
on career pathways (University of Texas S
ystem, 2016; AIR, 2018; Heckman, 2010). The advantage is 
that not only can these new data compare data science graduates to one another, but they can also 
compare the career pathways, successes, and failures of data science graduates to those of graduates 
in 
other fields. Such information can then be used to motivate further development and revision of the 
evolving data science curricula at the undergraduate level.
 Empirical evaluation is now possible because of the integration of multiple disparate sources
 of 
data at many 
academic institutions
Šfor example, 
the 
Ohio State
 University
 Ohio Education Research 
Center,
4 which is a collaboration of six Ohio universities and four research organizations
 and 
has data on 
students from preschool through the workforce. Seven states
ŠArkansas, Colorado, Minnesota, 
Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Washington
Šhave linked data so that students can see the earnings of 
graduates from institutions within these states (see
 Selingo, 2017). 
   BOX 5.2
 Linking Administrative Data 
  Academic institutions
 have a wealth of administrative data that can be used for evaluation 
purposes with minimal cost and burden
, and there is a
 consortium
 that has been established by 
universities to help standardize the data and make analysis possible. Administrative student transcript 
data, research funding data, and outcome measures have been integrated at the Institute for Research on 
Innovation and Sci
ence (IRIS) and through links to the U.S. Census Bureau and tax records on earnings 
and employment outcome
. Relevant data
 include the following:
                                                       4 The website for the Ohio Education Research Center is 
http://oerc.osu.edu
, accessed March 29, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-9  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   1. Student enrollment
 data
, which include basic demographics and inf
ormation on academic 
performance, 
are availab
le in all academic institutions
. In addition to information on the 
characteristics at entry of individual students in all fields, such data allow for the 
construction of detailed contextual information at the level of cohorts. At IRIS, for 
example, data cu
rrently exist for the University of California system, the University of 
Wisconsin, and the University of Michigan
. A concerted effort could be made to 
incorporate additional institutions that are implementing data science programs at the 
undergraduate and
 graduate levels.
 2. Research expenditures data
, such as 
data on undergraduate students 
who 
participat
e in 
research. 
For example, 
UMETRICS data, which are hosted by 
IRIS
, report information on 
all people paid by federal research grants 
and 
enable construction
 of detailed contextual 
measures of research training, especially labor
atories and researcher networks
 (Lane et al., 
2015). 
The number of universities participating in UMETRICS is 
increasing
.1  3. Dissertation data
, such as those 
derived from P
roQ
uest
,2 provi
de information on the 
scientific fields of graduate training as well as identify shared advisors and committee 
members
.  4. Grant titles and abstracts
 data
, such as those 
extracted from the Dimensions database
,3 allow anal
ysis of
 topics 
and classification by 
fields of research.
 5. Census Bureau data
, including the Longitudinal Employer
ŒHousehold Dynamics (LEHD) 
data set and the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD)
, permit the examination of the 
career outcomes, including earnings and employer characteristics, of 
students who 
complete 
or 
do not complete their degrees. The data can also be used to construct proxy 
measures of labor market expectations for each individual
Šbased 
both 
on labor market 
conditions (from the LEHD Quarterly Workforce Indicator series) and on
 the earnings and 
employment outcomes of individuals in their peer groups and networks.
  Together
, such linked administrative records give unparalleled sample size and detail to study the 
pathways of students, including underrepresented minority and female
 students, in all fields. 
  1 To view the current list, see http://iris.isr.umich.edu/, accessed January 22, 2018.
 2 The website for ProQuest is 
http://www.proquest.com/
, accessed January 22, 2018.
 3 The website for the Dimensions database is 
https://www.uberresearch.com/visual
-portfolios/, accessed January 
22, 2018.
  When integrated, these sources provide a unique data set for examining the educational, 
scholarly, and career trajectories of students while providing new insights into the mecha
nisms that shape 
outcomes for students from different backgrounds, races and ethnicities, and genders. These data include 
measures of individual characteristics ranging from undergraduate institution and standardized exam 
scores to race, ethnicity, and som
e information on financial status. From such data
, it becomes possible to 
identify cohorts at various levels, to characterize networks that provide social support as well as access to 
role models, and to provide information and resources that could contrib
ute to 
career
 success. Th
ese data 
can also illuminate both the labor market outcomes and shocks to demand that can drive outcomes for 
recent graduates. In the conceptual framework outlined 
earlier
, students
™ own characteristics and 
backgrounds are 
some 
of 
the most important determinants of outcomes either on their own or in 
combination with their 
courses, internships, and other educational experiences
. These new data also 
permit the measurement of these important characteristics of students.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-10  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   Finding 5.5:
 Data science methods applied both to individual programs and comparatively across 
programs can be used for both evaluation and evolution of d
ata science program components.
 It is 
essential that both processes are sustained as new pathways emerge at instit
utions.
  Recommendation 5.3: Academic institutions should ensure that programs are continuously 
evaluated and should work together to develop professional approaches to evaluation. This 
should include developing and sharing measurement and evaluation frame
works, data sets, 
and a culture of evolution guided by high
-quality evaluation. Efforts should be made to 
establish relationships with sector
-specific professional societies to help align education 
evaluation with market impacts. 
   ROLES FOR PROFESSION
AL 
SOCIETIES
  There are several challenges facing educational programs in any emerging field, and data science 
is no exception. As programs emerge and evolve, they look for best practices, for materials for classes, for 
guidance on career paths for students, 
and for a network or community with which to share ideas. 
Professional societies have a role to play in facilitating the community
-building and resource
-sharing that 
is needed.
 Data science benefits from sharing of materials whenever possible. However, the
re has been 
pushback to material collection by some researchers. Many may not have had intellectual property rights 
to these materials and did not want to share materials that were not theirs; others have had concerns about 
loss of intellectual property. S
till, it is important to learn from others
™ attempts. It is also important to 
have a means to identify and fill gaps in a program
™s resources (e.g., workflow; how to link together the 
tools and use them in real projects). Professional societies may play a 
major role in making materials 
available and in enabling educators to receive credit for sharing and material 
reuse. By valuing the high
-quality application of data over the quantity of data that is collected, this effort on the part of professional 
societ
ies could then incentivize even more data sharing. 
Professional societies can also play an important 
role in educating people about the 
process
 for sharing data by publishing best practices for increasing 
access to and awareness of useful, high
-quality dat
a sets. 
 Particularly for rapid
ly 
evolving fields such as data science, access to 
information about
 career 
paths (whether pursuing graduate education or moving into the labor workforce directly) may be difficult 
for students to obtain, significantly harder
 than for students in other long
-standing fields. For example, 
many STEM areas actively recruit undergraduates to attend professional society conferences at which 
they offer a wide range of career option workshops and presentations. Students in data scienc
e fields may 
find that obtaining such information is more difficult than for their peers in various STEM disciplines 
with large and active professional societies. Beyond formal meetings, professional societies host a wide 
array of information on their webs
ites that informs students about career options.
 The data science community would be well
-served by having a steering body to help organize 
conferences, collect materials (e.g., for programs, evaluation
5), provide models for industry interactions, 
and unde
rtake other activities. Professional societies could explore their role in pushing industry to 
provide career paths for students in order to motivate student adoption of data science programs. STEM
-minded students by
 and
 large can see the benefit in being 
trained as data scientist
s, especially in this 
competitive job environment. 
                                                       5 See, for example, the American Evaluation Association (http://www.eval.org/) or the Association for Public 
Policy Analysis and Management (http://www.appam.org/), accessed January 22, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-11  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Retention of talent, consequently, is a real challenge in most settings. New models may be needed 
to advance career progression and perhaps rotational models that allow for work f
lexibility and expanded 
problem sets. A clearinghouse or professional society, perhaps with foundation support, could help to 
foster further connection 
among
 the variety of established programs. However, it may be too difficult for 
a single data science pr
ofessional society to represent and be relevant to all data science communities. It is 
important to be cognizant and supportive of the many data scientists likely to be working in other fields. 
In addition to the need to accommodate the multidisciplinarity
 of data science, there is also a need to 
consider the business case for establishing new societies. It is unlikely that the revenue required for such 
an endeavor exists. A more structured collaboration of existing professional societies that work well 
tog
ether might work better; subsocieties devoted to data science elements may develop in any of these 
societies. These subsocieties could be closely connected to the educational opportunities for their 
members, fostering a sense of community and improved prof
essional development, while also promoting 
connections among practicing data scientists in other fields. Whatever convening mechanisms are chosen, 
they could cover varied topics such as curriculum, on
-ramping, continuing education, and bringing in 
multiple
 viewpoints, such as those from industry. Other opportunities include syndication, filtering, and 
editorial roles.
  Finding 5.6: 
As 
professional 
societies adapt to data science, improved coordination could offer 
new opportunities for additional collaborati
on and cross
-pollination. A group or conference with 
bridging capabilities would be helpful. Professional societies may find it useful to collaborate to 
offer such training and networking opportunities to their joint communities. 
  Recommendation 5.4: Exis
ting professional societies should coordinate to enable regular 
convening sessions 
on data 
science among 
their members. Peer review and discussion 
are 
essential to share ideas, best practices, and data. 
   REFERENCES
  Aaronson, D., L. Barrow, and W. Sander
. 2007. Teachers and student achievement in the Chicago public 
high schools. 
Journal of Labor Economics
 25(1):95
-135. AIR (American Institutes for Research). 2018. 
ﬁCollege Measures: Improving 
Higher 
Education 
Outcomes 
in the United States.
ﬂ http://www.air.org/center/college
-measures/
. Accessed April 17, 
2018. Avvisati, F., M. Guragand, N. Guyon, and E. Maurin. 2014. Getting parents involved: A
 field experiment 
in deprived schools. 
Review of Economic Studies
 81(1):57
-83. Behrman, J.R., S.W. Pa
rker, P.E. Todd, and K.I. Wolpin. 2015. Aligning learning
 incentives of students 
and teachers: Results from a social experiment in Mexican high
 schools. 
Journal of Political 
Economy
 123(2):325
-264.  Buser, T., M. Niederle, and H. Oosterbeek. 2014. Gender, 
competitiveness, and career
 choices. 
Quarterly 
Journal of Economics
 129(3):1409
-1447.  Figlio
, D., K. Karbownik, and K.G. Salvanes. 2016. Education research and administrative data. 
 Handbook of the Economics of Education
 5:75
-138. Figlio, D.N., and M.E. 
Lucas. 2004. Do high grading standards affect student
 performance? 
Journal of 
Public Economics
 89:1815
-1834. Gertler, P.J., S. Martinez, P. Premand, L.B. Rawlings, and C.M.J. Vermeersch. 2016. 
Impact Evaluation 
in Practice
. 2nd ed.Washington, D
.C.: Inter
-American Development Bank and World Bank. 
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    5-12  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Heckman, J.J. 2010. Building Bridges Between Structural and Program Evaluation Approaches to 
Evaluating Policy. 
Journal of Economic Literature
 48(2):356
-398.  Imberman, S.A., A.D. Kugler, and B.I. Sacerdote. 2012. 
Katrina
™s children: Evidence on the
 structure of 
peer effects from hurricane evacuees. 
American Economic Review
 102(5):2048
-2082.  Jacob, B.A., and L. Lefgren. 2008. Can principals identify effective teachers? Evidence on
 subjective 
performance evaluation 
in education. 
Journal of Labor Economics
 26(1):101
-136.  Japec, L., F. Kreuter, M. Berg, P. Biemer, P. Decker, C. Lampe, J. Lane, C. O
™Neil, and A. Usher. 2015.
 Big data in survey research: AAPOR Task Force report. 
Public Opinion Quarterly 
79(4):839
-880. Lane, J., J. Owen
-Smith, R. Rosen, and B. Weinberg. 2015. New linke
d data on research investments: 
Scientific 
workforce, productivity, and public value. 
Research
 Policy
 44(9):1659
-1671. Machin, S., S. McNally, and O. Silva. 2007. New technology in schools:
 Is there a payoff?
 Economic 
Journal
 117(522):1145
-1167.  Metcalf, H. 2010. Stuck in the pipeline: A critical review of STEM workforce literature. 
InterActions: 
UCLA Journal of Education and Information Studies
 6(2)
:1-20. National Science Board. 2015. 
Revi
siting the STEM Workforce. 
https://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=134866. Accessed January 23, 2018. 
 NRC (National Research Council). 2012. 
Discipline
-based Education Research: Understanding and 
Improving Learning in Undergraduate Science and Engi
neering
. Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press.
 NSF
 (National Scien
ce Foundation)
. 2014. ﬁCollege Board 
Launches 
New 
AP Computer Science 
Principles 
Course
.ﬂ https://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=133571. Accessed 
February 13, 2018.
O Pop
-Eleches, C., and M. Urquiola. 2013. Going to a better school: Effects and behavioral
 responses. 
American Economic Review
 103(4):1289
-1324.  Seling
o, J.J. 2017. Six 
myths about choosing a college major
. New York Times
, November 3. 
https://nyti.ms/2iYZN3
r. Accessed January 22, 2018.
 UC Berkeley (University of California, Berkeley). 2018. 
ﬁThe BJC Curriculum.
ﬂ https://bjc.berkeley.edu/curriculum
/. Accessed 
February 13, 2018.
 University of Texas System. 2016. UT System partners with U.S. Census Bureau to pr
ovide salary and 
jobs data of UT graduates across the nation. Press release, September 22. 
https://www.utsystem.edu/news/2016/09/22/ut
-system
-partners
-us-census
-bureau
-provide
-salary
-and
-jobs
-data
-ut-graduates
-across. 
Accessed February 13, 2018.
  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    6-1  PREPUBLICATION 
COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
       6 Conclusions
   Data science education is 
well 
into its formative stages of development
; it is evolving into a self
-supporting discipline
 and
 producing professionals with distinct and complementary skills relative to 
professionals in the computer, information, and statistical sciences. However, regardless of its 
potential 
eventual disciplinary status, the evidence points to robust growth of dat
a science education that will 
indelibly shape the undergraduate students of the future. In fact, fueled by growing student interest and 
industry demand, data science education will likely become a staple of the undergraduate experience. 
There will be an in
crease in the number of students majoring, minoring, earning certificates, or just taking 
courses in data science as the value of data skills becomes even more widely recognized. The adoption of 
a general education requirement in data science for all under
graduates will endow future generations of 
students with the basic understanding of data science that they need to become responsible citizens. 
Continuing education programs such as data science boot camps, career accelerators, summer schools, 
and incubato
rs will provide another stream of talent. This constitutes the emerging watershed of data 
science education that feeds multiple streams of generalists and specialists in society; citizens are 
empowered by their basic skills to examine, interpret, and draw 
value from data. 
 Today, the nation is in the formative phase of data science education
, where educational 
organizations are pioneering their own programs, each with different approaches to depth, breadth, and 
curricular emphasis (e.g., business, computer 
science, engineering, information science, mathematics, 
social science, or statistics). It is too early to expect consensus to emerge on certain best practices of data 
science education. However, it is not too early to envision the possible forms that such
 practices might 
take. Nor is it too early to make recommendations that can help the data science education community 
develop strategic vision and practices. The following is a summary of the findings and recommendations 
discussed in the 
preceding 
four cha
pters of this report.
   Finding 2.1:
 Data scientist
s today draw largely from extensions of the 
ﬁanalyst
ﬂ of years past 
trained in traditional disciplines. As data science becomes an integral part of many industries and 
enriches research and development, there will be an increased demand for more holistic and more 
nuanced 
data science roles
.  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    6-2  PREPUBLICATION 
COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Finding 2.2:
 Dat
a science programs that strive to meet the needs of their students will likely 
evolve to emphasize certain skills and capabilities. This will result in programs that prepare 
different types of data scientists.
  Recommendation 2.1: Academic institutions sho
uld embrace data science as a vital new 
field that requires specifically tailored instruction delivered through 
majors and minors in 
data science as well as the development of a cadre of faculty equipped to teach in this new 
field.
  Recommendation 2.2: 
Aca
demic institutions
 should provide and evolve a range of 
educational pathways to prepare students 
for an array of data science roles in the 
workplace
.  Finding 2.3
: A critical task in the education of future data scientists is to 
instill
 data acumen. This 
requires exposure to key concepts in data science, real
-world data and problems that can reinforce 
the limitations of tools, and ethical considerations that permeate many applications. Key concepts 
involved in developing data acumen incl
ude the following:
   Mathematical foundations,
  Computational foundations,
  Statistical foundations,
  Data management and curation,
  Data description and visualization,
  Data modeling and assessment,
  Workflow and reproducibility,
  Communication and teamwork, 
  Domain
-specific considerations, and
  Ethical problem solving.
  Recommendation 2.3: To prepare their graduates for this new data
-driven era, academic 
institutions should encourage the development of a basic understanding of data science in 
all 
undergraduates.
  Recommendation 2.4: Ethics is a topic that, given the nature of data science, students 
should learn and practice throughout their education. 
Academic institutions
 should ensure 
that ethics is woven into the data science curriculum from the
 beginning and throughout.
  Recommendation 2.5: The data science community should adopt a code of ethics; such a 
code should be affirmed by member
s of professional societies, 
included in professional 
development programs and curricula
, and conveyed through
 educational programs
. The 
code should be reevaluated often in light of new developments.
  Finding 3.1:
 Undergraduate education in data science 
can be
 experienced in many forms. These 
include the following:
   Integrated introductory courses that can satisfy
 a general education requirement; 
  A major in data science, including advanced skills as primary field of study; 
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    6-3  PREPUBLICATION 
COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   A minor or track in data science, where intermediate skills are connected to 
major field of study;
  Two
-year 
degrees and certificates
;   Other c
ertificates, often requiring fewer courses than a major but more than a 
minor; 
  Massive open online courses, which can engage large numbers of students at a 
variety of levels
; and
  Summer programs and boot camps, which can serve to supplement academic or 
on-the
-job training. 
  Recommendation 3.1: Four
-year and 
two
-year 
institutions 
should establish a forum for 
dialog
ue across institutions 
on all aspects of data science education, training, and workforce 
development.
  Finding 4.1: 
The nature of data science 
is such that it offers multiple pathways for students of 
different backgrounds to engage at levels ranging from basic to expert.
  Finding 4.2:
 Data science would particularly benefit from broad participation by 
underrepresented minorities because of the ma
ny applications to problems of interest to diverse 
populations. 
  Recommendation 4.1: As 
data science 
programs develop, they should focus on attracting 
students with varied backgrounds and degrees of preparation and preparing them for 
succe
ss in a variety 
of 
careers.
  Finding 4.3:
 Institutional flexibility will 
involve 
the development of curricula that take advantage 
of current course availability and will potentially be constrained by the availability of teaching 
expertise. Whatever organizational or infra
structure model is adopted, incentives are needed to 
encourage faculty participation and to overcome barriers.
  Finding 4.4:
 The economics of developing programs has recently changed with the 
shift to
 cloud
-based approaches and platforms.
  Finding 5.1:
 The
 evolution of data science programs at a particular institution will depend on the 
particular institution
™s pedagogical style and the students
™ backgrounds and goals, as well as the 
requirements of the job market and graduate schools.
  Recommendation 5.1: 
Because these are early days for undergraduate data science 
education, academic institutions should be prepared to evolve programs over time. They 
should create and maintain the flexibility and incentives to facilitate the sharing of courses, 
material
s, and faculty among departments and programs.
  Finding 5.2:
 There is a need for broadening the perspective of faculty who are trained in 
particular areas of data science to be knowledgeable of the breadth of approaches to data science 
so that they can more e
ffectively educate students at all levels. 
  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    6-4  PREPUBLICATION 
COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Recommendation 5.2: During the development of data science programs, institutions should 
provide support so 
that 
the faculty can become more cognizant of the varied aspects of data 
science through discussion, co
-teaching, sharing of materials, short courses, and other forms 
of training.
  Finding 5.3: 
The data science community would benefit from the creation of websites and 
journals that document and make available best practices, curricula, 
education research findings, 
and other materials related to undergraduate data science education.
  Finding 5.4:
 The evolution of undergraduate education in data science can be driven by data 
science. Exploiting administrative records, in conjunction with o
ther data sources such as 
economic information and survey data, can enable effective transformation of programs to better 
serve their students.
  Finding 5.5
: Data science methods applied both to individual programs and comparatively across 
programs can be 
used for both evaluation and evolution of data science program components. It is 
essential that both processes are sustained as new pathways emerge at institutions.
  Recommendation 5.3: Academic institutions should ensure that programs are continuously 
eva
luated and should work together to develop professional approaches to evaluation. This 
should include developing and sharing measurement and evaluation frameworks, data sets, 
and a culture of evolution guided by high
-quality evaluation. Efforts should be m
ade to 
establish relationships with sector
-specific professional societies to help align education 
evaluation with market impacts.
  Finding 5.6: 
As professional
 societies adapt to data science, improved coordination could offer 
new opportunities for additi
onal collaboration and cross
-pollination. A group or conference with 
bridging capabilities would be helpful. Professional societies may find it useful to collaborate to 
offer such training and networking opportunities to their joint communities. 
  Recommen
dation 5.4: Existing professional societies should coordinate to enable regular 
convening sessions 
on data science 
among 
their members. Peer review and discussion 
are 
essential to share ideas, best practices, and data.
  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
          Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
    Appendixes
   Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
    Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    A-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
        A Biographies of the Committee
   LAURA HAAS, 
Co-Chair
, joined the University of Massachusetts Amherst in August 2017 as dean of 
the College of Information and Computer Sciences, after a long career at IBM, where she was accorded 
the title IBM Fellow in recognition of her impact. At the time of 
Dr. Haas™s 
ret
irement from IBM, she was 
director of IBM Research
™s Accelerated Discovery Lab (2011
-2017), after serving as director of computer 
science at IBM
™s Almaden Research Center from 2005 to 2011. She had worldwide responsibility for 
IBM Research
™s exploratory sc
ience program from 2009 through 2013. From 2001
 to 
2005, she led the 
Information Integration Solutions architecture and development teams in IBM
™s Software Group. 
Previously, Dr. Haas was a research staff member and manager at Almaden. She is best known fo
r her 
work on the Starburst query processor, from which 
the database server 
DB2 LUW was developed, on 
Garlic, a system 
that 
allowed integration of heterogeneous data sources, and on Clio, the first 
semiautomatic tool for heterogeneous schema mapping. She h
as received several IBM awards for 
Outstanding Innovation and Technical Achievement, an IBM Corporate Award for 
Information 
Integration Technology
, the Anita Borg Institute Technical Leadership Award, and the Association for 
Computing Machinery (ACM) Speci
al Interest Group on Management of Data Edgar F. Codd Innovation 
Award. Dr. Haas was 
vice president 
of the Very Large Data Bases Endowment Board of Trustees from 
2004 to 
2009 and served on the board of the Computing Research Association from 2007
 to 
2016 (vice 
chair
, 2009
-2015). She currently serves on the National Academies Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board (2013
- 2019). She is an ACM 
fellow
, a member of the National Academy of 
Engineering, and a 
fellow 
of the American Academy of Arts and Scien
ces.  ALFRED O. HERO III, 
Co-Chair
, is the John H. Holland Distinguished University Professor of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and R. Jamison and Betty Williams Professor of 
Engineering at the University of Michigan. 
Dr. Hero™s
 primary appointment is in the Department of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
, and he also has appointments, by courtesy, in the 
Department of Biomedical Engineering and the Department of Statistics. In 2008 
Dr. Hero 
was awarded 
the Digiteo Chai
re d
™Excellence, sponsored by Digiteo Research Park in Paris, located at the Ecole 
Superieure d
™Electricite, Gif
-sur
-Yvette, France. He is an Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE) 
fellow, 
and several of his research articles have receive
d best paper awards. 
Dr. 
Hero was 
awarded the University of Michigan Distinguished Faculty Achievement Award (2011). He received the 
IEEE Signal Processing Society Meritorious Service Award (1998) and the IEEE Third Millennium 
Medal (2000). He was presiden
t of the IEEE Signal Processing Society (2006
-2008) and was on the 
board 
of 
directors 
of the IEEE (2009
-2011), where he served as director of Division IX (Signals and 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    A-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Applications). Dr. Hero
™s recent research interests have been in detection, classificatio
n, pattern analysis, 
and adaptive sampling for spatiotemporal data. Of particular interest are applications to network security, 
multimodal sensing and tracking, biomedical imaging, and genomic signal processing.
 Dr. Hero received 
a B.S. (summa cum laude) 
from Boston University
 in 
1980 and a Ph.D. from Princeton University
 in 
1984, both in electrical engineering.
  ANI ADHIKARI is a senior lecturer in statistics at the University of California, Berkeley
. Dr. Adhikari 
has received the Distinguished Teaching 
Award at Berkeley and the Dean
™s Award for Distinguished 
Teaching at Stanford University. While 
Dr. Adhikari™s
 research interests are centered on applications of 
statistics in the natural sciences, her primary focus has always been on teaching and mentorin
g students. 
She teaches courses at all levels and has a particular affinity for teaching statistics to students who have 
little mathematical preparation. 
Dr. Adhikari
 received 
an 
undergraduate degree from the Indian Statistical 
Institute and 
a Ph.D. in sta
tistics from the University of California, Berkeley.
  DAVID CULLER joined the faculty of the University of California, Berkeley
, in 19
89 and is currently 
the i
nterim 
dean for Data Sciences. He was associate chair (2010
-2012) and chair (2012
-June 2014) of t
he 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences department, the founding director of Intel Research, 
Berkeley, and co
-founder of Arch Rock corp. Dr. Culler won the Okawa Prize in 2013. He is a member of 
the National Academy of Engineering, an Association f
or Computing Machinery fellow
, and an Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers fellow. He has been named one of 
Scientific American
™s ﬁTop 50 
Researchersﬂ and the creator of one of 
MIT Technology Review
™s ﬁ10 Technologies That Will Change the 
Worl
d.ﬂ  Dr. Culler™s research addresses distributed systems for the built environment, networks of small, 
embedded wireless devices; planetary
-scale Internet services; parallel computer architecture; parallel 
programming languages; and high
-performance commun
ication.  Dr. Culler received a B.A. from the 
University of California, Berkeley, in 1980, and an M.S. and a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology in 1985 and 1989, respectively.
  DAVID DONOHO is an Anne T. and Robert M. Bass Professor of Hu
manities and Sciences and a 
professor of stat
istics at Stanford University. 
He is a member of the National Academy of Sciences 
and
 Foreign Associate of the
 French
 Académie des Sciences. He has worked in
 industrial research in oil 
exploration (Western 
Geophysical), in empirical finance (Renaissance Technologies)
, and
 co-founded a 
successful information technology sta
rtup, BigFix,
 acquired by IBM. 
Dr. Donoho received an A.B. from 
Princeton University and a Ph.D. from Harvard University. He received a Mac
arthur Fellowship and was 
recipient of the 2013 Shaw Prize in Mathematical Sciences.
  E. THOMAS EWING is an associate dean for Graduate Studies, Research, and Diversity in the College 
of Liberal Arts and Human Sciences and a professor in the Department of 
History at Virginia Tech. Dr. 
Ewing teaches courses in the history of data in social context, as well as courses in
 Russian, European, 
Middle Eastern, and world history; gender/women™s history; and historical methods. His publications 
include
 Separate Scho
ols: Gender, Policy, and Practice in the Postwar Soviet Union
 (2010) and
 The 
Teachers of Stalinism: Policy, Practice, and Power in Soviet Schools in the 1930s
 (2002), and his articles 
on Stalinist education have been published in
 Gender & History
, American
 Educational Research 
Journal
, Women™s History Review
, History of Education Quarterly
, Russian Review
, and
 Journal of 
Women™s History
. He has received six grants from the National Endowment for the Humanities at the 
intersection of digital humanities, data
 analytics, and medical history projects. Dr. Ewing™s education 
includes a B.A. from Williams College and a Ph.D. in history from the University of Michigan.
  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    A-3  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  LOUIS J. GROSS is an Alvin and Sally Beaman Distinguished Professor of Ecology and Evolutionary 
Biology and Mathematics and director of the Institute for Environmental Modeling at the University of 
Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK).
 Dr. Gross 
is also director of the National Institute for Mathematical and 
Biological Synthesis, a National Science Foundation
-funded center to foster research and education at the 
interface between math and biology. His research focuses on applications of mathematics and 
computational methods in
 many areas of ecology, including disease ecology, landscape ecology, spatial 
control f
or natural resource management, photosynthetic dynamics, and the development of quantitative 
curricula for life science undergraduates. 
Dr. Gross 
led the effort at UT
K to develop an across
-trophic
-level modeling framework to assess the biotic impacts of al
ternative water planning for the Everglades of 
Florida. He has co
-directed several courses and workshops in mathematical ecology at the International 
Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, Italy, and he has served as program chair of the Ecological 
Soc
iety of America, president of the Society for Mathematical Biology, president of the UTK Faculty 
Senate, treasurer for the American Institute of Biological Sciences, and chair of the National Research 
Council Committee on Education in Biocomplexity Researc
h. Dr. Gross 
is the 2006 Distinguished 
Scientist awardee of the American Institute of Biological Sciences and is a fellow of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science and of the Society for Mathematical Biology. He has served 
on the National 
Research Council Board on Life Sciences and was liaison to the National Research 
Council Standing Committee on Emerging Science for Environmental Health Decisions.
 Dr. Gross 
completed a B.S. in mathematics at Drexel University and a Ph.D. in applied mathem
atics at Cornell 
University, and has been a faculty member at UTK since 1979.
  NICHOLAS J. HORTON is Beitzel Professor
 of Technology and Society and professor of s
tatistics at 
Amherst Coll
ege
. Dr. Horton is 
an applied biostatistician
 whose
 work is based squarely within the 
mathematical 
and computational 
sciences but spans other fields in order to ensure that biomedical 
research is conducted on a sound footing. He has published more than 
170 
papers in the statistics and 
biomedical literature
 and 4 books on statistical computing and data science. He has taught a variety of 
courses in statistics and related fields, including introductory statistics, data science, probability, 
theoretical statistics, regression, and design of experiments. He is 
passionate about improving quantitative 
and computational literacy for students with a variety of backgrounds as well as engagement and mastery 
of higher
 level concepts and capacities to think with data. Dr. Horton received the American Statistical 
Associa
tion (ASA) Waller Award for Distinguished Teaching, the Mathematical Association of America 
Hogg Award for Excellence in Teaching, the Mu Sigma Rho Statistics Education Award, and the ASA 
Founders Award. He was a co
-principal investigator of the National S
cience Foundation
-funded Project 
MOSAIC, serves as the chair of the Committee of Presidents of Statistical Societies, is a fellow of the 
ASA
 and the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science
, and was a research fellow at the 
Bureau of Labor Stati
stics. Dr. Horton earned 
an 
A.B. from Harvard College and 
an Sc.D. in biostatistics 
from the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.
  JULIA LANE is a professor at the Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP) and at the New York 
University (NYU) Wagn
er Graduate School of Public Service. Dr. Lane also serves as a provostial fellow 
for innovation analytics and senior fellow at NYU™s GovLab. Dr. Lane is an economist who is the co
-founder of the Longitudinal Employer
ŒHousehold Dynamics (LEHD) partnership 
with the Census 
Bureau, which is now a major national statistical program. Dr. Lane has authored almost 80 refereed 
articles and edited or authored 10 books. Dr. Lane™s work to quantify the results of federal stimulus 
spending has been published in 
Science
 and 
Nature
. She co
-founded the new Institute for Research on 
Innovation and Science at the University of Michigan
, which uses empirical evidence to describe the 
structure of the research workforce, the nature and evolution of research collaborations, and 
the diffusion 
of sponsored research results. Dr. Lane has had leadership positions in a number of policy and data 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    A-4  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  science initiatives at her other previous appointments, which include senior fellow and senior managing 
economist at the American Institutes f
or Research; senior vice president and director, Economics 
Department at NORC/University of Chicago; various consultancy roles at the World Bank; and assistant, 
associate, and full professor at American University. Dr. Lane received a Ph.D. in economics an
d a 
master™s in statistics from the University of Missouri.
  ANDREW 
MCCALLUM 
is a professor and director of the Center for Data Science, as well as the 
Information Extraction and Synthesis Laboratory, in the College of Information and Computer Science at 
the University of Massachusetts Amherst. 
Dr. McCallum 
has published over 250 p
apers in many areas of 
artificial intelligence, including natural language processing, machine learning, and reinforcement 
learning; his work has received over 45,000 citations. In the early 2000s he was vice president of research 
and development at WhizBa
ng Labs, a 170
-person start
-up company that used machine learning for 
information extraction from the 
web
. Dr. McCallum 
is an Association for the Advancement of Artificial 
Intelligence 
fellow and 
the recipient of the UMass Chancellor
™s Award for Research a
nd Creative 
Activity, the UMass NSM Distinguished Research Award, the UMass Lilly Teaching Fellowship, 
as well 
as research awards from Google, IBM, Microsoft, and Yahoo. He was the general chair for the 
International Conference on Machine Learning 2012 and
 is the current president of the International 
Machine Learning Society, as well as member of the editorial board of the 
Journal of Machine Learning 
Research
. For the past 10 years
, Dr. 
McCallum has been active in research on statistical machine learning 
applied to text, especially information extraction, entity resolution, social network analysis, structured 
prediction, semisupervised learning, and deep neural networks for knowledge representation.
 Dr. 
McCallum obtained a Ph.D. from the University of Roche
ster in 1995 with Dana Ballard and a 
postdoctoral fellowship from Carnegie Mellon University with Tom Mitchell and Sebastian Thrun.
  RICHARD M
CCULLOUGH has been the vice provost for research
 (VPR) at Harvard University since 
2012, working with the presiden
t and provost to encourage, cultivate, and coordinate high
-impact 
academic research across all of Harvard
™s schools and affiliated institutions. The 
office 
of the VPR has 
broad responsibility and oversight for the development, review, and implementation of
 strategies, 
planning, and policies related to the organization and execution of academic research across the entire 
university. Dr. McCullough leads a new office of 
foundation 
and 
corporate development
. He also assists 
in oversight of many of the interdis
ciplinary institutes, centers, and initiatives across Harvard. Under 
Dr.
 McCullough
™s leadership, the 
office 
of the VPR is particularly focused on removing barriers to 
collaboration, whether in university policies or 
in 
financial or administrative systems.
 Additionally, the 
VPR
 works with the president and provost to foster and encourage entrepreneurship among 
undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty members
, and
 helps to lead the development of the new 
innovation campus. 
Dr. 
McCullough is also a prof
essor of materials science and engineering at Harvard 
and is a member of numerous professional societies and boards. Prior to being named 
VPR
 at Harvard, 
Dr. McCullough was the vice president for research at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, where 
he previously served as the dean of the Mellon College of Science and professor and head of the 
Department of Chemistry. Dr. McCullough has founded two companies: Plextronics, Inc.
, and Liquid X 
Printed Metals.
 Dr. McCullough has a B.S. in chemistry from t
he University of Texas, Dallas, and earned 
an M.A. and a Ph.D. in chemistry at Johns Hopkins University. He did his postdoctoral fellowship at 
Columbia University.
  REBECCA NUGENT is the associate department head, d
irector of undergraduate s
tudies, and a teaching 
professor in the Department of Statistics & Data Science at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) and has 
been teaching at CMU since 2006. Dr. Nugent recently was awarded top teaching honors with the 
American Statistical Association Walle
r Education Award; the William H. and Frances S. Ryan Award 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    A-5  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  for Meritorious Teaching; and Statistician of the Year by the ASA Pittsburgh Chapter. Dr. Nugent™s 
research interests lie in clustering, record linkage, educational data mining/psychometrics, publ
ic health, 
tech/innovation/entrepreneurship, and semantic organization. Dr. Nugent received a B.A with majors in 
mathematics, statistics, and Spanish at Rice University and an M.S. in statistics at Stanford University. 
She completed a Ph.D. in statistics a
t the University of Washington in 2006.
  LEE RAINIE is the director of 
Internet
, science, and technology research at Pew Research Center. Under 
Mr.
 Rainie™s
 leadership, the 
center 
has issued more than 500 reports based on its surveys that examine 
people
™s online activities and the 
role of the Internet
 in their lives. 
Mr. Rainie 
also directs the 
center™s 
new 
initiative on the intersection of science and society. The American Sociological Association gave 
Mr. 
Rainie its award for 
Excellence in 
Reporting on 
Social Issues
 in 2014 and described his work as the 
ﬁmost 
authoritative source of reliable data on the use and impact of the internet and mobile connectivity.
ﬂ Rainie 
is a co
-author of 
Networked: The 
New Social Operating System
 (MIT Press, 2012) 
and five boo
ks about 
the future of the 
Internet 
that are drawn from the 
center™s 
research. 
Mr. Rainie 
gives several dozen 
speeches a year to government officials, media leaders, scholars and students, technology executives, 
librarians, and nonprofit groups about the c
hanging media ecosystem. He is also regularly interviewed by 
major news organizations about technology trends. Prior to launching Pew Research Center
™s technology 
research, 
Mr. 
Rainie was managing editor of 
U.S. News & World Report
. He is a graduate of Harvard 
University and has a 
master™s degree 
in political science from Long Island University.
  ROB RUTENBAR joined the faculty at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU)
 in 1985
. Dr. Rutenbar 
spent 
25 years in electrical and computer engine
ering at CMU, ultimately holding the Stephen J. Jatras (E
™47) 
Chair. He was the founding director of the Center for Circuit and System Solutions, a large consortium of 
U.S. schools (e.g., CMU, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Stanford, Berkeley, Calt
ech, Cornell, 
Columbia, Georgia Tech, University of California, Los Angeles) supported by the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency and the U.S. semiconductor industry, focused on design problems at the end of 
Moore
™s Law scaling. In 2010
, Dr. Rutenbar
 moved to the University of Illinois, Urbana
-Champaign, 
where he was Abel Bliss Professor and head of 
the 
Department of 
Computer Science. At 
the University of 
Illinois
, he pioneered the novel CS + X program, which combines a core computer science curriculu
m with a disciplinary 
ﬁXﬂ curriculum, leading to a 
bachelor™s 
degree in 
ﬁX.ﬂ Student 
pipelines for CS + 
anthropology, astronomy, chemistry, 
and 
linguistics are now under way, with several more CS + X 
degrees under design. 
Dr. Rutenbar 
now serves as 
senior 
vice chancellor 
for 
research 
at the University of 
Pittsburgh. His research has focused 
on three 
primary 
area
s: tools for integrated circuit
 design, statistics 
of nanoscale chip designs, and custom architectures for machine learning and perception. In 1998 
he 
founded Neolinear, Inc., to commercialize the first practical synthesis tools for 
non
digital ICs, and served 
as Neolinear
™s chief scientist until its acquisition by Cadence in 2004. In 2006 he founded Voci 
Technologies
, Inc.
, to commercialize enterprise
-scale voice analytics. 
Dr. Rutenbar 
has won numerous 
awards, including the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
 Circuits and Systems
 Society
 Industrial Pioneer Award and the Semiconductor Research Corporation Arist
otle Award. His work
 has 
been featured in venues ranging from 
Slashdot
 to the 
Economist
. Dr. Rutenbar received a Ph.D. from the 
University of Michigan in 1984.
  KRISTIN M. TOLLE is the director of the Data Science Initiative in Microsoft Research Outreach, 
Redmond, Washington. Dr. Tolle 
joined Microsoft in 2000 and 
has acquired numerous patents and 
worked for several product teams including the Natural Language Gr
oup, Visual Studio, and the 
Microsoft Office Excel Team. Since joining 
the 
Microsoft Research 
Outreach 
program in 2006, she has 
run several major initiatives from biomedical computing and environmental science to more traditional 
computer and information s
cience programs around natural user interactions and data curation. She also 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    A-6  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  directed the development of the Microsoft Translator Hub and the Environmental Science Services 
Toolkit. Dr. Tolle is an editor, along with Tony Hey and Stewart Tansley, of one of
 the earliest books on 
data science, 
The Fourth Paradigm: Data Intensive Scientific Discovery
 (Microsoft Research, 2009)
. Her 
current focus is developing an outreach program to engage with academics on data science in general and 
more specifically around u
sing data to create meaningful and useful user experiences across device 
platforms. Dr. Tolle
™s present research interests include global public health as related to climate change, 
mobile computing to enable field scientists and inform the public, sensors
 used to gather ecological and 
environmental data, and integration and interoperability of large heterogeneous environmental data 
sources. She collaborates with several major research groups in Microsoft Research including eScience, 
computational science l
aboratory, computational ecology and environmental science, and the sensing and 
energy research group.
 Prior to joining Microsoft Dr. Tolle was an Oak Ridge Science and Engineering 
Research fellow for the National Library of Medicine and a research associa
te at the University of 
Arizona Artificial Intelligence Lab managing the group on medical information retrieval and natural 
language processing. Dr. Tolle earned a Ph.D. in management of information systems with a minor in 
computational linguistics from th
e Univers
ity of Arizona.
  TALITHIA WILLIAMS takes sophisticated numerical concepts and makes them understandable and 
relatable to everyone. As illustrated in her popular 
TED Talk 
ﬁOwn Your Body
™s Data,
ﬂ Dr. Williams 
demystifies
 the mathematical process in 
amusing and insightful ways, using statistics as a way of seeing 
the world in a new light and transforming our future through the bold new possibilities inherent in the 
science, technology, engineering
, and mathematics
 (STEM) fields. As an associate profes
sor of 
mathematics at Harvey Mudd College, 
Dr. Williams 
has made it her life
™s work to get people
Šstudents, 
parents, educators, and community members
Šmore excited about the possibilities inherent in a STEM 
education. In her present capacity as a faculty me
mber, she exemplifies the role of teacher and scholar 
through outstanding research, with a passion for integrating and motivating the educational process with 
real
-world statistical applications. Her professional experiences include research appointments a
t the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, the National Security Agency, and NASA. Dr. Williams develops statistical 
models 
that 
emphasize the spatial and temporal structure of data and has partnered with the World Health 
Organization in developing a cataract model 
used to predict the cataract surgical rate for countries in 
Africa. Through her research and work in the community at large, she is helping change the collective 
mind
-set regarding STEM in general and math in particular
Šrebranding the field of mathematics 
as anything but dry, technical, or male
-dominated but instead a logical, productive career path that is crucial 
to the future of the country.
 Dr. Williams™s
 educational background includes a 
bachelor™s degree in 
mathematics from Spelman College, 
masters™ d
egrees both 
in 
mathematics from Howard University and 
in 
statistics from Rice University, and a Ph.D. in statistics from Rice University.
 ANDREW ZIEFFLER is a senior lecturer and researcher in the Quantitative Methods in Education 
program within the Depart
ment of Educational Psychology at the University of Minnesota. Dr. Zieffler 
teaches undergraduate
- and graduate
-level courses in statistics and trains and supervises graduate students 
in statistics education. His scholarship primarily focuses on statistics
 education
, and he has authored or 
co-authored several papers and book chapters related to statistics education. Additionally, he has been a 
co-principal investigator on many National Science Foundation
-funded statistics education r
esearch 
projects. Dr. Zi
effler 
has co
-authored two textbooks that serve as an introduction to modern statistical and 
computational methods for students in the educational and behavioral sciences. He currently serves as co
-editor of the journal
 Technology Innovations in Statistics
 Education
 and as a member of the Research 
Advisory Board for the Consortium for the Advancement of Undergraduate Statistics Education. Dr. 
Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    A-7  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Zieffler received his Ph.D. in 
quantitative methods in e
ducation from the University of Minnesota in 
2006.    Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    B-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
        B Meetings and Presentations
   FIRST COMMITTEE MEETING 
 Washington, D.C. 
 December 12
-13, 2016  Lessons from 
Current 
Data 
Science 
Programs and 
Future 
Directions
 Rebecca Nugent, Carnegie Mellon University
 Rob Rutenbar, University of Illinois, Urbana
-Champaign 
 David Culler, University of California, Berkeley
 William Yslas Velez, University of Arizona
 Duncan Temple Lang, University of California, Davis
  Envisioning the 
Field of 
Data 
Science and 
Future 
Directions and 
Implications to 
Society
 David Donoho, Stanford University 
 Lee Rainie, Pew Research Center
  Expanding 
Diversity in 
Data 
Science
ŠAmong 
Student 
Populations and in 
Topic 
Areas 
Embraced by 
    Data 
Science
 Bhramar Mukherjee, University of Michigan
 Deb Agarwal, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
 Andrew Zieffler, University of Minnesota
  Questions 
That 
Should 
Be Asked to 
Envision the 
Future of 
Data 
Science for 
Undergraduates
 Tom Ewing, Virginia Tec
h Louis Gross, University of Tennessee, Knoxville 
 Chris Mentzel, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation 
 Patrick Perry, New York University
 John Abowd, U.S. Census Bureau
   SECOND COMMITTEE MEETING 
 Webinar
 April 25, 2017
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    B-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   Overview of the 
Study
 Michelle Schwalbe, National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
 Alfred Hero, University of Michigan
 Laura Haas, IBM Almaden Research Center
 Louis Gross, University of Tennessee, Knoxville
  Facilitated 
Discussion
 Andy Burnett, Knowinnovation
   WORKSHOP 
 Washington, D.C. 
 May 2
-3, 2017  Opening 
Comments
 Study Co
-Chairs: Laura Haas, IBM, and Alfred Hero III, University of Michigan
  Comments from the National Science Foundation
 Chaitan Baru, National Science Foundation
  Overview of the 
Workshop
 Andy Burnett, Knowinnovation
  Workshop Themes
  Skills and 
Knowledge for 
Future 
Data 
Scientists
 Rob Rutenbar, University of Illinois, Urbana
-Champaign
  Broadening 
Participation in 
Data 
Science 
Education
 Julia Lane, New York University
  Future 
Delivery of 
Data 
Science 
Education
 Nic
holas
 Horton, Amherst College
  Table Discussions About Key Questions
  Question 
Exploration 
Groups
 Small breakout groups to discuss all three questions
  Feedback from 
Question 
Groups
 Present ideas and discuss questions with full gro
up  Integrate 
Ideas into 
Three 
Thematic 
Areas
 Form three groups aligned with the thematic questions or possible new questions
  Feedback from 
Question 
Groups
 Share the integrated ideas with the full group
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    B-3  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
   Plenary 
Discussion of 
Feedback
 Study Co
-Chairs: 
Laura Haas, IBM, and Alfred Hero III, University of Michigan
  New 
Questions and 
Ideas 
That E
merged 
Overnight
 Full group discussion led by Andy Burnett, Knowinnovation
  Identify the 
Most 
Promising 
Ideas and 
Possible 
Findings for the 
Committee
™s Interim 
Repo
rt Small table groups
  Backcast the 
Most 
Promising 
Ideas
 Small table groups discuss what steps would have to be taken in order to implement the most 
promising ideas
   WEBINAR: BUILDING DATA ACUMEN 
 September 12, 2017
  Capstone 
Courses
 Nicole Lazar, 
University of Georgia
  NC State University Data Initiative
 Mladen Vouk, North Carolina State University
  Moderated 
Discussion
 Tom Ewing, Virginia Tech
   WEBINAR: INCORPORATING REAL
-WORLD EXAMPLES 
 September 19, 2017
  Using 
Urban and 
Sports 
Data in 
Student 
Projects 
 Cláudio Silva, New York University
  Building a 
Talent 
Pipeline 
Through a 
Strategic 
Career 
Development 
Program and 
 Academic
-Industrial 
Partnership
 Sears Merritt, MassMutual Financial Group
  Moderated 
Discussion
 Tom Ewing, Virginia Tech
    WEBINAR: FACULTY TRAINING AND CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT
 September 26, 2017
  Go to the 
People: Impactful 
Faculty 
Training in 
Data 
Science 
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    B-4  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Michael Posner, Villanova University
  Shodor, National Computational Science Institute, XSEDE, and Blue Waters
ŠHow 
Can 
We  Help? 
 Bob Panoff
, Shodor Education Foundation
  Moderated 
Discussion
 Nicholas Horton, Amherst College
   WEBINAR: COMMUNICATION SKILLS AND TEAMWORK
 October 3, 2017
  The 
Imperative of 
Interdisciplinarity in 
Data 
Science
  Madeleine Clare Elish, Data and 
Society Research Institute
  Data 
Science 
Collaboration for 
Public
-facing 
Research
 Adam Hughes, Pew Research Center
  Moderated 
Discussion
 Lee Rainie, Pew Research
   WEBINAR: INTERDEPARTMENTAL COLLABORATION AND INSTITUTIONAL 
ORGANIZATION
 October 10, 2017
  Forging Virginia Tech
™s Computational Modeling and Data Analytics (CMDA) 
Major 
Across 
 Departments 
 Mark Embree, Virginia Tech
  Some 
Thoughts on 
Data 
Science 
Education for 
Undergraduates 
 Mike Franklin, University of Chicago
  Moderated discussion
 Tom Ewing, 
Virginia Tech
   WEBINAR: ETHICS
 October 17, 2017
  An 
Ethical 
Reasoning 
Framework for 
Data 
Science 
Education
 Sorin Adam Matei, Purdue University
  Ethical 
Thinking for 
Data 
Science 
Education
 Brittany Fiore
-Gartland, University of Washington
  Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    B-5  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Moderated 
Discussion
 Lee Rainie, Pew Research
   WEBINAR: ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION FOR DATA SCIENCE PROGRAMS
 October 24, 2017
  Evaluation of 
Data 
Science 
Programs 
 Pamela Bishop, University of Tennessee, Knoxville
  Assessing 
Data 
Science 
Learning 
Outcomes
  Kari 
Jordan, Data Carpentry
  Moderated 
Discussion
 Louis Gross, University of Tennessee, Knoxville
   WEBINAR: DIVERSITY, INCLUSION, AND INCREASING PARTICIPATION 
 November 7, 2017
  Diversity, 
Inclusion, and 
Increasing 
Participation in 
Data 
Science
  Allison 
Master, University of Washington
  Diversity and 
Inclusion in 
Data 
Science: Using 
Data
-informed 
Decisions to 
Drive 
Student 
Success 
 Talithia Williams, Harvey Mudd College
  Moderated 
Discussion
 Nicholas Horton, Amherst College
   WEBINAR: 2
-YEAR COLLEGES AND INSTITUTIONAL PARTNERSHIPS 
 November 14, 2017
  Developing a 2
-year 
College 
Certificate 
Program in 
Data 
Science 
 Brian Kotz, Montgomery College
  Data Analytics Certificate Program at JCCC 
 Suzanne Smith, Johnson County Community
 College
  Moderated 
Discussion
 Laura Ha
as, University of Massachusetts
 Amherst 
   THIRD COMMITTEE MEETING 
 Washington, D.C. 
 December 6
-7, 2017
  Webinar 
Recaps
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    B-6  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Tom Ewing, Virginia Tech
 Nicholas Horton, Amherst College
 Lee Rainie, Pew Research
 Louis Gross, 
University of Tennessee, Knoxville
 Laura Ha
as, University of Massachusetts
 Amherst
  Big Data Hubs
 Melissa Cragin, Midwest Big Data Hub
 Renata Rawlings
-Goss, South Big Data Hub
  Comments from the National Science Foundation
 Stephanie August, National 
Science Foundation
 Chaitan Baru, National Science Foundation
        Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    C-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
     C Contributing Individuals
   The committee would also like to thank the following 
individuals for providing input to this 
study:
  John Abowd, U.S. Census Bureau
 Deb Agarwal, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
 Jon Ahlquist, Florida State University 
 Barbara Alvin, Eastern Washington University
 Barbara Anthony, Southwestern University
 Stephanie August, National Science Foundation
 David Austin, North Carolina State University
 Maria Aysa
-Lastra, Winthrop University
 Tom Barr, American Mathematical Society
 Laura Bartley, University of Oklahoma
 Chaitan Baru, National Scie
nce Foundation
 Nina 
Bijedic, University 
ﬁ
ﬂ of Mostar
 Pamela Bishop, University of Tennessee, Knoxville
 Sally Blake, Flagler College
 Roselie Bright, U.S. Food and Drug Administration
 Quincy Brown, American Association for the Advancement of Science
 Andy Burnett, 
Knowinnovation
 Dave Campbell, Simon Fraser University
 Robert Campbell, Brown University
 Eva Campo, National Science Foundation 
 Robert Carver, Stonehill College
 Amy Chang, American Society for Microbiology
 Lei Cheng, Olivet Nazarene University
 Hongmei Chi,
 Florida A&M University
 Alok Choudhary, Northwestern University
 William Coberly, University of Tulsa
 Peyton Cook, University of Tulsa 
 Bill Corey, University of Virginia 
 Melissa Cragin, Midwest Big Data Hub
 Catherine Cramer, New York Hall of Science
 James
 Curry, University of Colorado Boulder
 Nicole Dalzell, Duke University
 Juliana DeCastro, Núcleo de Planejamento Estratégico de Transporte e Turismo
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    C-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Sam Donovan, University of Pittsburgh
 Renee Dopplick, Association for Computing Machinery
 Maureen Doyle, Nor
thern Kentucky University
 Ruth Duerr, Ronin Institute
 Arturo Duran, IVA Ventures
 Stephen Edwards, ACM Administrative Centre
 Madeline Clare Elish, Data and Society
 Sandra Ellis, Texas A&M University, Corpus Christi
 Mark Embree, 
Virginia Polytechnic Institut
e and State University
 Paula Faulkner, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University
 Raya Feldman, University of California, Santa Barbara
 Dilberto Ferraren, Visayas State University
 William Finzer, Concord Consortium
 Brittany Fiore
-Gartland, 
University of Washington
 Julia Fisher, Coker College
 Michael Franklin, University of Chicago
 Roger French, Case Western Reserve University
 Kimberly Gardner, Kennesaw State University
 Sommer Gentry, U.S. Naval Academy
 Tara Ghazi, University of California, B
erkeley
 Richard Gill, Brigham Young University
 Shana Gillette, U.S. Agency for International Development 
 Juan Godoy, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientificas y 
Técnicas
 Greg Goins, North Carolina A&T State 
University
 Robert Gould, University of California, Los Angeles
 C. K. Gunsalus, University of Illinois
, Urbana
-Champaign
 Mirsad Hadzikadic, University of North Carolina, Charlotte
 Jim Hammerman, TERC
 Michael Harris, Bunker Hill Community College
 John Hathaw
ay, Brigham Young University
, Idaho
 Adam Hughes, Pew Research
 Kristin Hunter
-Thomson, Rutgers
, The State University of New Jersey
 Ambra Hyskaj, National Association of Public Health Albania
 Charles Isbell, Georgia Institute of Technology
 Mark Jack, Florida
 A&M University
 Vandana Janeja, National Science Foundation
 Bob Jecklin, University of Wisconsin, La Crosse 
 Xia Jing, Ohio University 
 Jeremiah Johnson, University of New Hampshire
 John Johnstone, University of Alabama, Birmingham
 Ryan Jones, Middle Tenne
ssee State University
 Kari Jordan, Data Carpentry
 Sungkyu Jung, University of Pittsburgh
 Michael Kangas, Doane University
 Nandini Kannan, National Science Foundation
 Roxanne Kapikian, GlaxoSmithKline
 Danny Kaplan, Macalester College
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    C-3  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Casey Kennington, Boise
 State University
 Sara Kiesler, National Science Foundation 
 Deepak Khatry, MedImmune
 Brian Kotz, Montgomery College
 Vladimir Krylov, Crimean Engineering and Pedagogical University
 Kristin Kuter, Saint Mary
™s College
 Jay Labov, National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
 Paula Lackie, Carleton College
 Sharon Lane
-Getaz, St. Olaf College 
 Duncan Temple Lang, University of California, Davis
 Nicole Lazar, University of Georgia
 Jeff Leek, Johns Hopkins University
 Matthew Liberatore, Universi
ty of Toledo
 Haralambos Marmanis, Marmanis Group
 Pat Marsteller, Emory University
 Allison Master, University of Washington
 Sorin Adam Matei, Purdue University
 Abhinav Maurya, Carnegie Mellon University
 Victoria McGovern, Burroughs Wellcome Fund
 Daniel 
Angel Ferreira Mena, DAF
-Engineering
 Chris Mentzel, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation
 Sears Merritt, MassMutual Financial Group
 Antoni Miklewski, Polish Academy of Sciences
 Ashlea Milburn, University of Arkansas
 Alex Montilla, U.S. Environmental Protection
 Agency
 Sheri Morgan, Mental Health Association of Franklin and Fulton Counties
 Richard Morris, MGI
-RamCo
 Mary Kehoe Moynihan, Cape Cod Community College
 Bhramar Mukherjee, University of Michigan
 Sherman Mumford, University of North Carolina, Charlotte 
 Ivo Neitzel, Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia de Birigui
 Richard Nelesen, University of California, San Diego
 Joseph Nelson, George Washington University
 Claudia Neuhauser, University of Minnesota
 Deborah Nolan, University of California, Berkeley
 Kofi Ny
amekye, Integrated Activity
-Based Simulation Research, Inc.
 Monika Oli, University of Florida
 Fred Oswald, Rice University
 Robert Panoff, Shodor
 Dennis Pearl, Pennsylvania State University
 Joan Peckham, University of Rhode Island
 Vikas Pejaver, University 
of Washington
 Gabriel Perez
-Giz, National Science Foundation
 Patrick Perry, New York University
 Steve Pierson, American Statistical Association 
 Michael Posner, Villanova University
 Earnestine Psalmonds
-Easter, National Science Foundation
 Hridesh Rajan, Io
wa State University
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    C-4  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  Louise Raphael, Howard University
 Renata Rawlings
-Goss, Georgia Institute of Technology
 Peggy Rejto, Normandale Community College
 Loren Rhodes, Juniata College
 Patrick Riley, Google, Inc.
 Martina Rosenberg, University of New Mexico
 Kim 
Roth, Juniata College
 Bill Roweton, Chadron State College
 Andee Rubin, TERC
 Maya Sapiurka, Society for Neuroscience
 Karl Schmitt, Valparaiso University
 Kala Seal, Loyola Marymount University
 Arun Sharma, Wagner College
 Lauren Showalter, National Academies 
of Science, Engineering, and Medicine
 Cláudio T. Silva, New York University
 Christine Smith, University of New Mexico
 Suzanne Smith, Johnson County Community College
 S. Srinivasan, Texas Southern University
 Anil Srivastav, Open Health Systems Laboratory
 Natalya St. Clair, Concord Consortium
 Victoria Stodden, University of Illinois, Urbana
-Champaign
 Martin Storksdieck, Oregon State University
 George Strawn, National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine
 Ralph Stuart, Keene State College 
 Kalum Ud
agepola, Scientific Research Development Institute of Technology Australia 
 Mel van Drunen, HAS University of Applied Sciences
 William Yslas Velez, University of Arizona
 Mladen Vouk, North Carolina State University
 Ron Wasserstein, American Statistical Ass
ociation
 Cheryl Welsch, State University of New York, Sullivan
 Mary Whelan, Arizona State University
 Nekesha Williams, Louisiana State University
 Emerald Wilson, Prince George
™s Community College
 Brian Wingenroth, National Consortium for the Study of Terro
rism and Responses to Terrorism,
 University of Maryland
 William Winter, State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry
 Mary Wright, Brown University
 Paul Zachos, Association for the Cooperative Advancement of Science and Education 
 Elena Zheleva, National Science Foundation
   Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    D-1  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
        D Data Science Oath
    The committee proposed a Data Science Oath in its interim report and offers a revised version in 
this final report (in parallel with a modern version of the Hippocratic Oath for physicians). Given the 
sensitive nature of certain 
types of 
data and the signi
ficant 
ethical 
implications of working with such data, 
similar efforts to establish a code of ethics for data scientists are under
 way throughout the field.
1 While 
these various codes at times intersect in their expressions of the ethical principles for da
ta science, the 
committee hopes that its 
oath 
captures the gravity of data
-driven decision making and provokes 
discussions on the future normative structure of data science.
 While there are many common aspects to the 
Hippocratic
 Oath and the proposed 
Data 
Science 
Oath, there are also some key differences. Both oaths, however, share aspects of being necessary but not 
sufficient to address current and future ethical considerations.
 The potential consequences of the ethical implications of data science cannot 
be overstated. 
Previously, data were small and specialized, but now data are pervasive. The fact that all humans are in 
this together (e.g., generating data and economic activity) means 
that 
they all have a responsibility to each 
other.
                                                          1 To read about other work in the development of data science cod
es of ethics, see, for example, 
https://datapractices.org/community
-principles
-on-ethical
-data
-sharing/,
 http://datafordemocracy.org/projects/ethics.html,
 http://www.datascienceassn.org/code
-of-conduct.html,
 http://www.rosebt.com/blog/open
-for
-comment
-proposed
-data
-science
-code
-of-professional
-conduct
, https://dssg.uchi
cago.edu/2015/09/18/an
-ethical
-checklist
-for
-data
-science/,
 http://thedataist.com/a
-proposal
-for
-data
-science
-ethics/,
 https://www.accenture.com/t20160629T012639Z__w__/us
-en/_acnmedia/PDF
-24/Accenture
-Universal
-Principles
-Data
-Ethics.pdf, accessed January 31, 2018.
 Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and OptionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    D-2  PREPUBLICATION COPY
ŠSUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION
  BOX 
D.1 Hippocratic Oath
   I swear to fulfill, to the best of my ability and judgment, this 
covenant:
 I will respect the hard
-won scientific gains of those physicians 
in whose steps I walk, and gladly share such knowledge as 
is mine with those who are to follow.
 I will apply, for the benefit of the sick, all measures which are 
required, avoiding those twin traps of overtreatment and 
therapeutic nihilism.
 I will remember that there is art to medicine as well as science, 
and that warmth, sympathy, and understanding m
ay 
outweigh the surgeon
™s knife or the chemist
™s drug.
 I will not be ashamed to say 
ﬁI know not,
ﬂ nor will I fail to call 
in my colleagues when the skills of another are needed for a 
patient
™s recovery.
 I will respect the privacy of my patients, for their 
problems are 
not disclosed to me that the world may know. Most 
especially must I tread with care in matters of life and death. 
If it is given me to save a life, all thanks. But it may also be 
within my power to take a life; this awesome responsibility 
must
 be faced with great humbleness and awareness of my 
own frailty. Above all, I must not play at God.
 I will remember that I do not treat a fever chart, a cancerous 
growth, but a sick human being, whose illness may affect 
the person
™s family and economic sta
bility. My 
responsibility includes these related problems, if I am to 
care adequately for the sick.
 I will prevent disease whenever I can, for prevention is 
preferable to cure.
 I will remember that I remain a member of society, with 
special obligations to 
all my fellow human beings, those 
sound of mind and body as well as the infirm.
 If I do not violate this oath, may I enjoy life and art, respected 
while I live and remembered with affection thereafter. May I 
always act so as to preserve the finest traditio
ns of my 
calling and may I long experience the joy of healing those 
who seek my help.
   _________________________
   SOURCE: L.C. 
Lasagna, 1964
, Hippocratic Oath
, Modern 
Version
, The Johns Hopkins Sheridan Libraries and University 
Museums. 
http://guides.library.jhu.edu/c.php?g=202502&p=1335759
, accessed August 21, 2017.
  BOX 
D.2 Data Science Oath
   I swear to fulfill, to the best of my ability and judgment, this 
covenant:
 I will respect the hard
-won scientific gains of those data 
scientists 
in whose steps I walk and gladly share such 
knowledge as is mine with those who follow.
 I will apply, for the benefit of society, all measures which are 
required, avoiding misrepresentations of data and analysis 
results.
 I will remember that there is art t
o data science as well as 
science, and that consistency, candor, and compassion 
should outweigh the algorithm
™s precision or the 
interventionist
™s influence.
 I will not be ashamed to say, 
ﬁI know not,
ﬂ nor will I fail to 
call in my colleagues when the skil
ls of another are needed 
for solving a problem.
 I will respect the privacy of my data subjects, for their data are 
not disclosed to me that the world may know, so I will tread 
with care in matters of privacy and security. If it is given to 
me to do good wi
th my analyses, all thanks. But it may also 
be within my power to do harm and this responsibility must 
be faced with humbleness and awareness of my own 
limitations.
 I will remember that my data are not just numbers without 
meaning or context, but represent
 real people and situations, 
and that my work may lead to unintended societal 
consequences, such as inequality, poverty, and disparities 
due to algorithmic bias. My responsibility must consider 
potential consequences of my extraction of meaning from 
data a
nd ensure my analyses help make better decisions.
 I will perform personalization where appropriate, but I will 
always look for a path to fair treatment and 
non
discrimination.
 I will remember that I remain a member of society, with 
special obligations to 
all my fellow human beings, those 
who need help and those who don
™t. If I do not violate this oath, may I enjoy vitality and virtuosity, 
respected for my contributions and remembered for my 
leadership thereafter. May I always act to preserve the finest 
tra
ditions of my calling and may I long experience the joy 
of helping those who can benefit from my work.
    