DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/4812Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed Work84 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-05185-9 | DOI 10.17226/4812Technology and Telecommunications: Issues and Impacts Committee, NationalResearch CouncilResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCHRECOMMENDATIONSTO FACILITATE DISTRIBUTED WORK
Technology and Telecommuting: Issues and Impacts Committee
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications
National Research Council
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C. 1994
iResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of

the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard

for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-

ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
Support for this project was provided by the Department of Energy (Grant No. DE-
FG02-93ER25161), and that support does not constitute an endorsement by the Department of

Energy of the views expressed in the report.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 94-68990
International Standard Book Number 0-309-05185-1

Additional copies of this report are available from: National Academy Press 2101 Constitution

Avenue, NW Box 285 Washington, DC 20055 800-624-6242 202-334-3313 (in the Washington

metropolitan area)
B-498Copyright 1994 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
iiResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY AND TELECOMMUTING: ISSUES AND
IMPACTS COMMITTEEROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University, 
ChairKATHLEEN CHRISTENSEN, City University of New York

CLEMENT COLE, Locus Computing Corporation

FRED GOLDSTEIN, Digital Equipment Corporation

GIL GORDON, Gil Gordon Associates

G. ANTHONY GORRY, Rice University

IRENE GREIF, Lotus Development Corporation

PATRICIA MOKHTARIAN, University of California at Davis

LISA NEAL, EDS Center for Advanced Research

LAWRENCE ROWE, University of California at Berkeley

CHRISTOPHER SCHMANDT, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

MISCHA SCHWARTZ, Columbia University

JAMES MALLORY, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
STEPHEN GODWIN, Transportation Research Board
GLORIA BEMAH, Project Assistant
iiiResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
BOARDWILLIAM A. WULF, University of Virginia, 
ChairFRANCES E. ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

JEFF DOZIER, University of California at Santa Barbara

DAVID J. FARBER, University of Pennsylvania

HENRY FUCHS, University of North Carolina

CHARLES GESCHKE, Adobe Systems Inc.

JAMES GRAY, San Francisco, California

BARBARA GROSZ, Harvard University
DEBORAH A. JOSEPH, University of Wisconsin

RICHARD M. KARP, University of California at Berkeley

BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Digital Equipment Corporation

BARBARA LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

JOHN MAJOR, Motorola
ROBERT L. MARTIN, AT&T Network Systems
DAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, University of California at Berkeley

WILLIAM PRESS, Harvard University

CHARLES L. SEITZ, Myricom Inc.

EDWARD SHORTLIFFE, Stanford University School of Medicine

CASMIR S. SKRZYPCZAK, NYNEX Corporation

LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel Corporation

MARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Director

LOUISE A. ARNHEIM, Senior Staff Officer

HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer

JAMES MALLORY, Staff Officer

RENEE A. HAWKINS, Staff Associate
GLORIA BEMAH, Administrative Assistant
KIMBERLY STRIKER, Project Assistant

LESLIE WADE, Project Assistant
ivResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,
MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONS
RICHARD N. ZARE, Stanford University, 
ChairRICHARD S. NICHOLSON, American Association for the Advancement of
Science, Vice ChairSTEPHEN L. ADLER, Institute for Advanced Study

JOHN A. ARMSTRONG, IBM Corporation (retired)

SYLVIA T. CEYER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

AVNER FRIEDMAN, University of Minnesota

SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley

ROBERT J. HERMANN, United Technologies Corporation

HANS MARK, University of Texas at Austin

CLAIRE E. MAX, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

CHRISTOPHER F. McKEE, University of California at Berkeley

JAMES W. MITCHELL, AT&T Bell Laboratories

JEROME SACKS, National Institute of Statistical Sciences

A. RICHARD SEEBASS III, University of Colorado

LEON T. SILVER, California Institute of Technology
CHARLES P. SLICHTER, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
ALVIN W. TRIVELPIECE, Oak Ridge National Laboratory

NORMAN METZGER, Executive Director
vResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-
perpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and

engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology

and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter

granted to it by Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to

advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Bruce

Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under
the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of

outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection

of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the

responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of

Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national

needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior

achievements of engineers. Dr. Robert M. White is president of the National

Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National
Academy of Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate

professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the

public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National

Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal

government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care,

research, and education. Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of

Medicine.The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy
of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and

technology with the Academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and advising

the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies

determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating

agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of

Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the

scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by

both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. Robert

M. White are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National

Research Council.
viwww.national-academies.org
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceIn 1993, the Department of Energy (DOE) asked the Computer Science
and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council to
organize a study of the technological issues and impacts related to
telecommuting. In response, CSTB, in collaboration with the NRC's

Transportation Research Board (TRB), convened a committee of researchers

and practitioners with both technical and sociological expertise. The

committee's task was to recommend research into relevant computing and

communications technologies that could enable increased telecommuting. In

developing these recommendations the committee relied on existing literature,

briefings, and its own expertise and deliberations. With the agreement of DOE,

the study committee chose to broaden its approach to its task in two specific

ways. First, it chose to examine both telecommuting and the broader topic of

distributed work, because it believed that focusing solely on telecommuting

would overlook more far-reaching impacts of computing and

telecommunications technology on the way work is done. Second, the
committee chose to examine technological issues within a broad social context
in order to ensure the relevance of its recommendations.
This study is the result of the study committee's deliberations. It is
independent of and complementary to the April 1993 Department of

Transportation study, 
Transportation Implications of Telecommuting
PREFACEviiResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.), on the future impacts of
telecommuting on transportation, and to the DOE study 
Energy, Emissions, and
Social Consequences of Telecommuting
 (U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C.), which was released in early 1994. The publication of

Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed Work
 during 1994 will
allow its conclusions and recommendations to be considered during the
development of the National Information Infrastructure (NII) in the same
manner as those regarding other nationally important applications such as

education and health care.
At another level, the committee is convinced that computing,
telecommunications, and related technologies are profoundly changing the ways

in which society acquires, manages, and distributes information. In the private

sector, the development of new tools for distributed work could enable new

forms of collaboration, allowing employees to work effectively at any location

that is mutually agreeable to them and their employers. One result could be
new, more productive configurations of people, processes, and technology. In
the public sector, new tools for distributed work could be used to address high-

priority needs, such as rural and inner-city health care, and to remedy long-

standing inequities among the nation's classrooms.
A nationwide information and network infrastructure could open new
avenues for mutual cooperation and support among our workplaces, schools,

neighborhood centers, community groups, and government. This new digital

environment has the potential to enable a richness in information access and

sharing that could help us restore a sense of community within and between the
public and private sectors. Achieving such goals will depend on having both the
specific knowledge and broad understanding needed to implement appropriate

technology wisely. In accordance with that concept, this report complements

two other recent CSTB reports, 
Information Technology in the Service Society
and Realizing the Information Future
 (both published by National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C., 1994), and the forthcoming 
Rights and
Responsibilities of Participants in Networked Communities.
The Technology and Telecommuting: Issues and Impacts Committee is
grateful to the numerous individuals who contributed to its deliberations and to

those who commented on early drafts of this report. The anonymous reviewers

in particular helped to sharpen and focus the material. The staff of the Computer

Science and Telecommunications Board and the Transportation Research Board
were indispensable in creating the report. Gloria Bemah attended to the
PREFACEviiiResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.multitude of details required for committee meetings and report production,
Leslie Wade helped check references, and Jim Mallory transformed the

committee's submissions into the final text. The committee, however, retains

responsibility for the final content of the report.
Robert Kraut, 
ChairTechnology and Telecommuting: Issues and Impacts Committee
PREFACEixResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 11 TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE
 5  New Opportunities for Flexible Work
 5  This Report 7  Approach and Emphasis
 7  Scope and DefinitionsŠTelecommuting Versus Distributed
Work 8  Technology and Society 8  The Rise of Distributed WorkŠRepresentative Concerns
 10  Other Impacts and Public Policy Considerations
 13  Summary Comments 142 DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE
 16  Aspects of Distributed Work Enabled by Computing and Commu-
nications Technology 16  Information Processing 17  Audio and Video Communications
 19  Computer-mediated Communications
 22  Information Sharing and Use of Remote Facilities
 24  The Reality of Today's Distributed Work
 25  The Mobile WorkerŠA Composite
 25  Distributed Education 29CONTENTSxiResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Collaborative WorkŠThe Need for New Products Linked to
Underlying Databases or Objects
 31  The Potential for Increased Distributed Work
 323 DISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES
 35  Distributed Work in the Context of Business Organizations
 36  Strategies for Accommodating Distributed Work
 37  Basic Group Processes to Be Supported for Effective Distributed
Work 39  Selecting Goals 39  Recruiting Group Members
 40  Managing Distributed Groups
 42  Obtaining Information
 424 FACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK
 46  Identifying Barriers to Expansion of Distributed Work
 46  Complexity-of-Use Barriers
 46  Cost-of-Technology Barriers
 48  Designing Communications Infrastructure to Support a Range of
Capabilities for Distributed Work
 49  Supporting Typical Work Routines
 49  Envisioning the Applications Enabled by Unlimited Bandwidth
 51  Enabling Integration of Low-and High-Bandwidth Applications
 52  Meeting Requirements for Multimedia Communication
 52  User Requirements
 53  Technology Requirements 545 RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
 56  Infrastructure Research
 56  Mobile Work
 57  Multipoint, Multimedia Distributed Work
 59  Applications Research
 60  Domain-Specific Research
 60  Generic Research
 62  Conclusion 64  BIBLIOGRAPHY 66CONTENTSxiiResearch Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive SummaryThe term ''distributed work" describes the practice of working without
regard to location by using a combination of modern communications and
computing technologies. It includes:
  Working while truly mobileŠin activities ranging from sales and on-
site customer support or equipment repair to composing and submitting
a product design while traveling;
  Working as part of a geographically dispersed project teamŠin
activities such as research and report writing done largely without
traveling to a common site; and
  Traditional telecommutingŠcarrying out activities such as responding
to customers' telephone calls by utilizing a personal computer linked to
a remote database while working at home or at a satellite work center.
Distributed workers can engage in these activities on a full-time basis, as
might be the case for a distributed customer service operation. Perhaps more

commonly, however, they may engage in the practice of distributed work on a

part-time basis, such as spending a day per week contributing to a company-

wide product evaluation.
To the extent that a job involves or is enhanced by the creation,
manipulation, storage, or communication of information, it is increasingly
possible to do that job anywhere that the appropriate information
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.processing equipment and communications links are found. There are numerous
economic and social benefits to be gained by enhancing and extending

distributed work practices. These include increased locational independence for

employees, greater flexibility in convening project teams for employers, and

better use of transportation resources for society. There are also some potential

disadvantages, such as loss of contact and identification with an organization, as
well as a possible increase in demands on employees' time and energy.
Although many individuals already engage in distributed work, current

technologies have several important limitations, especially for groups whose

members are geographically dispersed and for individuals who need to work

while truly mobile. However, technology itself is only an enabler of or

constraint on change rather than a direct motivator of change. Thus, along with

better technologies, distributed work practices will also be enhanced by a better

understanding of the human factors and sociology of the changing workplace

and labor force.Recent improvements in the capabilities and availability of
communications and computing tools have meant that distributed work,

including telecommuting, can be done more easily now than in the past.

Likewise, future improvements in these interrelated fields will benefit those

engaged in distributed work. However, to optimize the opportunities for and

effectiveness of distributed work, the study committee recommends that
research also be conducted with distributed work as a specific focus.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONSComputing power, in terms of processing speed and mass storage capacity,
and communication capabilities, in terms of available bandwidth and quality of

services, can be viewed as a spectrum of varying capacities. Currently, with

respect to distributed work, the "high end" of the spectrum may be thought of as

being represented by a fully configured desktop workstation attached to a high-
bandwidth network. The "low end" of the spectrum may be considered to be
characterized by a small hand-held device such as a personal digital assistant

with only low-bandwidth wireless communications capabilities.
Through the middle part of the capability spectrum, the nation's computing
and communications infrastructure is reasonably well established and utilized.

High-speed modems and communications services are decreasing in price and

becoming more widely used. Both individuals and organizations have abundant

computing power
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.readily available, and the most pressing need is for applications research.
Conversely, the communications and computing communities should conduct

research aimed at stretching the capabilities of the network and computing

infrastructure at both the low and high end of the spectrum. The committee's

recommendations for technical research are detailed in 
Chapter 5
 of the report
and summarized below.
Infrastructure Research
Working while mobile presents many challenges, because communications
bandwidth and computing power are limited compared to what is typically

available in a stationary environment with a wire or optical fiber network

connection. The committee's research recommendations center on increasing

the bandwidth available to mobile workers and better using whatever bandwidth

is available at any point in time, as well as facilitating periods of disconnected
work when there is no bandwidth at all. The fact that communications
bandwidth and computing power can often be substituted for each other both

complicates and adds promise to research at the low end of the capability

spectrum.Research at the high end of the infrastructure capability spectrum should
center on exploring distributed work practices that can be facilitated by

multipoint, multimedia communication at generally abundant bandwidths.

Currently, little is known about transmitting large volumes of interactive,

multimedia traffic among multiple parties. The committee recommends
research centered on understanding and specifying quality-of-service factors,
controlling the various types of traffic, enabling new billing methods, and

minimizing the human efforts currently involved in establishing and

maintaining multipoint, multimedia conference sessions.
Applications Research
Various types of distributed work are reasonably common in the U.S.
workplace. However, the implementation and effectiveness of distributed work

are often constrained by the computing and communications applications

available to support it. The committee recommends research-oriented

distributed work field trials in areas of national or commercial interest to help
solve the difficult problems of information retrieval, sharing, and browsing;
group socialization; remote supervision; and related problems in the context of

real-world employer-employee distributed work relationships. While these field
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.trials would be conducted within specific domains, the lessons learned and tools
developed could be applied in many other fields as well. An interdisciplinary

approach is needed to gain the full benefit of such trials.
The committee also recommends more general research related to
applications to benefit telecommuting. If distributed work is to expand beyond

those individuals with considerable technical skill, researchers must pay

attention to simplifying complex user interfaces and commonly required

operations. Research should concentrate on developing tools, interfaces, and

systems that encourage information sharing; bridging synchronous and
asynchronous communications to facilitate input to and follow-up from group
work sessions; improving and extending the user interface to the telephone

network and services; improving capabilities to use audio as a data type; and

reducing the costs of input/output devices and network support.
CONCLUSIONDuring a period when the nation's economy seems to be in transition to a
postindustrial model, the nation and its work force would be well served by

having efficient and effective tools for engaging in distributed work. The

research topics addressed by the committee in 
Chapter 5
 will provide important
new technological capabilities to enhance and extend the practice of distributed
work to provide greater locational flexibility, expanded employment
opportunities, and better use of our transportation resources.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY4
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Technology and the Changing Workplace
NEW OPPORTUNITIES FOR FLEXIBLE WORK
To the extent that a job involves or is enhanced by the creation,
manipulation, storage, or communication of information, it is increasingly
possible to do that job anywhere that the appropriate information processing
equipment and telecommunications links are found. This is true not only for

jobs performed by a single isolated individual, but also for group tasks, such as

decision making, that involve multiple individuals in dispersed locations.
There are many potential benefits of the flexibility that locational
independence provides. For an employer, those benefits may include the ability
to recruit the best workers anywhere without requiring them to move to a
central location, the ability to assemble and disassemble teams on an as-needed

basis, the ability to offer improved customer service through coverage over

longer hours and a greater geographical area, and savings in overhead costs

through more efficient use of space. For a worker, the benefits of locational

independence may include a more desirable lifestyle: greater choice in

residential location, type of job, and allocation of time between work and

personal interests. For society, benefits may include greater economic

efficiency, opportunities for economic development in underdeveloped areas,

expanded employment opportunities for individuals with limited mobility, and

more efficient use of the transportation infrastructure.
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE5
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.However, the potential benefits of greater flexibility in where and when
work can be done must be balanced against the potential costs or disadvantages.

For an employer, disadvantages may include the direct costs of investing in the

requisite technology, the intangible costs of learning how to use new tools and

develop new styles of management suited to distributed work, less opportunity

for certain kinds of serendipitous productivity (e.g., clearing up of a
misunderstanding during a chance meeting at the coffee pot), and some loss of
distributed workers' identification with an organization. For a worker,

disadvantages may include loss of privacy, the blurring of boundaries between

work and personal activities, fewer chances to interact socially with colleagues,

and the increasing domination of work over other aspects of life if the worker is

expected to be constantly on call for the employer. Employees may bear part of

the costs of a new distributed work style if, for example, the employer allows

telecommuting only by those who are willing to provide their own computers.

Loss of job security and fringe benefits can result from any shift toward a

greater use of temporary and contract workers and the flattening of

organizational hierarchies. Increased social isolation may be a negative outcome

for some distributed workers.
For society, a negative consequence of greater flexibility may be a
fragmented populace that is increasingly able to segregate itself into

homogeneous strata. The ability to enjoy a distributed work style may be

inequitably distributed, and the socioeconomic gap between the information

"haves" and "have nots" may continue to widen. The off-shore relocation of

some location-independent work, increased automation of jobs, and associated
organizational restructuring may contribute to increased domestic
unemployment (CSTB, 1994a). Finally, greater flexibility for workers in

choosing where to live may further exacerbate urban sprawl and result in too-

rapid growth in rural areas. (See the report 
Energy, Emissions, and Social
Consequences of Telecommuting
 (U.S. Department of Energy, 1994) for
detailed discussion of many of the societal impacts of telecommuting.)
Until recently, the information technology that was commonly available,
the communications infrastructure, and prevailing work practices have inhibited

individuals and organizations from taking full advantage of the potential

benefits of flexibility in the place and time of work. For example, when 300-

baud modems were the norm, each full computer screen of text took

approximately 50 seconds to transfer, and most file transfers had to be manually
initiated at both the origin and destination. Increasingly, however, the
proliferation of more affordable, more portable, more powerful, and somewhat

easier to use computing systems and telecommunications equipment
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE6
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.has broadened the opportunities for effective, efficient location-independent
work. Developments on the horizon, such as greater integration of information,

communications, and multimedia systems, suggest that these opportunities will

continue to expand. Simultaneously, on the demand side, changes in the

economy, increased time pressures, a desire to reduce energy consumption,

corporate layoffs, and the growing use of work teams have resulted in increased
interest in implementing telecommuting and distributed work programs and
projects.Together, the new enabling technologies and an increase in demand are
likely to result in an increase in location-independent work. How such work can

best be facilitated and integrated to meet individual, group, and national needs

and expectations is a topic that merits careful study.
THIS REPORTApproach and Emphasis
Despite the growing interest in and potential benefits of distributed work,
there are many technological, economic, and social barriers to its wider

adoption. Although in its deliberations the committee focused initially on

developing a technical research agenda, it quickly realized the importance of

acknowledging context. Distributed work is an area for which consideration of
purely technical issues is potentially misleading and counterproductive. Thus, in
addition to outlining goals for technological research that could facilitate wider

adoption of distributed work among individuals and organizations, this report

also emphasizes the need to understand the broader social, economic, and

public policy impacts of wider use of computing and communications

technology, including possible negative impacts and how to ameliorate them.

Although detailed treatment of such issues is outside the direct charge to the

committee, social and economic considerations
Še.g., the capability for
ubiquity of connection, or the willingness and ability of people to work

independently and often in relative isolation
Šprovide the larger framework
within which specific technical decisions are made and directions taken. The

committee concluded that understanding that framework is an essential
precondition to making the most effective technical decisions. The results of
such decisions will be seen in the long-term ability of comparatively new

activities like distributed work to contribute positively to U.S. national life.
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE7
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Scope and DefinitionsŠTelecommuting Versus Distributed
WorkOne difficulty in discussing new work styles is the widespread lack of
consensus on the use of terms such as "telecommuting" and "teleworking" (see

Kraut, 1988, for one discussion of the difficulties associated with defining and

measuring the amount of telecommuting). It has been suggested (Mokhtarian,

1991a) that two factors that distinguish telecommuting from other forms of

remote work are remote supervision and a reduction in commuting. Under these

criteria, overtime work done at home in the evening by an insurance company

executive, for example, would generally not be considered telecommuting
because it does not involve a reduction in travel. In contrast, an employee of a
software publisher who answers telephone requests for technical assistance

from his or her home, instead of answering the questions while present at a

centrally located help-line location, is certainly engaged in telecommuting.

Likewise, a person doing transcription for a medical clinic and submitting the

completed work via a modem and telephone line is a telecommuter.
However, to focus exclusively on telecommuting, as narrowly defined, is
to overlook the sweeping nature of technology-supported changes that are

affecting virtually every employer and every worker. These changes are leading

to a work style that may be broadly referred to as distributed work: work that is

done in a location different from that of the supervisor, subordinate, or fellow

team member. Distributed work includes mobile work (work done while

traveling), computer-supported cooperative work, field work, off-shore

information processing, teleconferencing, and numerous other arrangements as

well as home-and center-based telecommuting. To encompass the diversity of
current approaches to location-independent work and to develop a
correspondingly broad research agenda, this report examines distributed work

of various kinds in an effort to delineate the strengths and limitations of current

computing and communications technologies for enabling effective work.
TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY
It is important to view technology in its proper role as an enabler of, or
constraint on, change, rather than as the direct motivator of social or individual

change. An individual may be motivated to telecommute not because

technology permits it, but rather, for example, to avoid an onerous commute, to

get more work done, or to have more time to spend with family. An employer

may be motivated
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE8
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to adopt telecommuting for its staff not because technology makes it possible,
but rather to improve recruitment and retention, save money, increase

productivity, or help comply with mandated trip-reduction goals. Confusing an

enabler of change with a motivation for change is likely to lead to overstating

the potential impacts of the enabler, which does not alone guarantee that change

will occur. Change will occur when there are no binding constraints and when
one or more motivations are present (Mokhtarian and Salomon, 1994).
New technologies sometimes emerge because they are needed; that is,
researchers are motivated to develop a technology because they are aware of a

need that the technology can satisfy. Often, there is a cyclical interrelationship

between technological and social issues related to the work environment: the

social context gives rise to the need for a given technology, and over time, that
technology may have social impacts that are significant enough to alter the
social context, giving rise to the need for another round of technological

innovation. For example, Yates (1989) has shown that as corporations grew and

organized into divisions, the internal office memorandum was developed to

increase communications and document organizational procedures.

Typewriters, filing systems, various copying technologies, and word processors

were all developed to meet the demand for more memoranda and other written

materials. More recently, electronic mail was developed to meet a variety of

immediate communication needs in an increasingly distributed environment.

Each of these technologies affected society by creating new classes of jobs,

which in turn often led to further organizational division and the resultant need

for even newer, better forms of communication.
In other instances, technological research is driven by the desire to expand
knowledge and capabilities for their own sake, without consideration for their

likely application. Research and development conducted without specific needs

in mind may produce important scientific understanding, new technologies, and

solutions to problems that are not yet widely recognized. However, research

that is exclusively technology-driven also may produce solutions that no one
wants and for which there is no market, or solutions that some may even view
as potentially damaging.
The social context of research efforts helps ensure that some of each type
of research is conducted. Generally, exploration of technology for its own sake

is balanced by economic and social realities, and pragmatism is balanced by

opportunities for unexpected discoveries. Regardless of the motivation, new

technologies may permit us not only to do the old things better, but also to do

new things that
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE9
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.are not imagined until the enabling technology is available. The practice of
distributed work and the technologies developed to support it are best examined

in relation to society and with an understanding that they will have important

impacts on all of us.
The Rise of Distributed Work
ŠRepresentative Concerns
Impacts on Transportation and Land Use
Telecommuting per se is frequently proposed as a strategy for reducing
peak-period vehicle trips, fuel consumption, and air pollution by substituting

communications for travel. It has been included as such in a variety of federal,

state, and regional or local policy statements (see, e.g., Mokhtarian, 1991b). A
great deal of research has been conducted on the transportation-related impacts
of telecommuting. Some of the early studies hypothesized about the ultimate

extent of telecommuting and its effects on transportation (for a review, see, e.g.,

Salomon, 1986). It was suggested, for example, that the travel mileage saved by

telecommuting might be partially or completely offset by an increase in

noncommuting trips motivated by some inherent desire for mobility or travel.

Empirically, this effect of generating more travel has not been found to date.

The measured net impact of telecommuting on transportation has been a

relatively uniform reduction in miles traveled: an average of 36.1 person-miles

saved per telecommuting occurrence (Mokhtarian et al., 1994). However, these

findings are based on short-term studies involving small samples of early

adopters of telecommuting who may be unrepresentative of the population that
eventually engages in it. For example, studies published to date have found that
telecommuters live about twice as far from work as the average commuter in

their region. As telecommuting moves into the mainstream, the per capita travel

savings of telecommuting is likely to decline but will probably remain positive

on balance.A broader critical issue concerns the transportation-related impacts of
enhanced computing and telecommunications capabilities generally, not just

those of telecommuting. What will be the impacts on transportation of

distributed work activities such as the remote acquisition of goods and services,
tele- and videoconferencing, product or project coordination with business
partners, and consumer activities such as teleshopping? There are a few isolated

empirical and anecdotal examples of complementary effects (Mokhtarian, 1988,

1990), such as electronic access to information and people prompting travel
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE10
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to obtain further information or to develop a relationship, or a regional
videoconference stimulating travel because it is accessible to more people than

would be a single national conference without video. However, such

complementary impacts of distributed work activities on transportation have not

been studied as extensively as substitution and generation impacts. Thus the

possibility of distributed work leading to more employment-related travel
remains a fertile area for research.
Another important social impact of using computing and
telecommunications technology for distributed work involves changes in land

use patterns. A commonly held hypothesis is that distributed work will make it

possible for people to move even farther from central sites than they currently

live, possibly leading to a net increase in travel. Again, the empirical evidence
to date (Nilles, 1991; Mokhtarian, 1994) has not borne out the hypothesis that
distributed work will lead to fewer but longer commuting trips in the aggregate,

although no long-term evaluation has been made. A simple theoretical model

based on economic location theory (Lund and Mokhtarian, 1994) suggests that

even after optimal residential relocation occurs, total commute-miles traveled

will generally be lower because of more widespread telecommuting, but more

research is needed to refine such a model and to test it empirically.
In the literature on the general impacts of computing and
telecommunications on land use and urban form, the most commonly expressed

expectation is that their use will lead to greater decentralization. However, it is

also pointed out that telecommunications is usually a facilitator, not a driver, of

decisions about residential and industrial location and that it can support
centralization as well as decentralization. For example, although the elevator is
considered to have made modern skyscrapers possible, the telephone played an

equally important role in making them practical (de Sola Pool, 1980). Although

computing and telecommunications may support a relative decline in the

advantage of central locations, these locations will retain a competitive

advantage due to the economics of agglomeration and the existence of their

massive, already-built environments (Nijkamp and Salomon, 1989).
Social IsolationOne reason for early skepticism about the widespread adoption of
telecommuting was the idea that people would not want to be isolated from

others. The assumption seemed to be that telecommuting was to be full-time

work from home. Current experience indicates
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE11
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that telecommuting is most often part-time: one or two days per week on
average. At this level, isolation and related issues such as visibility to

management are not often cited as concerns by telecommuters. However, there

is obviously some self-selection bias in considering the responses only of

telecommuters, while not obtaining and considering the responses of those who

may have chosen not to telecommute because of the possibility of isolation.
Even when telecommuting is virtually full-time, telecommuters and, for that
matter, millions of home-based business owners have found numerous

strategies for circumventing isolation (Christensen, 1988; Race, 1993;

Shellenbarger, 1993). These strategies include participating in local chapters of

professional organizations, having lunch with colleagues, and using electronic

mail extensively. Thus, the same technology that permits increased isolation can

also be used to decrease it. Finally, experimentation with telecommuting at

satellite work centers like the federal telecommuting center in Waldorf,

Maryland, is increasing (Bagley et al., 1993). One hypothesized advantage of

such centers is that they offer an opportunity for some social and perhaps

professional interaction.
The effects of isolation may reach beyond the individual actively engaged
in telecommuting. For example, individuals who become isolated as the result

of corporate downsizing (a department of specialists may be reduced to a single

individual) may require contacts with other human beings (i.e., networks) in

other organizations to survive in their jobs. In such cases, too, distributed work

technologies can decrease isolation as well as cause it: electronic mail,

computer-aided conferencing, and the on-line availability of conference
proceedings can help individuals to keep current within their occupations.
A broader question concerns the impact of computing and
telecommunications in general on social isolation. Arguably, these

technologies, much like television, have contributed to social isolation, although

just as arguably, they have also given rise to new forms and norms of

socialization. Technology is a tool that can be used to break down social

barriers by enabling egalitarian access through such mechanisms as electronic

mail communications, as much as it can be used to facilitate separation through

mechanisms such as the increased opportunity to choose isolated residential
locations.Management and Personnel Considerations
The process of selecting personnel for telecommuting can be usefully
represented as a triangle: the right employees, jobs, and managers must be

selected to ensure the success of telecommuting. More
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE12
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.than 10 years of practical experience have helped define the selection criteria
for each. Most important is the selection of remote workers, which should be

based on a combination of well-informed volunteerism from the employees and

final selection by management, based on the employees' work habits, skills, and

knowledge of the organization.
Supervision of remote workers has been the primary stumbling block for
many organizations considering telecommuting. The perennial question is, How

can I tell they're working when they're not here in the office? The best answer is

brought out by another question, How can you tell they're working when they

are here in the office? This exchange highlights the fact that many managers

practice ''eyeball management," often erroneously assuming that if work and

workers can be seen, workers are working and being supervised. Effective
managers of telecommuters learn that it is the product, not the presence of a
person or a visible process, that counts; they should be selected and trained so

that they are comfortable managing workers according to the end product

produced. Likewise, jobs that have, or can be modified to have, ascertainable

end products and quantifiable standards for quality should be considered as the

prime candidates for distributed work.
Managing or working successfully to produce expected deliverables means
that telecommuters are relatively free to work how and when they want as long

as the end product meets expectations. Conversely, managers and workers who

prefer command-and-control organizational styles may find it uncomfortable, if

not impossible, to manage and work at a distance. Thus, in the short term, the

perceived loss of control of remote workers is a concern that could inhibit more
widespread implementation of distributed work practices.
Other Impacts and Public Policy Considerations
Beyond concerns about effectiveness, efficiency, social consequences,
management, and personnel issues that will be resolved largely on a case-by-

case basis are a number of broad public policy issues associated with the

expansion of distributed work. They will need to be discussed, understood, and

addressed in order for distributed work to expand to the fullest extent possible.
Perhaps foremost is the question of the amount of private and public support for
the infrastructure that is likely to be needed to provide the enhanced

communications services required for distributed work. In the past, the nation

has supported infrastructure development by providing general or limited

monopolies, loans, grants, construction subsidies, and tax incentives. In most

recent developments involving technology,
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE13
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.however, the private sector has been the main investor in new facilities. Given
the broad range of technological capabilities that may be needed for distributed

work, it seems likely that private funding will play the major role, with

government supplementing efforts only in areas that will not be addressed

without such assistance. User fees and access to new services are also a concern

to many, particularly to those who believe that access to information and
communications over the National Information Infrastructure will be necessary
to fully participate in tomorrow's society and economy.
Financial considerations will also affect our ability as a nation to further
develop and expand our capabilities for distributed work. Although since World

War II the federal government has played a crucial role in financing both basic

and applied research in numerous fields, that role is now in transition, and there

is great uncertainty regarding the philosophy for support and levels of federal

funding for various fields.
The increased practice of distributed work also raises concerns about
intellectual property rights, privacy, and the security of information as it is

stored, accessed, and processed electronically. Several reports of the National

Research Council have detailed these issues. 
Computers at Risk
 (CSTB, 1990),
Realizing the Information Future
 (CSTB, 1994b), and 
Rights and
Responsibilities of Participants in Networked Communities
 (CSTB, 1994c) are
helpful for their discussion and recommendations on these and related issues.
SUMMARY COMMENTS
The overall societal consequences of distributed work practices are not yet
completely clear, and their treatment is not within the scope of this study. Many

researchers in academia, industry, and government are currently examining

distributed work, including telecommuting, in order to gain a better

understanding of its advantages and disadvantages. A recent Department of

Energy report, 
Energy, Emissions, and Social Consequences of Telecommuting
(U.S. Department of Energy, 1994), summarizes much of this research, and the
Department of Transportation's 
Transportation Implications of Telecommuting
(U.S. Department of Transportation, 1993) focuses more detailed scrutiny on

transportation. Intellectual Teamwork: Social and Technological Foundations
of Cooperative Work
 (Kraut et al., 1990) is also useful for its linking of social
and work issues and technology. The committee underscores the need for open

and detailed discussion of the public policies that may be implemented with

respect toTECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE14
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the practice of distributed work. Technology and society have a complex
relationship that is constantly changing (see, e.g., CSTB, 1994a). It will be

important for researchers to address not only the technical agenda

recommended in this report, but also interrelated social and economic issues.
TECHNOLOGY AND THE CHANGING WORKPLACE15
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Distributed Work: Current Reality and
PromiseThis chapter describes today's distributed work landscape, exploring
current uses, benefits, limitations, potential enhancements, and opportunities for
expansion. Its purpose is not to describe an exhaustive set of applications and
scenarios, but rather to aid in exploring the need for further technological

research aimed at enhancing distributed work. Although the initial discussion

focuses on the representative activities of information processing and

communicating at various levels, it is clear that jobs vary in the extent to which

they require complex handling of data, people, and things (see U.S. Department

of Labor, 1991). Dealing with people and objects requires tools that are

different from those for dealing with information. U.S. industry has developed a

rich palette of mail and telecommunications applications to enable

communication among people at a distance. However, even in regular telephone

communications, improvement is needed for some typical distributed work

tasks. In comparison, there are even fewer techniques for dealing with objects at

a distance.ASPECTS OF DISTRIBUTED WORK ENABLED BY
COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY
The last 15 years have seen a proliferation of information technologies and
communications applications that let people do their
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE16
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.work while overcoming some of the limitations of space and time. Corporate
databases, electronic libraries, and information servers help people retrieve,

process, and store the information they need to do their jobs, regardless of

location. Facsimile, electronic mail, and audio-and videoconferencing now

routinely supplement long-standing communications media such as face-to-face

meetings, postal mail, and the telephone, keeping people in touch with their
fellow employees and with their clients and customers. The traditional media
also have changed: many telephone systems now include voice mail, the U.S.

Postal Service offers overnight delivery, and formerly widespread telex service

has been largely replaced by other communications technologies. Home-based

resources, too, have been augmented: national surveys have shown that doing

paid employment from the home is the best predictor of having a computer at

home (Dudley et al., 1993).
Information Processing
Declines in the cost of computing hardware and the concomitant growth in
the use of computers for both routine and strategic purposes in organizations

mean that much of the information that people need to do their jobs is in

computerized form at some point during its life cycle. And once information is

in computerized form, it becomes possible for people to access it with
comparatively few logistical constraints on where they are and when they do so.
Much of the information available to remote personnel is generated as a by-

product of an organization's routine transaction processing, rather than created

specifically for the purpose of supporting distributed work. For example,

computerized reservation systems for the airline industry were developed to

allow a highly distributed work force of travel agents to gain up-to-date

information about flight schedules and prices. A variant of this reservation

system combined with nationwide data networks such as CompuServe now

allows average citizens to access the same information on their personal

computers at home. Similarly, by using database technology combined with call

distributors and other telecommunications services, some customer service

representatives are able to do their work independent of location. Service
representatives working for a telephone company, for example, can access
recent bills, customer credit history, and databases of help information so that

they can resolve billing conflicts, collect past-due accounts, take new service

orders, and answer customer questions.
Many workers can also have at their disposal information beyond that
created by a single organization. For a fee, individuals and
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE17
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.firms can access any of the thousands of commercial databases containing a
vast array of information, including the full text of legal cases; financial

information about firms from various sources, including Securities and

Exchange Commission filings; consumer and business credit information;

patent filings; stock quotations; the full text of national and regional

newspapers; and research articles in virtually every scientific and technical
field. An increasing number of databases (especially for government-generated
or government-owned information) are also becoming available on a no-fee

basis via the Internet.
Moreover, recent developments in information publishing and retrieval
have made increasing amounts of information available on public networks

such as the Internet and America OnLine. For example, a tool developed by

researchers at CERN in Geneva, the World-Wide Web, links documents and

files connected by the Internet. The information in the Web is based on a hyper-

text mark-up language protocol that makes it possible for individuals and
organizations to publish information on the Internet that is cross-linked both
internally and to external documents. For example, selecting, or clicking on, a

highlighted word within a document can initiate retrieval of its definition, or

related information, from within that same document, or even from a document

at another location on the network. This capability allows the user to browse

easily through related pieces of information, or groups of related documents,

without regard to the physical location of the information. This and other new

techniques for information retrieval on computer networks (including the easy-

to-use Mosaic interface to the World-Wide Web) have stimulated the supply of

available information by improving access to it, but they have also led to

increased network traffic.
Taken together, the availability of company and other databases,
commercial database services, and the networks that connect them mean that

many people can be much less reliant on centralized, physically co-located

corporate resources to do their jobs. Lawyers do not need the corporate law

library if an electronic library is available, and service representatives need not

be tied to file cabinets of paper invoices. It is clear that people use electronic

archives of information when they work away from a conventional work site.
Yet there are practical limits on the extent to which people can work away
from a conventional work site, remote from peers and supervisors, merely by

relying on electronic archives. The major consideration is the availability in

electronic form of the information people need to perform information-intensive

tasks. Sales representatives for mail-order companies have in electronic form

most of the
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE18
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information they need to take an order
Šproduct and inventory information, for
example. Yet other information that they might need to aid a customer, such as

the exact color of a product and whether it clashes with the color of another

item, might require accurate pictures that are not easily stored or searched for in

currently available conventional databases. While searching for textual

information (e.g., skirts in size 7) is easily done, searching for nontext
information (e.g., blouses compatible in style with a skirt) is still a problem.
Even much text-oriented information that employees need to handle

transactions may originate from outside their company and therefore not be

readily available in electronic form; thus letters of complaint or explanation that

accompany a mail-order return may not be available when the customer next

calls up to discuss the status of an order.
Even if the information-intensive tasks that people perform were
adequately supported by networked electronic archives, retrieving and

processing of information account for only a portion of most people's duties.
Audio and Video Communications
AudioSpeech plays an essential role in our work lives due to its power,
expressiveness, and richness in interactive conversation. Numerous studies

(e.g., Kraut et al., 1990; Ochsman and Chapanis, 1974) comparing voice and

other communications media have repeatedly identified speech as the primary

channel for cooperative problem solving. Except in specialized cases, speech
plus any medium is better than any other combination of media without speech.
Thus, one traditional way for remote workers to keep in touch is to use the

telephone. The voice telephone enables real-time communication, supporting

interactivity between people that allows them to rapidly get feedback from each

other during the course of a conversation. This feedback improves their ability

to communicate clearly (Kraut et al., 1982; Clark and Brennen, 1991).
Although the telephone is an old technology (the first call was completed
in 1876), several recent developments have contributed to its importance in

supporting distributed work. The first is simply the reduction in costs and the

related change in cultural attitudes that have made long-distance telephone calls

a much more frequently used business tool now than in the past. The second

trend is the growing availability of mobile communications that make it much
easier to contact workers while they are traveling. Historically, drawbacks
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE19
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to the radio services used by police dispatchers and others who communicate
with mobile workers have been their limited geographic range, their high cost,

and their very limited availability. In traditional telephony a constraint has been

the fact that a telephone number represented a fixed location, not a person. Thus

one person attempting to contact another placed calls to the locations where the

recipient was most likely to be, and hoped for the best.
Recently, however, both switched and store-and-forward services for
mobile workers have become available nationwide. National switched services

include paging and the mobile telephone, which signals its presence to local

relay cells so that any calls to that mobile telephone number can be routed to the

cell then in contact with the mobile telephone. Store-and-forward services

include electronic mail and voice mail, which allow a sender to leave in a
repository a message that can subsequently be picked up and attended to by the
recipient over local or wide area data networks, including the nationwide

telecommunications network.
A third trend in telecommunications that enhances telephony's support for
distributed work is the introduction of what had been business services or

equipment, repackaged for the residential market by communications

companies and equipment manufacturers. For example, telephone companies

now offer call waiting, call forwarding, three-way calling, calling number

identification, and voice mail for the residential market. Relatively inexpensive
telecommunications hardware for the home both supplements and competes
with the services now embedded in the communications network. Multiline

telephones, answering machines, and fax machines are now easily affordable.

Both optional communications services and stand-alone devices are

disproportionately purchased by people who work from their homes (Dudley et

al., 1993).Video and Audio-Video
Video telephony is another communications development that has
implications for distributed work. Video telephones were first demonstrated in

1927 (Ives, 1930). Since then, the telecommunications industry has attempted to

solve the technical problems that prevented video telephony from enjoying

widespread use. Recent improvements in algorithms for video compression and

powerful new microprocessing chips will increase quality and reduce the cost of
videophones and conferencing equipment to levels that small businesses and
consumers can afford. These developments, along with industry agreement on

standards for the interoperability of compression
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE20
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and decompression devices for digital video (codec devices) and the availability
of communications services at data rates that support reasonable-quality video

transmission, promise to make video telephony and videoconferencing more

widely used services in the future.
It seems reasonable to think that a video connection should be especially
good at enabling distributed groups to work as if they were in a face-to-face

meeting. Yet a substantial body of research literature suggests that the visual

medium does little to improve conversation when the main goal is the exchange

of information. However, video connections do seem to have greater value for
handling complex, ambiguous, or conflictual tasks and for tasks in which the
social component is important (see Williams, 1977, for an early review and Fish

et al., 1992, and Tang and Isaacs, 1992, for more recent discussions). Compared

to audio-only conversations, audio-video conversations are more personalized,

less argumentative, and broader in focus. Groups engaging in audio-video

conversations tend to like each other more and are more likely to reach

consensus easily; in negotiation or persuasion sessions, the negotiation is

gentler and agreements tend to be influenced by the personalities of the

bargainers, rather than resting exclusively on the merits of the argument

(Williams, 1977).In addition, in field trials, new applications of video connections have
emerged that go beyond conventional interpersonal communication, including

the use of videophones to access multimedia information services and to

maintain organizational awareness. The use of videoconferencing for accessing

broadcast materials is common in both business and education settings (LaRose,
1983, cited in Svenning and Ruchinskas, 1984). Users of experimental video
telephony systems can place calls to television channels to see the news and

other entertainment, and to video cassette recorders to access stored

information. By placing calls to corporate lectures and presentations and thus

attending these events remotely, users reduce their risk of wasting time, since

they can politely turn off an unproductive session or attend to the broadcast and

their desk work simultaneously. People have also used video for benign

surveillanceŠto maintain awareness of what their colleagues are doing even
when they are not immediately communicating with them. In video telephony

field experiments, users have maintained long-lived calls to "public" places
Šlobbies or lunch rooms, for example
Šjust to know what was going on at
remote sites. In addition, they have maintained long-lived calls to work partners
Šfor example, people with whom they were coauthoring a document
Šin order
to have easy access to them, but
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE21
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.without engaging in sustained conversation. In effect, when they anticipated
frequent but unscheduled conversations, they used video to create a shared

office for a time. These novel uses were enabled by video; they rarely happen

on the voice telephone.
Computer-mediated Communications
Typically, in conventional organizations members acquire much of their
technical knowledge and a substantial amount of incidental information by

bumping into interesting people or situations (Allen, 1977; Kusterer, 1978;

Lave and Wenger, 1991). Members who are at the periphery of an organization

have fewer opportunities to converse spontaneously with colleagues and to
observe others working or in interaction with each other. Isolated members can
thus be at a disadvantage in knowing about their work environment (e.g.,

Hesses et al., 1993).
Current Uses of Electronic Mail
Electronic mail seems to be an especially useful medium for supporting
distributed work because it is able to overcome many disadvantages of working

at a distance, especially for isolated members of an organization. Like other

asynchronous media, such as facsimile and voice mail, electronic mail allows

people to leave messages that are available almost instantaneously regardless of

distance but that do not require the sender and recipient of the message to be
simultaneously available. In addition, communications sent by electronic mail
tend to be processed and archived more easily than communication exchanged

using more ephemeral media (e.g., face-to-meetings and telephone calls) or

media that are harder to search (e.g., voice mail). Electronic mail as a written

document supports a form of memory for distributed work groups, allowing

personnel to keep up with communications that have gone on in their absence.

Third, because of the ease of sending messages to multiple recipients through

on-line bulletin boards and distribution lists, communications sent by electronic

mail tend to have more recipients than communication through other media

(Kraut and Attewell, 1993; Finholt, 1994), thus facilitating the spread of

organizational information.Several studies have shown that individuals working at an organization's
periphery use electronic mail more than those at the core of the organization

(Kraut and Attewell, 1993; Finholt, 1994). Compared to those who do not use

electronic mail, members of distributed groups who use it regularly tend to

know each other better
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE22
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and to be more uniformly involved in the group's projects (Eveland and Bikson,
1988). When isolated members use electronic mail more, they tend to be more

informed about their organizations (Kraut and Attewell, 1993; Finholt, 1994)

and tend to be more successful. For example, Hesses et al. (1993) have shown

that oceanographers who used an electronic mail network for project

communication published more articles and had greater professional recognition
than did nonusers and that the benefits of network use accrued most to the
scientists who were geographically isolated (i.e., away from the coasts) or who

were less senior.
Potential Uses of Electronic Mail for Distributed Work
Communications technologies are more valuable the more ubiquitous they
are. Much of electronic mail's potential for distributed work has not yet been

realized, because its use is still significantly concentrated within high-

technology organizations and the academic community. The use of electronic

mail by unaffiliated individuals and small businesses, and the ability to

communicate with people who are not on large networks, is still limited.
However, it is growing with the expansion of commercial network providers.
What truly distinguishes electronic mail from other communications media
is that electronic mail messages are computational objects. That is, messages

are sent and received in a form that can be directly processed by computer. In

theory, it is possible to use information retrieval techniques to search through an

organization's archives of electronic mail, or use filtering mechanisms to allow
intelligent agents to separate important messages from the routine or irrelevant.
In practice, however, most commercial electronic mail software packages have

only rudimentary searching and filtering capabilities.
It is also possible to anticipate forms of computer-augmented
communication that will improve traditional human-to-human communication,

rather than merely allowing it to take place at a distance. For example, with

some addition of database capabilities, products like Lotus Notes use electronic

mail to form the basis for work flow processing. Once designed, certain types of

messages can automatically route themselves through the various steps in an
organizational process, collecting comments and approvals along the way. This
type of application can also be used to consolidate and record organizational

knowledge and may be particularly important for distributed organizations and

work teams.Currently, however, few people apply computation to electronic messages,
even when these capabilities are available (see Lai et al.,
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE23
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1988; Flores et al., 1988; and Borenstein, 1992, for examples of systems for
computer-augmented human communication). Despite the recent development

of ''intelligent" electronic mail systems with some searching, filtering, and work-

flow-processing capabilities, most electronic mail is apparently still read

directly by humans, without the aid of these information-handling tools (Bullen

and Bennett, 1991). Additional multidisciplinary research in this general area
might improve the ability of software to mimic the filtering, sorting, and
processing functions of individuals who have learned to use electronic mail as a

central part of their work.
Information Sharing and Use of Remote Facilities
Although the capability to enable remote sharing of expensive
instrumentation and facilities has been limited to date, its potential benefits are

considerable. Some of the possibilities for using computing and

communications technology to facilitate remote field work in oceanography,

control of remote instruments in space physics, or real-time sharing of research

results in molecular biology have been suggested in 
National Collaboratories
(CSTB, 1993). Other distributed and mobile workers will also find it
advantageous to be able to control physical devices remotely. For example, the

University of California at San Diego recently made an electron microscope

available to scientists over the Internet. Users can control many of the functions

of the microscope while receiving high-quality images in real time.

Applications of this nature need not, however, be limited to the scientific

research realm; specialized industrial or medical imaging and testing equipment

might also be controlled, and the output viewed, remotely. In general, the value

of this capability is highest when either the physical assets or the individuals

with the needed knowledge are in short supply, or when the equipment must be

operated in a hazardous environment.
Remote control and utilization of data require reliable networking with
sufficient bandwidth to support interactive responses between the equipment

being controlled and the user receiving the images or other data stream.

Expansion of this type of application will require changes to the devices to be

controlled, sophisticated distributed control software systems, and creative user

interfaces. A particularly challenging application might be to develop a remote

control application that would allow scientists to control experimental devices
over a wireless personal communication system device or over cellular networks.
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE24
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE REALITY OF TODAY'S DISTRIBUTED WORK
Although distributed work includes telecommuting, it also encompasses
activities such as working while mobile, field work, and computer-and

telecommunications-assisted education and collaboration. What could once be

done only in an office or lecture hall, for example, can now often be

accomplished from other sites. Mobility has significant advantages, such as

increased temporal and locational flexibility in working and learning, but also
disadvantages, for instance, that the time and effort spent to utilize
technological capabilities may sometimes seem to outweigh the benefits. At

times, what can be envisioned as a productive approach to doing work well is

not supported by currently available communications technology and

infrastructure.The Mobile Worker
ŠA Composite
The work experience of "Richard," A prototypical modern mobile
executive in a large, multinational organization, simultaneously illustrates the

capabilities that today's technology enables and underscores many of the

limitations that people undertaking distributed work or telecommuting must

face today.
What Richard does can be divided loosely into two categories: (1)
"manifest" work activities, performed primarily alone, such as information

retrieval and perusal, reading, editing, and document preparation; and (2)

communication and related activities involving other individuals. As with many

managers and executives, at least half of Richard's time is devoted to

communications. There is, of course, an enormous overlap between the two

categories, and both tend to be interrupted frequently by external demands.
Richard works in a number of locations, including his office, additional
company sites, his home, customer sites, his car, hotel rooms, airplanes, and

airports. To support his work and communication needs, Richard relies on an

office computer, a home computer, a portable computer, modems, printers,

facsimile machines, electronic mail, telephones, and voice mail, and from time

to time he accesses his office computer from computers in other offices. On a

few occasions, while negotiating a complex deal, he has used a pager.
Because his job is so communication-intensive, much of Richard's
computer use is for sending and receiving electronic mail. He estimates that less

than 20 percent of his computer use is for his manifest work activities. To

accomplish those tasks, he relies heavily on paper
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE25
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.because of its portability and ease of manipulation; paper can be carried from
place to place, skimmed, studied, and/or marked up with ease.
Given Richard's activity mix, work locations, and the devices on which he
relies, what are the main problems he encounters in accomplishing his work?
The main problem Richard is constantly encountering is the lack of
integration between his computers and the other devices he uses, and even

among the software programs used on his computers. The output from one tool

or device can not always be easily input to another. For example, Richard uses

four separate electronic mail systems to obtain global coverage but cannot

combine them to receive mail in one place. He has a similar problem with his

calendar and appointment information, which cannot be easily transferred

among systems or made easily accessible to others who are at remote sites. In
the office he still must print complex pages or pages containing graphics and
physically carry them to the facsimile machine for transmission. This lack of

integration inconveniences and irritates Richard and slows his work.
Richard also encounters difficulties related to the complexity of installing,
gaining access to, and using tools and devices. He tends to use a small subset of

the functionality available in software packages and in complex devices such as

facsimile machines. Richard is not fond of interface changes and unexpected

incompatibility among systems, and so he often chooses not to upgrade

software until his system administrator insists. The other problems he

encounters range from relatively minor but annoying circumstances
Šsuch as
the difficulty of locating electronic mail addresses, the occasional unreliability

of electronic mail delivery, and uncertainty about the extent to which a note by
electronic mail should be polished and formal like a letter, rather than informal
like a voice mail message
Što broader, less defined concerns about issues like
privacy and security.Richard's use of a laptop computer illustrates many of the above problems
and some additional issues as well. He has yet to discover a simple, foolproof

method of keeping the programs, information, and files on his laptop

synchronized with those on his office and home computers. Technical support is

an even greater problem for the laptop than for his home computer: the portable

computer is generally used both away from the office and during off hours

when the office is closed. Even worse, he often does not know what electronic

files he will need when he goes to a meeting away from his home office, and he

would prefer to be able to connect to his office and access electronic
information from the meeting site with equipment
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE26
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.located there. He thinks that, ideally, he should be able to access his electronic
mail and files, exchange electronic information with others physically present at

the meeting, and set up a remote information world without having had to carry

anything at all to the meeting. In short, he wishes that the computing

environment at his various meeting sites would enable him to obtain all the

computer-based information support he could get at his office if he were
physically present there.
Richard still feels that the laptop is too obtrusive for taking notes during
really important meetings. He has considered getting a personal digital assistant

just for use in such circumstances, but he doesn't want yet another device to

carry and he has heard that the handwriting recognition is poor. Richard

therefore typically relies on pencil-and-paper notes and tries to type up the
important ones to save on the portable computer for easy referral. He is
intrigued by the use of computers during meetings for tasks such as

brainstorming but is concerned that he will not be able to communicate his

ideas as effectively as he does when speaking. Richard has used his computer a

few times to prepare presentations. He found that it required a great deal of time

to get everything colored, spaced, and sized properly for visual appeal, in

contrast to the times when he used the company's graphics department.
Modem use is essential during Richard's time away from his office.
However he rarely finds that he can just plug the modem in and use it,

especially when he is traveling internationally. He often cannot access his

electronic mail when he wants to, or feels that he wastes time in getting

connected. His success in sending facsimiles from hotel rooms using his own
portable computer is even lower. And at the moment, his portable computer
cannot receive and display facsimiles.
Richard's problems with printers are "simple." His home printer does not
have the quality, speed, or reliability he would like. A printer is rarely available

when he is traveling and when one is available, he often has trouble connecting

to it and getting his software to print documents properly. On some occasions,
he has resorted to sending himself a fax, in essence using a facsimile machine
as a printer.
People sometimes joke that Richard has a telephone attached to the side of
his head. He still relies heavily on the telephone and voice mail for

communication. He identifies fewer difficulties with telephone use than

computer use. The problems he encounters are the quantity of numbers he needs
to remember and the expense and occasionally the poor quality of cellular
telephone use. Because Richard frequently works from home and sometimes

while on vacation,DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE27
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.he wants to be accessible without letting people know where he is. Instead, he
finds all too often that he leaves three or four telephone numbers with someone

when he wants to be reachable. He has occasionally used a pager when he

wanted to ensure that he could be reached immediately.
Richard has found that voice mail is a necessary addition to telephone
communications. He likes the informality and personal nature of voice mail but

sometimes must rerecord a message to convey the desired tone. He wishes he

could be notified more easily of waiting messages, especially important ones.

He also wishes he could skim, prioritize, filter, and save the text of messages,
just as he can with electronic mail. Yet the convenience and availability of
telephone use, compared to computer use, mean that Richard uses voice mail

much more heavily than electronic mail. He is occasionally concerned about the

privacy of voice mail, especially given the ease of forwarding it within his

system. But at the same time, he wishes that his company would integrate all its

voice mail systems so that he could forward messages to anyone in the company.
Expense also is an issue, especially to the management in Richard's
company. He would like to explore some new technologies, such as ways of

connecting his various communication devices or the use of videoconferencing

to reduce his travel and allow impromptu meetings, but he is unable to justify

the cost. He is nervous about increasing the number of technological devices he

needs to know how to operate or use, even though he imagines that it would be
great to call a meeting quickly and use videoconferencing to have it, rather than
having to plan it far enough in advance that everyone can schedule it and travel

to a common site for it. Richard is concerned that skills that he has refined over

his career will become less effective with the introduction of other ways of

accomplishing work; in particular, his ability to dominate conversations is well

refined and has contributed to his success. He also wonders about his ability to

manage his work time and personal family time. It sometimes seems that his

manager now has unlimited expectations regarding Richard's availability since

there are now fewer technical boundaries no matter what the hour of the day is

or where he is located
Ševen when he is on vacation. Although the discomfort
that many managers feel at supervising people who are connected but not often

visible has been cited as a significant problem with mobile work, major
problems also exist for the mobile worker regarding the management of work
and family boundaries.
There are thus several general problems Richard encounters in his use of
multiple devices and communication channels. One is that the amount of

technical expertise needed for effective use far exceeds
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE28
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.his desired level of knowledge. Much of what he does is too time-consuming,
and the lack of integration and interoperability is a constant source of

frustration. Solutions may exist to some of Richard's problems, but he is not

aware of them or he is hesitant to implement the significant changes to his work

habits that would be required. He also feels that he now must do himself much

of the work that used to be done by his assistant. With important
communications being transmitted via so many different media, he particularly
misses the ability his assistant used to have to filter and prioritize calls,

messages, and written information.
In summary, Richard wants significantly better integration of devices,
services, and interfaces regardless of whether he is in his office or mobile. He

needs better ways to manage and integrate the ever increasing flows of

information arriving on multiple media from multiple sources. In the long term,

he wants a ubiquitous computing environment such as that being explored at

Xerox PARC (Weiser, 1993) so that he can largely dispense with "hoofing
around" so much technology and so many information sources himself.
Distributed Education
Much like mobile work, education currently makes use of several
technologies to achieve some locational independence, and could use even

better tools to increase educational effectiveness. The United States, Great

Britain, and many European countries have a long tradition of offering distance

learning using paper, television, and more recently, computer-augmented
instruction. Commercial and public television has been used to broadcast
college-level courses for decades, and corporate teleconferencing and closed-

circuit networks have been used for broadcasting training materials since their

earliest days (see, e.g., LaRose, 1983). The National Technological University

broadcasts more than 25,000 hours of educational material and short courses to

more than 130 corporate clients per year (NTU, 1994). In a typical distance

education application, a lecture is specially organized for noninteractive, video

delivery and is broadcast to subscribers, who view it as it is transmitted or

record it for later playback. These broadcast lectures are often supplemented

with a telephone connection, so that members of a remote audience can ask

questions or make comments to the lecturer. In a variant of this model, Stanford

University's School of Engineering (Gibbons et al., 1977) has videotaped
regular college lecture courses and then shown them unedited to students from
industry in off-campus locations. The tapes are shipped to remote sites with

homework assignments and examinations.
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE29
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.An on-site tutor guides the students through the lecture, encouraging them
to stop frequently for questions and discussion. In the 1980s and 1990s,

electronic mail and bulletin boards and other tools have been added to the more

traditional video media to support interaction among students and between

students and instructors (Hiltz, 1993).
The use of technology to support distance education has obvious benefits.
It allows experts to be more productive by distributing their expertise to a wider

audience. It supports students who are physically removed from schools and

universities or who are isolated from a critical mass of other students who share

their educational needs. Using asynchronous technology like videotapes also

allows students to study at times convenient to them. Similarly, they can stop

and start the instruction at will, which can be an advantage in trying to
understand material that is especially difficult or that is presented in a language
other than a student's own native language.
Despite these advantages, the current technology to support distance
learning places substantial constraints on the educational enterprise. It is no

surprise that current distance learning applications typically use a lecture style

of instruction, since the technology is conducive to this model of information

transmission. Whether live or on video, today's lecture setting is characterized

by the isolation of the instructor, a low degree of social interaction, a low level

of attention to individual students, and a declarative model of learning. For
example, while at a lecture, students generally cannot make use of archived
information, and interaction typically is limited to a few questions and answers.

The pace of information delivery is not under the student's control; it must be

modulated by the teacher in response to his or her assessment of average

student readiness or understanding. While the content of most educational

material is declarative, the goal of much educational instruction is to impart

procedural knowledge, the basis for doing rather than describing.
Educators and others can imagine the value of remote instruction that
incorporates features of the workplace, thereby enabling substantial interaction

among students, access to personal archives, and hands-on experience with

work objects like models, experiments, or instruments
Šfor example, a
remotely taught collaborative design course in which industrial design students

work with human-factors specialists and software engineers to build a wearable

computer (Smailagic and Siewiorek, 1994). Unfortunately, the capability for

remote participants in distance learning to have highly interactive discussions to
plan and develop a design is not supported well by current communications
technologies or applications. Neither audio-nor
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE30
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.videoconferences deal well with multiple voice channels, or with the starts,
stops, and interruptions that characterize animated group discussions (see, e.g.,

O'Conaill et al., 1992) Similarly, while electronic mail and computerized

bulletin boards are good for involving many participants and for keeping

records of a conversation, they do not handle well the give-and-take discussions

that many groups need to have when clarifying ideas.
Some experiments using more interactive technology such as two-way
video for distance learning are now under way (e.g., National Geographic's

Kid's Net for geography and ocean sciences education). These experiments

emphasize collaborative learning and in the process are developing tools for

distributed work that are specialized for educational settings, especially for the

K-12 age groups. However, techniques for operating equipment and instruments
at a distance, for receiving output, and for sharing output among multiple
students are in their infancy.
Collaborative Work
ŠThe Need for New Products Linked to
Underlying Databases or Objects
One of the reasons for the success of electronic mail is its similarity to
current work practices: it resembles other forms of message sending and

information circulation. However, many of the most successful collaborative

projects are based on a model that has a closer technological match in physical

objects or database technology. For example, when people work together they

often co-locate and share writing, drawings, physical space, and mental space.

They communicate through gesturing at a shared image or section of text. They

suggest changes that can easily be seen, evaluated, and further changed by

colleagues (Whitaker and Geelhoed, 1993; Fish et al., 1992). Unfortunately,
most group and distributed work products still depend on easy-to-accept
electronic mail-based models of work augmented by some shared-screen

capabilities. Products, like Lotus Notes, based on underlying databases are now

only beginning to be developed and marketed.
Facsimile transmission allows remote workers to quickly transmit and
share static documents but not to jointly manipulate them during the course of a

conversation. Several software packages and technology being developed for

audio-and videconferencing over the Internet allow people whose computers are

on a common data network to jointly view and manipulate computer files and

computer screens. Unfortunately, unlike telephones or fax machines, which
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE31
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.have a level of standardization such that virtually any fax or telephone in the
world can communicate with any other, these file-and screen-sharing programs

are not standardized and do not interoperate. Therefore these applications work

only with careful planning and agreement among people who use compatible

combinations of hardware and software.
Although current products have facilitated writing and composition for
many individuals, much collaborative writing and revision continue to be done

primarily by people who are either temporarily or permanently co-located. The

still painful nature of collaborating in such tasks via electronic mail is

evidenced by the various editing "protocols" that have evolved from the use of

current word processors and electronic mail to coauthor or revise a document:

to circumvent the main goal of the design of word processors
Šmaking changes
visible as soon as possible and always keeping what is displayed on the screen
as close as possible in form and appearance to the final output
Šauthorscollaborating via electronic mail often must differentiate new text from old text,

or comments on existing text, by changing the appearance of the new text or

marking existing text with a ">" mark at the beginning of each line. By using

these somewhat contrived conventions, they can better communicate changes

and discuss them before agreeing on a final version.
Emerging products such as PREP, developed at Carnegie Mellon
University, and Shredit, developed at the University of Michigan, hold promise

for facilitating writing and editing by geographically distributed groups. What

distributed authors need
Šand what the market is only slowly starting to provide
Šis reengineered programs that can leverage database technology to support
collaborative building of documents, diagrams, presentations, and other

application objects. In other words, the conventional word processor, designed

for individual use and highly evolved for layout and production of paper
documents, needs to be rethought and recast as a group writing tool. It must
have all the power of a great word processor, but it must also be built with

distributed database technology to support work at a distance in which the

document is shared in an environment of heterogeneous hardware, software,

and network systems.THE POTENTIAL FOR INCREASED DISTRIBUTED WORK
Distributed work, including telecommuting, is almost certain to increase in
the next decade. Even using a comparatively narrow definition of

telecommuting, the U.S. Department of Transportation
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE32
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(1993) has estimated, for example, that, the current number of telecommuters is
about 2.0 million and will grow to between 7.5 million and 15 million by the

year 2002. Although the exact extent of the increase is difficult to predict, the

following factors will be important contributors to an expanded potential for

distributed work:
   If you wire it, they will come
ŠAs long as the National Information
Infrastructure includes two-way connections, the expected growth in

telecommunications capacity for the home and for potential satellite

office sites will make the services needed for effective telecommuting

and distributed work more widely available and probably less

expensive on a unit basis. As higher-bandwidth networks and high-
capacity telecommunication links become more widely available, for
example, opportunities will increase for the appropriate use of high-

quality audio and video links to enable the work of distributed project

teams.   The real estate imperative
ŠCorporate America is starting to realize
that the term "fixed overhead" need not apply to office space. As staff

sizes are reduced, employees are relocated to customer sites, and some

employees choose to engage in distributed work for their own reasons,

an increasing number of companies will consider reducing costs by
reducing the size of their facilities, including high-overhead meeting
rooms.   Moving beyond working at home to remote work
ŠThe United States
is catching up to worldwide interest in satellite offices, rural telework

centers, and other hybrid work sites intermediate between the home

and the central office. To the extent that these options overcome real or
perceived problems of telecommuting from the home, and to the extent
that they offer job-creation possibilities, they will become more

prevalent. This development will shift the focus of both distributed

workers and policymakers away from a model involving 10 people,

each working at home 20 miles from the office 2 days a week, to one

of 100 people working in a rural telecenter 500 miles from the office 5

days a week. The scope, the stakes, and the potential economic

benefits are much larger.
   Life beyond bureaucracy
ŠWhether the eventual result is a virtual
corporation, a series of strategic alliances, or massive "outsourcing,"

we are moving into an era in which the traditional, full-employment

corporation that does its own work with its own employees may
become the exception instead of the rule. Removing the boundaries of
the traditional organizational chart is likely to alter the assumption that

centralization of the work force is inherently a good idea.
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE33
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.It may be that the most agile and competitive organizations in the next few
decades will be those with the best networks
Šnetworks in the broad sense of
interconnected people, telecommunications, information resources, suppliers,

production capabilities, and customers. Distributed work tools that facilitate

collaboration, reduce travel, and track complex projects across several

organizations will be in great demand to support such an organizational
structure. The nation will benefit through improved competitiveness, and
individuals will benefit as locational barriers to employment are reduced.

However, researchers and policymakers will need to pay considerable attention

to integrating the new work styles and technologies in a way that yields optimal

social and economic benefits while minimizing market disruptions.
DISTRIBUTED WORK: CURRENT REALITY AND PROMISE34
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Distributed Work and Group Processes
Distributed work has implications for many of the activities that
organizations, groups, and individuals need to accomplish to be effective; its
wider adoption will present both organizational and personal challenges.
Technology is likely to solve only a subset of these challenges, but nonetheless

should be developed and applied when appropriate.
The impact of distributed work on group processes and performance is
worthy of examination because group performance encompasses individual

performance, because so much of the work in organizations is done by groups,
and because organizations themselves have functions that parallel those of
groups (Katz and Kahn, 1979). Reviewing the voluminous research literature on

groups and organizations is beyond the scope of this report. Rather, the intent in

this chapter is to point out group processes most likely to be affected by the

distribution of work across space and time and to discuss basic functions that

must be supported for distributed work to be conducted effectively.
Such functions go beyond tasks with a single focus such as writing a
report, selling a product, or handling a customer's transaction. Individuals in

organizations are typically members of multiple groups, each of which is
involved in multiple projects. As members of groups, people perform their
assigned work tasks, as well as many ancillary activities that keep them

coordinated, motivated, well trained, and
DISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES35
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.adapted to their organizational context. Moreover, individuals may well play
different roles in different groups: leader in some, member in others; expert in

some, novice in others; and so on.
DISTRIBUTED WORK IN THE CONTEXT OF BUSINESS
ORGANIZATIONSEven though businesses are not identically structured, they share
similarities that can be discussed usefully in terms of the effects of distributed

work. Every organization has two primary, albeit competing, needs: to divide

labor into the various tasks that need to be performed and to coordinate these

tasks so that the overall goals of the organization can be met. As management

theorist Henry Mintzberg (1979) has written, the ''structure of an organization

can be defined simply as the sum total of the ways in which it divides its labor

into distinct tasks and then achieves coordination among them." According to
Mintzberg, each relatively large business organization consists of three basic
parts: (1) an operating core that has as its primary function the fundamental

work of producing goods and/or services; (2) an administrative component that

provides strategic management, middle or line management, and technical

services and leadership; and (3) a support staff that provides ancillary services

such as legal counsel and personnel, finance, communications, and building

services.Any introduction of technology into an organization must take into account
both the nature of the technology and where in the organization the technology

is introduced. Introducing advanced robotics on the shop floor will yield a very

different relationship between technology and organizational culture than will

increasing the availability of laptop computers, cellular telephones, and

modems in the ranks of middle management or at the strategic apex of the

corporation. The introduction of new technologies to facilitate distributed work

is simply a particular case of the broad interaction between organizations and
technology.While distributed work in almost all cases means increased independence
of place for the worker, how it plays out precisely will vary according to the

kind of work, the intention of the worker, and the area within the organization

in which it occurs. In some cases, "knowledge" workers can work outside of the

centralized office
Šat home or in a satellite office
Šso as to achieve greater
mental concentration or a more desirable lifestyle. Much of the contemporary

discussion regarding telecommuting concerns this aspect of distributed work. In

other cases, distributed work may mean that employees will travel
DISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES36
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.less to the centralized office
Šbecause they now have access to information or
services that once would have required them to make trips into the office
Šandtravel more freely and frequently to clients or to other operating plants.
For example, advanced technology currently allows more time in the field
for General Electric Company service staff. A GE service technician returns

home at the end of each day and uses a laptop computer and modem to obtain

assignments for the next day, order parts necessary to replenish inventory, and

order whatever special equipment may be needed for the next day's calls. While

the technician sleeps, the van, still sitting in his or her driveway, is restocked,
saving a trip to a parts depot and allowing for more repair time the following
day. Such a work arrangement requires fundamental changes in core work

concepts and practices: inventory is delivered to technicians rather than having

to be picked up at parts depots, and assignments are obtained at home rather

than at the office. The technician's data become part of a larger performance

management system so that management can track trends in the nature of

service calls, anticipate preventive maintenance needs, and so on.
Distributed work can enhance productivity and locational independence for
a variety of work purposes. The various approaches chosen by individuals and

organizations to fulfill their particular purposes are almost certain to gain

increased attention and importance over the coming years. Distributed work

also raises questions regarding the impacts of various work arrangements on the
individual and on the culture and functioning of organizations. In addition to the
technological research outlined in this report, extensive sociological and

organizational research will be required to ensure that distributed work can be

carried out to serve the needs of individuals and organizations effectively.
STRATEGIES FOR ACCOMMODATING DISTRIBUTED
WORKAccording to estimates by the U.S. Department of Transportation (1993),
more than 2 million people currently telecommute in the United States, and

more than 10 times as many work at home under other arrangements, including

corporate after-hours work or various forms of self-employment. In addition,

large numbers of people travel as a routine part of their jobs: sales people travel

to customer sites, maintenance personnel travel to immobile equipment, and

executives travel to meetings, for example. Yet currently available technology
for distributed work places substantial constraints on the types of work and
DISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES37
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.learning that can be done remotely from a central site, on the road, or removed
from peers and supervisors.
When a work group is co-located and physically embedded within a larger
organization, many of the processes necessary for success are tacit or informal.

People learn the norms of an organization and many job-relevant behaviors by

observing the people around them. Supervisors manage groups by monitoring

employee effort, recognizing and averting incipient failure, helping resolve

personality conflicts, appraising performance, and providing advice and

instruction. Workers may call over to a colleague at the next desk for help. They
share budgets, designs, or machinery by simply gathering in a common physical
place with the appropriate facilities, such as a white board or overhead

projector, or with the item under discussion. Substantial research suggests,

however, that while these informal and tacit processes are common, they are not

invariably the best ones for ensuring organizational effectiveness. Workers

may, for example, learn norms of minimal work effort by being able to ask a

convenient local for advice while ignoring an expert farther away. And, as

organizations become larger and more specialized, these informal processes

often become increasingly impractical.
When members of a work group are physically separated from each other
or from a supporting organizational structure, tacit and informal processes no

longer suffice to support group work and organizational effectiveness. Groups

need different strategies for handling group formations, operations, external

relations, and reorganization. The approaches that can be taken are of three

major types.
   Organizations can attempt to reduce the interdependence among
distributed group members. Studies of telecommuting and home-based

employment suggest that reducing interdependence is a common mode

of coping with a distributed work force in the face of inadequate

communications facilities. For example, companies occasionally
reduce the interdependence between supervisor and employee by
paying piece rates or by creating independent contractor arrangements.

Consultants may tend to recommend only stand-alone jobs such as

writing manuals as being suitable for telecommuting. Scientists

working remotely from each other may engage in a more formal

division of labor and may communicate less among themselves.
   Firms can attempt to reproduce at a distance the informality of the
processes typically supported by physical proximity and, in so doing,

may reproduce both the adequacies and the inadequacies of the

informal processes. For example, some organizations have deployed

electronic mail and computer conferencing to support informal
DISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES38
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.communication, discussion, and decision making. In several
organizational experiments, long-duration video connections between

remote work sites have also been used to support informal

communication (Abel et al., 1990; Fish et al., 1992; Bly et al., 1993).
   Alternatively, organizations can attempt to use managerial and
technological mechanisms to formalize at a distance the processes

normally supported by proximity-based informal communication. For

example, tools currently exist to facilitate the successful development

of software programs by geographically distributed teams. Typically, a
highly specialized database is used to track the programmers' progress
and coordinate the program segments that have been placed within a

globally distributed file system.
BASIC GROUP PROCESSES TO BE SUPPORTED FOR
EFFECTIVE DISTRIBUTED WORK
Despite the use of strategies for handling decentralized work, several
group and organizational processes are likely to be disrupted by the distribution

of work over space and time. Among these are the selection of goals,

recruitment of group members, management of distributed groups, and

information retrieval. Sketched below for each is the way the process is

generally performed in a centralized organization, how distributed work might

disrupt the process, technological solutions that might mitigate such disruption,

and, if applicable, application and infrastructure research needed to implement
these solutions.Selecting Goals
The process of selecting initial goals depends on the type of group being
formed. For some groups, such as a crisis task force, the group goal is largely

predefined. However, in other groups, like senior management teams, quality

improvement circles, or teams of collaborating scientists, specific goals often

emerge from informal communication. This communication can occur in

distributed communication environments through the use of electronic bulletin

boards or electronic mail distribution lists, or through the use of real-time audio-

or videoconferences. The technical challenge is to support both casual and
formal small-group communication to facilitate the formulation, evaluation, and
selection of goals in distributed work groups. Today, the traditional written

medium is generally too slow for the give and take through which new, shared

ideas emerge and goals areDISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES39
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.selected. Computer-facilitated communication is faster but often reduces social
context cues, thereby blurring the link between what is being said and the

person saying it and thus reducing the likelihood that consensual goals will

emerge.Recruiting Group Members
In addition to determining an initial project goal, the most important
processes in forming a project group are identifying, investigating, and

recruiting potential members.
Substantial research literature suggests that physical proximity plays a
large role in forming teams. As Hagstrom (1965) noted over 25 years ago,

"since collaboration often begins through informal contacts, anything that

increases the frequency of such contacts increases the likelihood of

collaboration. 
–Spatial propinquity often leads to collaboration since it is
likely to lead to informal communication." Of course, more recent experiences
with electronic networks suggest new options for stimulating informal

communication, although it may be too early to tell how productive they are.
During the initiation phase of a collaboration, potential collaborators must
establish an intellectual and interpersonal relationship based on shared interests.

Selecting people and ideas are both important and often intertwined. Physical

proximity creates opportunities for potential collaborators to become

acquainted, to assess and develop interpersonal compatibility, to identify

common interests, to explore new ideas, and to accomplish rudimentary
planning before they become committed to working together. In this way,
individuals determine whether potential partners are smart enough to help think

through problems, responsible enough to do their share of the work, and humble

enough to accept only their share of the credit, as well as whether they are

sympathetic enough with one's perspective and compatible enough in work style

and personality to make working together pleasant. Sometimes collaborations

come about simply because the potential collaborators like each other, before

they have any shared ideas to work on.
While research collaborations and other types of ad hoc groups can and do
form at a distance, the evidence indicates they are much less likely to do so than

if the potential members are or have been co-located. Nevertheless, despite the

barriers, some amount of scientific research has always been carried out by

individuals who share common or complementary interests but happen to be

located at different institutions. Notably, scientists have been among the early

adoptersDISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES40
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of network, data communication, and computing technologies, the most basic
tools and technologies needed for collaboration at a distance. In addition,

supervision is generally less of an issue in scientific research teams than in

project teams in other areas.
Although members of a team are often identified and evaluated informally,
database and information retrieval technology could aid in the selection process

for distributed workers on at least some dimensions. For example, it is

theoretically possible to apply the statistical techniques used in information

retrieval to a database of research personnel. Potential candidates for a work
group could be represented by the documents they have written or textual
descriptions of the projects they have worked on. Queries against such a

database could return information on the relevance of each candidate to the

query, subject of course to the known inaccuracies of information retrieval

systems. In the case of seeking a partner for scientific collaboration, a query of

the published literature could return a list of researchers who have, for example,

applied factor analysis to the problem of second language learning.
Such techniques, however, do not currently suffice for identifying people
with the personal attributes and skills necessary for a particular work group.

The insufficiency is not intrinsic to an information retrieval approach to

personnel recruiting, but occurs because personal attributes are seldom

articulated explicitly by people seeking to form groups and, more importantly,
because this information is now rarely recorded in organizational archives about
projects or people. For example, effective group work may require individuals

with a sense of humor, creative or leadership abilities, and a willingness to do

their share of the work; knowledge of such attributes as they apply to

individuals is most often uncovered through informal conversations with people

who have worked with these individuals before. Of course, this phenomenon is

also reflected in conventional hiring procedures, in which substantial screening

is done based on resumes or comparable documentation but final decisions tend

to be based on interviews and consultations with references.
The ability to assess personal, work-relevant attributes from databases of
public-record materials or, more likely, to interact informally with individuals

who could attest to such attributes could promote more effective, efficient

formation of distributed work groups (assuming that privacy, liability, and other

ancillary social and legal considerations can be accommodated). Social

scientists and computer scientists should consider joint research aimed at
providing a database structure that could aid in the formation of distributed
groups.DISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES41
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Managing Distributed Groups
Typically employees in groups distributed at two or three different
locations (usually in different time zones and often in different countries) are

charged with completing a development task by working collaboratively with

their remote colleagues. The development target could be a new piece of

hardware, a new financial product, an advertising campaign, and so on. Each

site contains several people, at least some of whom have worked together
before. And at least some of those people know some of the people at the other
sites. Typically the project manager is co-located with the employees at one of

the sites.The first management problem is building one cohesive group out of
distributed subgroups. How can technology be used to help people create shared

mental models, shared goals, and trust? Technology such as videoconferences

may even inadvertently subvert this process by setting up unintended "we/they"

dynamics. Project reporting and tracking are more difficult across multiple sites

and are exacerbated as project schedules become more complex. The
integration of the work products of each site may become an issue if the project
involves intellectual or creative efforts that are only marginally suited to

detailed specification. Finally, it may be difficult to evaluate the relative

contributions of the different groups and individuals on a distributed team.
Obtaining Information
To function successfully within modern organizations, individuals and
groups must have increasing amounts of information. Given adequate data

transmission links, conventional information systems can currently provide

many workers the core information they need. Thus, reservation clerks,

directory assistance operators, and even reference librarians working from home
can easily obtain needed information from the same information systems they
would use in centralized job settings.
Text-based Electronic Sources
Many library collections and other archives of books, articles, and text-
oriented documents are becoming increasingly available over general-purpose

computer networks such as the Internet. As more of this information becomes

available, facilities to browse and search it become increasingly important.
More than 30 years of research on
DISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES42
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information retrieval, coming primarily from a library science perspective, can
be applied to the problem of helping people find information when they have a

relatively well defined informational need (Salton and McGill, 1979). However,

recent experience shows that current query techniques are much less effective

for very large databases, or collections of databases, especially if the user is

unfamiliar with the underlying detailed structure of the information or database.
Often, even the best retrieval systems return only a portion of the material that
is relevant to a query, while at the same time returning other material that is

irrelevant.Paper SourcesCurrently, much of the information workers receive and would like to have
available in multiple locations or to share with others does not arrive in

electronic form. While newspaper articles, consultants' reports, and company

memos may exist electronically during some stage in their life cycles, they

often come to one's desk in paper form. To share hard copy with a colleague

electronically is a cumbersome process. A user needs tools to easily convert
paper sources of information back into electronic form and to ship, store, and
retrieve them. The individual parts for these tools are commercially available in

the form of scanners, optical character recognition systems, facsimile machines,

multimedia databases, and multimedia electronic mail. However, they are still

separate and sizable hardware items, some are still largely outside mainstream

use, and users must be familiar with the details of hardware and software

compatibility, file formats, image resolution, and other technical details.
Individual Sources
Empirical studies of how managers, scientists, and other knowledge
workers search for and use information shows that text-oriented documents are

not necessarily the most sought after or the most valuable information in many

circumstances. In science, for example, because of their timeliness and

relevance to problems at hand, personal contacts and the "gray literature" in a
discipline are often as valuable as the published literature (Garvey et al., 1970),
which often involves long lead-times for publication. Thus, scientists often

know about new findings in their field well before they appear in conference

proceedings or archival journals. When attempting to
DISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES43
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.solve a problem, scientists, engineers, and sales personnel are as likely to get
help from colleagues as they are to find information in any written source

(Constant et al., 1994; Culnan, 1983; Kraut and Streeter, 1994; Tushman,

1977). For example, an individual needing to understand or apply a new

statistical technique is as likely to seek guidance from a local expert as from

books on statistics or journal articles that have used the technique. (Whether
this underuse of the archival literature is desirable or is more a reflection of the
poor tools for information search is a question worthy of research in its own

right.) In many other circumstances, individuals' personal stores of information

are more valuable than new information gleaned from a library. Assuming that

the widespread use of individuals' knowledge stores and interpersonal queries is

desirable, supporting their use in distributed organizations suggests several

directions for research.
Information Sharing
A special problem in supporting distributed work groups and organizations
is ensuring that people who have useful information will provide it to others.

Within organizations, colleagues and experts often respond to the requests of

others for information. The problem with respect to answering such questions is

that self-interest can discourage actions that promote the public good. Thus,
while many people benefit from having others in an organization contribute
their expertise on various topics, it can also be in an individual's interest to take

advantage of these databases without contributing to them (Thorn and

Connolly, 1987). For example, with properly designed networks and software, a

question about using a particular statistical technique might be posed on a

university-wide network. Using new indexing mechanisms, the posting could be

directed to a small group of campus members with relevant expertise instead of

being broadcast to the entire campus or merely posted on a computer bulletin

board. These experts could be encouraged to provide answers by systems that

implement payment of a royalty for information, that archive particular requests

for later use by others, or that highlight an expert's similarity to or identification

with the person asking the questions.
In many conventional organizations, information gatekeepers play a
special role in spreading needed knowledge (Tushman, 1977; Allen, 1977).

These people typically have knowledge of the information needs of other group

members, sources of information both within and outside the group, and the

communication skills and organizational
DISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES44
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.motivation to proactively connect the two. Research on this type of selective
dissemination of information has been ongoing for almost 25 years (Foltz and

Dumais, 1993; Gentile and Houseman, 1970), but it has been based on

conventional information retrieval techniques. Future research should also

consider the dissemination of information in electronic form.
DISTRIBUTED WORK AND GROUP PROCESSES45
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Facilitating Distributed Work
IDENTIFYING BARRIERS TO EXPANSION OF
DISTRIBUTED WORK
In addition to the organizational and social processes that constrain
adoption of distributed work, there are many technical barriers to its wider

acceptance. Good database technology is not in place yet; applications in

current use are expressed as massive, monolithic code structures that cannot
easily be rewritten; and new applications operate in ways that are not as familiar
as the message-passing routines of electronic mail and will therefore meet

resistance from customers. Although many of the technical and design issues

can be addressed in research laboratories, the issue of user acceptance must be

considered at other levels as well: until software producers see a sufficient

market for these products, for example, they may be reluctant to make the large

investment in research and software development required to overcome the

significant barriers.Complexity-of-Use BarriersToday, to effectively engage in distributed work or telecommuting, one
must absorb a large amount of technical detail and have access to an array of

equipment. Before they can become ubiquitous, the systems and equipment

must be made easier to understand, and certainly
FACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK46
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.easier to use. For example, a sales person who needs to access a customer
accounts database while at home or traveling must have, at a practical

minimum, a V.22bis-standard, 2,400-bps modem connected to, or internal to, a

portable computer; communications software; and an analog telephone line with

an accessible RJ11, or similar, standard jack. Additionally, most

communications software packages require that the user be at least minimally
aware of communications parameters such as baud rate, parity, data bits, stop
bits, and local echo. All of these requirements may be fairly easy to manage at

home. However, if a hotel or customer site lacks telephone jacks, or has only

digital telephone lines, accessing the customer database can be impossible. In

fact, inveterate mobile workers can sometimes be identified by the contents of

their well-stocked portable computer cases: screwdrivers and pliers to

disassemble telephones, various patch cords with alternate telephone plugs or

alligator clips, handset adapters, audio-coupled modems, and digital line

adapters. Users who need to have full, mobile access to their company's

computer networks must master additional levels of technical sophistication

ranging from integrated services digital network (ISDN) telephone line

standards to the technicalities of Internet addressing and packet transport
protocols.Inconsistent and inadequate user interfaces also increase complexity-of-use
barriers and interfere with the adoption of new computing and communications

technology. This is particularly true for distributed workers, who may find

themselves using a variety of communications devices and services but in ways

only incidental to their primary work tasks or to the primary use of the
communications device. For example, it is often a matter of trial and error to
determine which of the many services possibly used by a mobile worker, such

as call waiting or cellular telephone services, interfere (and in exactly what

way) with particular computer communications and how this interference can

be eliminated. Often, the ability of end users to take full advantage of flexible

and programmable services is limited by cryptic user interfaces based on touch-

tone telephone keypads.
Consistency of interfaces and connections across a range of environments
are equally important to the mobile worker. Today, for example, a cellular

telephone user often needs to make several attempts to dial a long-distance call

while roaming in another cellular provider's system. This will certainly become

exacerbated when users more routinely wander from areas with high-
bandwidth, multimedia connections, to localities with low-bandwidth
connections, to remote locations providing high bandwidth from a distant network
FACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK47
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.host. Ubiquity of capabilities
Šthe common denominator, which may be
relatively low
Šwill be a key constraint on the speed of distributed work
applications.For the foreseeable future, learning to use networks effectively will require
a great deal of human support. It has even been possible to make a business out

of providing that support. For example, Omnet, the network company that

provides electronic mail and bulletin board services to oceanographers, has a

toll-free telephone number enabling an oceanographer to talk to a real person

who will tell him/her how to set the parity bits or the local access phone number
for accessing electronic mail from Bogota, Bulgaria, or Burlington. Omnet also
manages electronic mail distribution lists for distributed projects, ensuring that

everyone's electronic mail address is up-to-date and providing hard-copy postal

or facsimile delivery to people without electronic mail. Other value-added

network vendors offer similar services. More generally, the spread of

sophisticated computer-based technologies from the sophisticated pioneering

user base into the general population has increased the need for support

services, which are provided by both employers and system vendors.
Cost-of-Technology Barriers
The most difficult challenge is how to deploy high-speed communications
networks, connections, and equipment at a reasonable price and on a wide scale.

As the National Information Infrastructure is advanced and the nation's

economy becomes increasingly dependent on information, equitable and

inexpensive access will be important to a very large segment of the population.

Inclusive policies and deployment decisions will best serve both public and

private interests (CSTB, 1994b) and permit wider utilization of distributed work
practices. In fact, many modern information technologies depend on wide
utilization for their effectiveness and efficiency.
For example, it is instructive to examine the recent, rapid spread of
facsimile machines. The basic principles of facsimile transmission were

developed in 1842 and thus precede even the telegraph (
McGraw-Hill 
Encyclopedia of Science & Technology
, 1987). The first significant commercial
use was by large news organizations that began sending ''wirephotos" in the

1930s. However, the high cost and low speed of the early equipment severely

restrained adoption of the technology. Office use began to increase with the
introduction of digital facsimile equipment and lower-cost long-distance
telephone service in the late 1970s. In the early 1990s inexpensive integrated

circuit chips became available, speeds increased, prices dropped drastically, and

a "criticalFACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK48
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.mass" of installed machines was reached. The market almost literally exploded,
and the least expensive of the machines became home consumer items.
If telecommuting and other forms of distributed work are to increase,
lower-cost communication devices and services will be needed. In 1993, high-

speed modems generally cost between $100 and $350, and faster ISDN terminal

adapters were about twice as expensive, still without offering the bandwidth

needed for multimedia and video applications. Video codecs, devices necessary

for serious two-way, real-time video work, cost 10 times the amount of current

ISDN adapters. Additionally, inexpensive, high-quality displays are clearly
needed. Currently a good-quality 17-inch computer monitor, which is generally
considered necessary for serious desktop publishing efforts, costs $1,200 or

more. This will need to decrease by a factor of at least three before it will be

affordable to most users. While general market forces will probably continue to

reduce unit prices, researchers and individuals making decisions about

distributed work should remember the importance of reducing prices for both

infrastructure items and services.
DESIGNING COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE TO
SUPPORT A RANGE OF CAPABILITIES FOR DISTRIBUTED
WORKHigh-speed, broadband communications will be needed to handle the
multimedia environment envisioned for both distributed work and the National

Information Infrastructure. The next few years should see increasing amounts of

bandwidth available due to the deployment of new network facilities and

services such as asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) and other broadband

network backbones running at speeds ranging from 45 megabits per second to a

gigabit per second, or more. However, most of the research in this area has

focused on point-to-point communications of a single medium; almost nothing

has been done in the area of multiparty, multimedia technologies.
Supporting Typical Work Routines
Currently, the ability to engage in distributed work depends to a large
extent on the availability of communications services to support typical

activities of an individual or group working remotely, such as the following:
FACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK49
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Contacting another individual, or a group of individuals, using regular
telephones and circuits;
   Exchanging messages by electronic mail, voice mail, or facsimile
transmission;   Exchanging documents or images by electronic mail or facsimile
transmission;   Accessing and using computers or computer networks from a remote
location, an activity often referred to as a remote log-on;
   Sharing computer files locally and remotely by using explicit schemes
such as file transfer protocols, or by using indirect techniques such as

distributed file environments; and
   Engaging in videoconferences with participants at two or more
locations.These activities impose different requirements for data transmission rate,
or bandwidth, on the supporting technologies. The data transmission rate is a

measure of the speed with which a given technology can exchange data and is

normally measured in bits per second (bps). The size of data objects (e.g., pages
of text, still images, digitized audio clips, movie-like sequences of still images)
is measured in bits, and dividing the size of the data object by the transmission

rate yields the minimum time that it takes for an object to be transmitted,

disregarding any "overhead" for processes like error checking and

retransmission. In practice, about 10 percent of the bandwidth is lost to

overhead in asynchronous communications. For example, one page of simple

text with no fancy formatting or graphics typically comprises at least 24,000

bits, or 3,000 bytes, of information. At a nominal 2,400 bps, a slow but still

common modem speed, it takes at least 11 seconds to transfer each page of text.

Text that must be transmitted with specific fonts or formatting, or in word

processor or spreadsheet format, requires a somewhat larger number of bits

depending on the features and formats that are included. A 1-megabyte file
takes more than 1 hour to transfer at 2,400 bps but only a few seconds over a
very lightly loaded network running at 10 megabits per second (Mbps).

Depending on the resolution and number of shades of gray required, a one-page,

black-and-white graphic image comprises between 1 and 4 megabytes.
Bandwidth is even more critical for media that must be transmitted in an
ongoing data stream such as audio or video. One second of telephone-quality

audio requires approximately 64,000 bits. Full-color, full-motion video

conforming to regular U.S. television standards (as set forth by the National

Television Systems Committee) requires a bandwidth of 180 Mbps. These
numbers can be reduced by limiting
FACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK50
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the resolution of the image, transmitting fewer frames per second, and utilizing
various compression algorithms. However, bandwidths on the order of 1.5

Mbps to 8 Mbps are still required to achieve reasonable quality. From these

considerations, it is easy to see that video applications are far more demanding

than audio applications, which are in turn more demanding than still-image and

text-only applications.Envisioning the Applications Enabled by Unlimited
BandwidthThe introduction of microprocessors and their rapid penetration of the
market have resulted in a drastic reduction in the cost of computer processing

cycles. The National Information Infrastructure (NII) will have a similar effect

on the cost of communications: it will make long-haul, high-bandwidth

connections less expensive and more widely available. However, lower-

bandwidth cellular and wireless technologies will also become widely available,

and low-bandwidth, analog telephone lines will continue to be used in many

homes and sparsely populated areas. Thus, distributed work applications
utilizing the NII will need to be integrated well across different network
technologies and bandwidths. Important research areas will include system

infrastructure, user interfaces, and developing applications that will effectively

use the varying bandwidths available.
For example, the processor, the internal data communications bus, and the
input/output systems of desktop computers are now very powerful, with further

increases coming at a rapid rate. How could high network bandwidth and

abundant, inexpensive desktop computing power be combined and integrated to

enable, for example, useful and innovative distance learning applications to

improve education? Some possibilities, with widely differing bandwidth

requirements, might include the following:
   Dynamically creating a single video data stream with the "audience"
incorporated into the image. This would allow, for example, each

participant in a distributed industrial or professional training session to

pan and zoom within the videoconference or presentation just as he or

she might look back and forth between the presenter and the other

participants in a small workshop or seminar;
   Dynamically analyzing the facial expressions of the audience to create
different measures and displays summarizing audience response (e.g.,

30 percent of the audience shows evidence of understanding what is

being presented);FACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK51
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Capturing and organizing audio questions from audience members
during the lecture that can be reviewed and/or responded to by the

lecturer later. In other words, members of the audience can create

private audio messages that are passed to the lecturer;
   Capturing and indexing the lecture so that members of the audience
can more easily locate and review what the lecturer said;
   Providing audience members access to the source material on which
the lecture is based so that they can browse through it during the

lecture; and   Broadcasting several video streams and allowing audience members to
select among them or to watch several at the same time.
Similar possibilities exist for other applications. The key idea is to
determine how bandwidth could be used if it were effectively unconstrained, so

as to better understand its usefulness for distributed work.
Enabling Integration of Low-and High-Bandwidth
ApplicationsAt the same time, bandwidth limitations will exist for traditional telephone
service, wireless connections, and cellular services for a long time. Thus,

applications and devices that can provide essential functions using limited

bandwidth and yet be integrated well with devices and services provided over

high-bandwidth networks also should be developed. One example might be to

allow a person to cooperate in a videoconference using a personal digital

assistant (PDA) with limited computational power. While the video portion

would likely be a casualty of limited bandwidth, the audio channel could be
played and a shared drawing browser could be used in a discussion between a
field repair person and a technical support desk. The audio channel might be

sent over a cellular network, and the shared drawing tool commands might be

sent over the PDA wireless network. More generally, communications protocols

that have little overhead and that can utilize processing power to substitute for

bandwidth are fertile areas for further technical research.
MEETING REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIMEDIA
COMMUNICATIONThe distributed work environments of the future will clearly involve the
transmission and reception of multiple types of communications traffic,

including voice, data images, video, and data files. Multimedia communication

is particularly demanding because video
FACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK52
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and audio data must generally arrive in real time, although delays may be
tolerated in the receipt of data files and images. The objective, in the general

sense, is to enable people to engage in multimedia communications independent

of location, distance, computing and communications environment, or the

number of parties involved in a given collaborative session.
User Requirements
The type of distributed work session might range from that involving a
single individual carrying a wireless-network computer interacting with a

remote database to a large-scale multimedia teleconference or group work

session involving many remotely located parties as well as specialized servers

for video, image, and data. Individuals in such a multimedia, multiparty

conference or work session must be free to come and go. Subconferences might

be convened and later, the full session reconvened. Different types of media
might be transmitted to all or subsets of the group at any given time.
Participants in a distributed work environment do not want to be aware of
the underlying communications infrastructure required to make their sessions or

conferences possible. They want to turn on intelligent systems, indicate with

whom they wish to communicate, and start the session within, almost literally,

the blink of an eyelid. They want the chance of a session setup being denied due

to lack of network resources to be as small as it is currently for voice telephone

callsŠabout 1 percent or less. While users may recognize that video, voice, and
images in a wireless environment may not be received with the same fidelity as
in the wired environment, the quality of service clearly has to be acceptable no
matter where users are located and how they move.
Quality-of-service requirements vary greatly, depending on the type of
data being transferred. For example, computer data files must be transferred

without loss or corruption but can generally be delayed during transmission.

Real-time voice, on the other hand, is recognizable in spite of some loss or

corruption during transmission, but substantial loss or delay results in

unacceptable degradation. The delay and loss requirements for real-time video

over communication networks are not completely understood at this time and
depend on the kind of compression techniques used in transmitting the video
and on the quality of image that is required. A multimedia, multipoint network

must ensure that the different media arrive in reasonable synchronism at any

given receiver site and appear at nearly the same time at the different sites.
FACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK53
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.As an example, consider a three-party work session with users located in
New York City, Boston, and Honolulu. The New York user sends a multimedia

message involving video with audio, a number of images, and some

accompanying data, with each medium to be displayed on a different window

on the recipients' screens. Four different kinds of media are involved. Assume

that the transmission to Hawaii encounters a network problem resulting in some
loss of data. The lost data are repeated a number of times before finally arriving
correctly at their destination. The video and its accompanying audio

information are separated from each other and from the data, following different

paths because of differing bandwidth requirements. How will the audio and

video be appropriately resynchronized at the two receiving workstations, and

how will the system and/or users handle latency problems resulting from the

fact that the complete, correct multimedia data took longer to reach Hawaii than

Boston? Issues such as these must be addressed in the context of research into

multimedia, multipoint protocols.
Technology Requirements
At least three enabling technologies are required for effective multimedia
communication among users distributed in time and space.
1. A high-speed, broadband, wired communications infrastructure to
handle diverse multimedia traffic;
2. A wireless networking environment capable of handling
multimedia traffic; and
3. Multimedia communication protocols appropriate over wide areas
and involving multiple parties in heterogeneous computing

environments, i.e., multimedia, multiparty protocols.
Multimedia, multiparty communications capability is already available to a
limited extent over local area networks and is clearly a topic of great interest

among computer, workstation, and communications vendors. Multimedia

communication over wide areas is still in its infancy, with many research issues
yet to be addressed. A limited amount of multimedia protocol design for the
Internet has been carried out. Some work on point-to-point multimedia

communication protocols, as contrasted to multiparty communications (group

work sessions and teleconferences), has appeared in the technical literature.

However, the bulk of the work carried out thus far on multimedia

communications has focused on workstation design and issues such as the

synchronization of different traffic types. In the terminology
FACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK54
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of network communications architecture, research attention has been focused
principally on the "higher-layer" protocols. Relatively little work has been

carried out on the communications infrastructure, including the transport layer,

required for long-distance multimedia communications over wide area

networks. The recently published 
Realizing the Information Future
 (CSTB,
1994b) has called for an expanded program of research to support an Open Data
Network architecture that would facilitate multimedia traffic.
FACILITATING DISTRIBUTED WORK55
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Research Recommendations
Distributed work, including telecommuting, relies heavily on computing
and communications technologies. Recent improvements in the capabilities and
availability of tools in these interrelated fields have meant that distributed work
can be undertaken more easily now than in the past. Likewise, future

improvements will benefit those engaging in distributed work and provide both

economic and social benefits to the nation. Thus the committee supports the

continuation of broad national computing and communications research

programs in academia, industry, and government.
However, in order to optimize the opportunities for and effectiveness of
distributed work, the committee recommends that research also be conducted

with distributed work as a specific focus. The research needed can be
conceptualized as indicated in 
Figure 5.1
: infrastructure research is most needed
at the extremes of the range of computing and communications capabilities, and

applications research is most needed in the middle of the spectrum.
INFRASTRUCTURE RESEARCH
The national initiative to develop the technologies for and establish the
National Information Infrastructure (NII) will benefit distributed work. For

example, the NII will require both richer and more robust security features than
are now available on the Internet. These
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS56
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.same features will of course be useful to distributed workers to help ensure
proper access, control, authentication, and tracking of both individual and group

work. The committee recommends that specific technical infrastructure research

to enhance and extend distributed work practices be undertaken in the following

areas.FIGURE 5.1 Types of research needed to support distributed work across a
range of capabilities.
Mobile WorkWorking while mobile, for example, while traveling in a automobile or
standing in a customer's office, presents many challenges due to the limited

communications bandwidth and computing power that are typically available

compared to those offered in a stationary environment with wire or optical fiber

network connections. While pocketsize cellular telephones have enabled voice

communications for many users, reliable mobile data communications services

are just now being deployed and are still typically limited to asynchronous, low-
bandwidth applications like electronic mail or its equivalent. Similarly,
computing power becomes limited as equipment size and weight are restricted.

Laptop computers, weighing a few pounds and suitable for use while sitting

down, are capable of running most programs from a desktop computer

environment, but computing power
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS57
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and thus the programs that can be used become extremely constrained on a
''palm-top" device suitable for use while standing or walking.
To help increase the usefulness of mobile devices and services, the
committee recommends a comprehensive research program with the following

major elements (goals):
   Increasing the bandwidth available to mobile devices. This might
include using multiple channels or transmission technologies to

increase the effective delivered bandwidth.
   Developing network protocols that specifically facilitate mobile
addresses or end-points. (The current protocols, TCP/IP and ISO TP4,

were developed under the assumption of geographically fixed end-

points.)   Effectively and efficiently allocating among multiple media (e.g.,
image, text, audio, and signaling) the varying bandwidth that is

available to a mobile user. Both short-term variances caused by

circumstances such as changes in network load and long-term

variances attributable to advances in transmission technology will need
to be gracefully accommodated with minimal user attention.
   Balancing and accommodating the competing service demands and
network traffic generated by multiple, simultaneous mobile users.
   Maintaining the essential functionality of communications that
originate in a high-bandwidth environment but must be delivered in

environments of varying bandwidth, including those of low-bandwidth

mobile devices.
   Managing the real-time tracking and transfer of users moving between
wireless cells, and ultimately the transfer of users moving from a wired

to a wireless network environment in the course of a single,

multimedia work or conference session.
1   Developing computer processes and programs that can migrate across a
network with the user as that individual moves from place to place.

(Ubiquitous computing and a mobile computing environment are

similar concepts.)
   Facilitating periods of "disconnected work" done when a network
connection is not available. Currently, even the best-connected
1 Wireless systems already track users in order to provide uninterrupted service.
However, safeguards must be established to prevent the system from being abused as a

way to simply monitor the movements of citizens for other reasons. This is one concrete
example of the need for implementing privacy safeguards as the nation's technology
advances.RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS58
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.mobile workers have some periods when they must work with no
network connection at all, such as during commercial air flights. This

can present a problem when their work involves files that are shared

with other workers: when a temporarily disconnected worker returns to

connected operations, how can he or she know which version of each

file is the latest, and how can the changes made by the temporarily
disconnected worker be reconciled with a file that may also have been
changed by workers within the group who remained connected?
Complicating but also adding promise in low-bandwidth-environment
research is the fact that computing power and communications bandwidth can

often be substituted, one for the other. For example, if a suitable processor and

algorithm are available, data compression can reduce the need for large

bandwidths by effectively decreasing the quantity of information that must be

transmitted.Multipoint, Multimedia Distributed Work
A broad-ranging technical research program should be initiated to explore
possibilities for distributed work practices using multipoint, multimedia

communications at different, but generally abundant, bandwidths. 
2 In addition
to facilitating distributed work, a research program in this area would help

ensure the timely implementation of the NII. It should include research aimed at

achieving the following:
   Understanding and specifying minimum quality-of-service standards
for a representative variety of application areas. Currently, the impacts

of conditions such as latency, jitter, buffering, and synchronization of

high-quality, interactive audio, image, and video are not fully

understood. For example, the amount of video jitter that is acceptable
for distance learning may be figuratively and literally deadly in a
telemedicine application. The requirements for latency, jitter, and the

like may also differ between live and delayed (recorded) viewing.
2 Related sociological, organizational, and human-factors research will need to be
conducted contemporaneously with technical research. For example, videoconferencing

is still a relatively new technique: we use it, but not necessarily well. How can it be made
more effective? What formats are good for meetings? How can both previously prepared
and spontaneously written materials best be integrated into a videoconference?
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS59
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Predicting and controlling the various types of simultaneous
communications traffic to ensure the required quality of services for

both point-to-point and multipoint sessions. This may involve

individuals using devices with varying bandwidth capabilities joining

and leaving during an active session.
   Determining how to charge for distributed patterns of resource
consumption on complex networks that may include sections of

varying bandwidth. For example, the current conference-call model of

charging a single party with the entire cost of a distributed work

session is very likely to inhibit usage when newer, more complex

networks and connections are available and are used by multiple

organizations that have agreed to be responsible for their own costs
while cooperating on a particular project. Specifically, a party
participating via a limited-bandwidth connection in an otherwise high-

bandwidth, multimedia, six-way conference session may not wish to

pay one-sixth of the total cost of the session. Ideally, a variety of

methods for billing according to bandwidth use or allocation should be

supported.   Establishing multimedia communication sessions among multiple,
remote parties, to include notification of individuals and initiation of

the actual session with minimal human attention.
APPLICATIONS RESEARCH
Domain-Specific Research
Although various types of distributed work are currently carried out in the
U.S. workplace, the implementation and effectiveness of important

organizational group processes are often constrained by the lack of relevant

computing and communications applications in a distributed work environment.

For example, the informal methods that people in organizations have for sharing
information, coordinating tasks, learning new skills, recruiting members, and
sustaining group activities cannot be applied easily in distributed settings. The

committee believes that many of these processes can be facilitated by a

sustained research effort focusing on computing and communications

applications for distributed work.
Thus, the committee recommends research-oriented field trials of
distributed work in areas of national or commercial interest, such as delivery of

health care in rural areas, collaborative design of complex systems, or the

maintenance and repair of deployed equipment. These trials should be
conducted across large geographic areas and should utilize heterogeneous
hardware, software, and communications services whenever possible. As

appropriate, they could be combined
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS60
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.with other federal and state field trials of distributed education, health care,
distributed science, or electronic commerce. The field trials should lead to the

development of applications tailored to improve performance in each of these

domains. Importantly, it appears that with minor modifications they will

enhance distributed work in other domains as well. The committee believes that

similar efforts in other important areas of distributed work would help solve the
difficult problems of information sharing, group socialization, remote
supervision, and related constraints in the context of employer-employee

relationships. Properly designed field trials of distributed work would provide

the opportunity to conduct extensive research in important substantive areas

such as education and on tools such as group writing products that could

enhance and extend future distributed work in many other fields or domains.

Research should be conducted to discover approaches to the following:
   Improving the capability to search for and share unstructured
information. Research aimed at improving the tools needed to identify

potential group members and to identify and access personal stores of

information in the same manner as information stored in libraries and
other institutional archives is only starting, and more is clearly needed.
Even if the technological problem of finding experts were solved, the

social issues of ensuring privacy and controlling access to expert

individuals across networks need extensive research. Numerous

opportunities for research also exist in the area of search algorithms

capable of handling nonstandardized information formats on

heterogeneous hardware platforms.
   Developing techniques for forming and sustaining distributed groups,
including methods for developing group cohesiveness, enabling remote

supervision, providing individual and group motivation and rewards,

and ensuring continued commitment to a project or organization.

Behavioral and organizational research should be conducted
concurrently to better identify exactly how physical proximity
stimulates effective recruitment of group members, so that functionally

analogous processes can be encouraged in distributed work settings.
   Scaling and extending information retrieval techniques so that users
can search all relevant and available databases, not just previously

known and selected databases. Query techniques that are independent

of the underlying database structure will be increasingly valuable as

increasing amounts of information become accessible via public

networks such as the Internet. Related research is needed into highly
reliable global file systems and environments and on improving
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS61
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the performance of distributed databases, and their impacts on network
traffic. More generally, research is needed to develop techniques for

browsing and other ways of facilitating queries in which the user may

not have a well-specified question.
   Developing portable, extensible tool kits for building distributed
remote control systems and their user interfaces. For example, key

control functions must be identified and made accessible to remote

control, security and safety must be foolproof, and both novice and

expert users must be accommodated. Additionally, researchers should
investigate the potentials for controlling heterogeneous devices with
the same end functions through a single remote control program.
The field trials recommended by the committee should be interdisciplinary
research efforts, with expert personnel drawn from the behavioral and social

sciences as well as from the computing and telecommunications disciplines.

Social and behavioral scientists have extensive understanding of the functions

that groups need to fulfill to successfully accomplish their work and experience

in evaluating the success with which new computer and communications-based
tools have met these needs, as well as expertise in assessing the social impact of
new tools and technologies. Technology researchers have expertise in inventing

successful applications that push the limits of technology, that can be

generalized across domains, and that raise fundamental research issues in the

supporting technical disciplines. Together they can explore the interrelated

technical, human, organizational, and social factors that can enhance and extend

distributed work across many discipline-and situation-specific domains.
Generic Research
Computers have provided powerful new capabilities to the nation's
workers. Word processors and desktop publishing programs make writing,

editing, laying out, designing, and publishing sophisticated documents

dependent on the skill of the individual rather than on the availability of

expensive specialized equipment. Spreadsheet and graphics programs allow
legions of workers to analyze scientific, financial, and other numerical data in
sophisticated ways that prior to 1980 were possible only for those with access to

large mainframe computers. Database programs allow workers with only

minimal programming skills to record, store, retrieve, and analyze huge

amounts of data.
However, with these ever-increasing capabilities has come increasing
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS62
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.complexity. Workers needing to cooperate with others must now be conversant
about multiple file formats and their compatibility (or general lack thereof),

translation utilities, diskette formats, data densities, and even features supported

between versions or releases of the same program. While these intricacies are

reasonably manageable within a single, physically contiguous organization with

ample technical support, they can quickly become very limiting within a
geographically distributed work group using heterogeneous hardware, software,
and communications media. Mobile workers may have an even more difficult

time as they attempt to communicate and cooperate across time zones utilizing

unfamiliar telephone and data connections with little or no technical support.
If the capacity for distributed work is to expand to individuals and groups
beyond those with considerable technical proficiency, attention must be paid to

simplifying many of the required operations and user interfaces. The committee

thus recommends a research program with the following goals:
   Developing distributed work tools, interfaces, and systems that actively
encourage information sharing. This activity is critical to group

accomplishments and can become difficult in dispersed groups. New
systems should include features to anticipate and accommodate work
conditions described in the social science literature
Šsuch as social
dilemmas, social loafing, and altruism
Što improve information sharing.
   Bridging the gap between synchronous and asynchronous
communications to facilitate both prior input and follow-up to group

work sessions. Currently, distributed group discussions and work
sessions tend to take place synchronously, using only a few
specifically preannounced reference or discussion items. Extensive pre

and post-session discussions occurring by asynchronous means such as

electronic mail are often ignored or imperfectly summarized and

considered due to the difficulties of indexing, referencing,

conveniently using, and generally relating them to a work session

occurring on a synchronous medium. Technical and human-factors

research may reveal methods to better link these two major categories

of communication.
   Improving and extending the user interface to the telephone network
and services. The nearly universal 12-key touch-tone key-pad has

become a limiting factor in many systems. So-called voice response
systems use audio only on one end of the transaction, and users must
be led through a long menu tree in order to limit the number of choices

at any one branch. Interfaces might be both richer
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS63
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and easier to use with some combination of alphanumeric display,
voice prompts, and audio input from the user. Even in an age of

growing computer networks, "plain old telephone service" remains the

most ubiquitous means of sharing information.
   Improving audio processing technology and equipment to facilitate
working at a distance. This effort should include research aimed at

better managing and using captured audio as a data type, and

improving noise and echo cancellation in less-than-ideal audio

environments.   Reducing the human support currently needed for the use of
widespread, complex networks by distributed workers. Currently, wide

area network services, whether provided directly through Internet

connections or indirectly by value-added network vendors, generally

require large amounts of human-provided technical support. This is

especially true when end users do not wish to learn about underlying
network technologies. Research aimed at better automating long-and
short-term network connections as well as ongoing network trouble-

shooting and maintenance would be valuable to all individuals

engaging in distributed work and to most other network users as well.
   Improving the quality and reducing the cost of powerful, high-quality
computer input and output devices. While these improvements would

aid all workers, distributed workers in particular must often process

large amounts of information with little support from others. Improved

scanning, optical character recognition, and computer display systems
would be very helpful. Better interfaces are needed for browsing,
annotating, retaining, and communicating the context of information.
   Improving the reliability of communications and computing systems to
reduce the chance of telecommuters becoming isolated due to system

failures. Networks and multiuser systems of all types will need to have

the same or better reliability as today's stand-alone, single-user systems.
CONCLUSIONMany observers believe that the U.S. economy is in transition to a
postindustrial model. While the exact outlines of this new economy are not yet

completely known, it appears that the nation would be well served by enhancing

workers' capabilities to engage in distributed work and by carefully considering

its wider adoption in order to increase locational flexibility, provide expanded

employment opportunities, and make better use of our physical transportation
resources. The research recommendations of the Committee to Study
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS64
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Technology and Telecommuting: Issues and Impacts will by no means be the
final word on the topic. New opportunities for research will appear as the

nation's work practices change and its computing and communications

technology continues to advance. The committee is convinced, however, that

the research it has recommended will provide major new technological

capabilities to enhance and extend the use of distributed work in the nation.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS65
Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BibliographyAbel, M.J. 1990. "Experiences in an exploratory distributed organization." Pp. 489-510 in J.
Galegher, R. Kraut, and C. Egido, eds., 
Intellectual Teamwork: Social and Technological
Foundations of Cooperative Work
 . Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Earlbaum Associates.
Allen, T. 1977. 
Managing the Flow of Technology. 
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Argote, L. 1982. "Input uncertainty and organizational coordination in hospital emergency units."
Administrative Science Quarterly
 27:420-434.
Bagley, M., J. Mannering, and P. Mokhtarian. 1993. 
Telecommuting Centers and Related Concepts:
A Review of Practice
. University of California, Davis, Institute of Transportation Studies
Research Report, prepared for the California Department of Transportation Office of

Traffic Improvement (December).
Baiylin, L. 1988. 
Toward the Perfect Workplace? The Experience of Home-based Developers
.Working paper 1993-88. Cambridge, Mass.: Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts

Institute of Technology.
Bly, S., S. Harrison, and S. Irwin. 1993. "Media spaces: Bringing people together in a video, audio
and computing environment." 
Communications of the ACM
 36(1):28-46.
Borenstein, N. 1992. "Computational mail as network infrastructure for CSCW." 
Proceedings ofComputer Supported Cooperative Work 1992 
. New York: Association of Computing
Machinery.BIBLIOGRAPHY66Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Brooks, F. 1975. 
The Mythical Man-month: Essays on Software Engineering
 . Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Bullen, C., and J. Bennett. 1991. "Groupware in practice. An interpretation of work experiences."
Pp. 257-287 in C. Dunlop and R. Kling, eds., 
Computerization and Controversy: Value
Conflicts and Social Choices 
. New York: Academic Press.
Christensen, K. 1988. 
Women and Home-Based Work: The Unspoken Contract 
. New York: Henry
Holt and Company.
Clark, H.H., and S.E. Brennen. 1991. "Grounding in communication." Pp. 127-149 in L.B. Resnick,
R.M. Levine, and S.D. Teasley, eds., 
Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition
.Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
Computer Science and Technology Board (CSTB), National Research Council. 1990. 
Computers at
Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age
. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council. 1993.
National Collaboratories: Applying Information Technology for Scientific Research
.Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council. 1994a.
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century Lever
 .Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council. 1994b.
Realizing the Information Future: The Internet and Beyond
. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council. 1994c.
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked Communities
. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press, in press.
Constant, D., L. Sproull, and S. Kiesler. 1994. "The kindness of strangers: On the usefulness of
weak ties for technical advice." 
Organizational Science
, forthcoming.
Culnan, M. 1983. "Environmental scanning: The effects of task complexity and source accessibility
on information gathering behavior." 
Decision Science 14:194-206.
de Sola Pool, I. 1980. "Communications technology and land use." 
Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science
 451 (September):1-12.
Dudley, K., R. Kraut, and C. Steinfield. 1993. 
American Home Telecommunications Project
.Unpublished research. Morristown, N.J.: Bell Communications Research.
Eveland, J., and T. Bikson. 1988. "Work group structures and computer
BIBLIOGRAPHY67Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.support: A field experiment.'' 
ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems
 6(4):354-379.Feldman, M.S. 1987. "Electronic mail and weak ties in organizations." 
Office: Technology andPeople 3:83-101.
Festinger, L., S. Schacter, and K. Back. 1950. 
Social Pressures in Informal Groups: A Study of
Human Factors in Housing
. Palo Alto, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Finholt, T., and C. Huff. 1994. 
Social Issues in Computing: Putting Computing in Its Place
. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Fish, R., R. Kraut, R. Root, and R. Rice. 1992. "Evaluating video as a technology for informal
communication." 
Communications of the ACM
 36(1):48-61.
Flores, F., M. Graves, B. Hartfield, and T. Winograd. 1988. "Computer systems and the design of
organizational interaction." ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems
 6:153-172.
Foltz, P., and S. Dumais. 1993. "Personalized information delivery: An analysis of information
filtering methods." 
Communications of the ACM
 35(12):51-60.
Galegher, J., and R. Kraut. 1994. "Computer-mediated communication for intellectual teamwork:
An experiment in group writing." 
Information Systems Research 5(2):110-138.
Garvey, W., N. Lin, and C. Nelson. 1970. "Communication in the physical and social sciences."
Science 170:1166-1173.
Gentile, F., and R. Houseman. 1970. 
A Development Project in Self and Home Employment for the
Homebound. Albertson, N.Y.: INA Mend Institute at Human Resources Center.
Gibbons, J., W. Kincheloe, and K. Down. 1977. "Tutored videotape instruction." 
Science 195:1139.
Hagstrom, W. 1965. 
The Scientific Community
. Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press,
pp. 121-122.
Hesses, B., L. Sproull, S. Kiesler, and J. Walsh. 1993. "Returns to science: Computer networks and
scientific research in oceanography." 
Communications of the ACM
 36(8):90-101.
Hiltz, S. 1993. "Correlates of learning in a virtual classroom." 
International Journal of Man-
Machine Studies
 39:71-98.
Ives, H. 1930. "Two-way television." 
Bell Labs Record
 8:399-404.
Katz, D., and R. Kahn. 1979. 
The Social Psychology of Organizations
 . Second edition. New York:
John Wiley & Sons.
Katz, R., and M. Tushman. 1978. "Communication patterns, project performance, and task
characteristics: An empirical evaluation in an R&D setting." 
Organizational Behavior andHuman Performance
 23:139-162.
Kraut, R. 1988. "Homework: What is it and who does it?" Chapter
BIBLIOGRAPHY68Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 in K. Christensen, ed., 
The New Era of Home-based Work
. Boulder, Colo.: Westview
Press.Kraut, R., and P. Attewell. 1993. 
Electronic Mail and Organizational Knowledge: Media Use in a
Global Corporation
. Technical Report CMU-CS-93-208. Pittsburgh, Pa.: Carnegie Mellon
University, Computer Science Department.
Kraut, R., and L. Streeter. 1994. "Coordination in large scale software development."
Communications of the ACM
, in press.
Kraut, R., C. Egido, and J. Galegher. 1990. "Patterns of contact and communication in scientific
research collaboration." Pp. 149-171 in J. Galegher, R. Kraut, and C. Egido, eds.,

Intellectual Teamwork: Social and Technological Foundations of Cooperative Work
.Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kraut, R., S. Lewis, and L. Swezey. 1982. "Listener responsiveness and the coordination of
conversation." 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
 43:718-731.
Kusterer, K. 1978. 
Know-how on the Job: The Important Working Knowledge of Unskilled Workers
.Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Lai, K., T. Malone, and K. Yu. 1988. "Object lens: A "spreadsheet" for cooperative work." 
ACMTransactions on Office Information Systems
 6(4):332-353.
LaRose, R. 1983. 
Future Demand for Teleconferencing and Teleconferencing Suppliers
. East
Lansing, Mich.: EELRA Group.
Lave, J., and E. Wenger. 1991. 
Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation
. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Lund, J., and P. Mokhtarian. 1994. "Telecommuting and residential location: Theory and
implications for VMT in the monocentric metropolis." 
Transportation Research Record
,forthcoming.McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science & Technology
. 1987. "Facsimile." Sixth edition. New York:
McGraw-Hill.Miller, J., M. McKenna, and P. Ramsey. 1993. "An evaluation of student content learning and
affective perceptions of a two-way interactive video learning experience." 
EducationalTechnology 33(6):51-55.
Mintzberg, H. 1979. 
The Structuring of Organizations
. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, p. 20.
Mokhtarian, P. 1988. "An empirical evaluation of the travel impacts of teleconferencing."
Transportation Research A
 22A(4):283-289.
Mokhtarian, P. 1990. "A typology of relationships between telecommunications and transportation."
Transportation Research A
 24A(3):231-242.
Mokhtarian, P. 1991a. "Defining telecommuting." 
Transportation Research Record
 1305:273-281.
BIBLIOGRAPHY69Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Mokhtarian, P. 1991b. "Telecommuting and travel: State of the practice, state of the art."
Transportation 18(4):319-342.
Mokhtarian, P. 1994. "The transportation impacts of telecommuting: Recent empirical findings." In
P.R. Stopher and M. Lee-Gosselin, eds., 
Understanding Travel Behavior in an Era of
Change. Elmsford, N.Y.: Pergamon Press, forthcoming.
Mokhtarian, P., and I. Salomon. 1994. "Modeling the choice of telecommuting: Setting the context."
Environment and Planning A
 26(4):749-766.
Mokhtarian, P., S. Handy, and I. Salomon. 1994. "Methodological issues in the estimation of
transportation, energy, and air quality impacts of telecommuting." 
TransportationResearch A
, forthcoming.
National Technological University (NTU). 1994. "National Technological University: Press fact
sheet." NTU, 700 Centre Ave., Fort Collins, Colo., August.
Nijkamp, P., and I. Salomon. 1989. "Future spatial impacts of telecommunications." 
TransportationPlanning and Technology
 13(4):275-287.
Nilles, J. 1991. "Telecommuting and urban sprawl: Mitigator or inciter?" 
Transportation 18
(4):411-432.Ochsman, R., and A. Chapanis. 1974. "The effects of 10 communications modes on the behavior of
teams during co-operative problem solving." 
International Journal of Man-Machine
Studies 6(September):579-619.
O'Conaill, B., S. Whitaker, and S. Wilbur. 1992. 
Conversations over video-conferences: An
evaluation of video mediated communication
. Unpublished manuscript. Bristol, England:
Hewlett Packard Research Laboratories.
Race, T. 1993. "Testing the telecommute." 
New York
 Times, August 6, p. F11.
Salomon, I. 1986. "Telecommuting and travel relationships: A review." 
Transportation Research A
20(3):223-238.Salton, G., and M. McGill. 1979. 
Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval
. New York:
McGraw-Hill Books.
Schramm, W. 1977. 
Big Media, Little Media: Tools and Technologies for Instruction
. Beverly Hills,
Calif.: Sage Publications.
Shellenbarger, S. 1993. "Some thrive, but many wilt working at home." 
Wall Street Journal
,December 14, p. B1.
Smailagic, A., and D. Siewiorek. 1994. "The CMU mobile computers." 
Proceedings of IEEE
COMPCON '94
. New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
Svenning, L., and J. Ruchinskas. 1984. "Organizational teleconferencing."
BIBLIOGRAPHY70Research Recommendations to Facilitate Distributed WorkCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Pp. 217-248 in Ronald E. Rice Associates, eds., 
The New Media
. Beverly Hills, Calif.:
Sage Publications.
Tang, J., and E. Isaacs. 1992. 
Why Do Users Like Video? Studies of Multimedia-supported
Collaboration. SMLI TR-92-5. Mountain View, Calif.: Sun Microsystems Laboratories.
Thorn, B., and T. Connolly. 1987. "Discretionary data bases: A theory and some experimental
findings." Communications Research
 14(5):512-528.
Tushman, M. 1977. "Special boundary roles in the innovation process." 
Administrative Science
Quarterly 22(4):587-605.
U.S. Department of Energy. 1994. 
Energy, Emissions, and Social Consequences of Telecommuting
.Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Labor. 
1991. Dictionary of Occupational Titles
. Volume 1. Fourth edition.
Lanham, Md.: Bernan Press.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Office of the Secretary. 1993. 
Transportation Implications of
Telecommuting. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Weiser, M. 1993. "Some computer science issues in ubiquitous computing." 
Communications of the
ACM 36(7):47-84.
Whitaker, S., and E. Geelhoed. 1993. "Shared workspaces. How do they work and when are they
useful?" 
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies
 39:813-842.
Williams, E. 1977. "Experimental comparisons of face-to-face and mediated communication: A
review." Psychological Bulletin
 84:963-976.
Yates, J. 1989. 
Control Through Communication
. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press.
BIBLIOGRAPHY71