DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/4813Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications IndustryCompetitive: Convergence of Computing, Communications, andEntertainment90 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-05089-0 | DOI 10.17226/4813Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research CouncilKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iTO BE SET WITH COVERKeeping the U.S. Computer andCommunications IndustryCompetitive: Convergence ofComputing, Communications,and EntertainmentSteering Committee on Keeping the U.S. Computer and  Communications Industry Competitive:  Convergence of Computing,
  Communications, and Entertainment
Computer Science and Telecommunications BoardCommission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and ApplicationsNational Research CouncilNational Academy PressWashington, D.C.  1995
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy ofSciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the

committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.Support for this project was provided by the following organizations:  Air Force Office of
Scientific Research (under Contract N00014-87-J-1110), Advanced Research Projects Agency (underContract N00014-87-J-1110), Apple Computer Corporation, Department of Energy (under Grant DE-FG05-87ER25029), Digital Equipment Corporation, Intel Corporation, International Business Ma-
chines Corporation, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (under Grant CDA-9119792),National Science Foundation (under Grant CDA-9119792), and Office of Naval Research (underContract N00014-87-J-1110).  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in

this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 94-66573International Standard Book Number 0-309-05089-8Additional copies of this report are available from:
National Academy Press2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Box 285Washington, DC  20055
800-624-6242202-334-3313 (in the Washington Metropolitan Area)B-455This report is also available on the National Academy of SciencesÕ Internet host.  It may be accessedvia World Wide Web at http://www.nas.edu.Copyright 1995 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of AmericaKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STEERING COMMITTEE ON KEEPING THEU.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRYCOMPETITIVE:  CONVERGENCE OF COMPUTING,
COMMUNICATIONS, AND ENTERTAINMENTDAVID C. NAGEL, AppleSoft Inc., ChairPETER F. COWHEY, University of California at San Diego(at press time, Federal Communications Commission)ESTHER DYSON, EDventure Holdings Inc.
JANICE OBUCHOWSKI, Freedom Technologies Inc.
ALEXANDER SINGER, Film DirectorSpecial AdvisorsSAMUEL H. FULLER, Digital Equipment CorporationROBERT W. LUCKY, Bell Communications Research
IRVING WLADAWSKY-BERGER, POWER Parallel Systems Inc.,International Business Machines CorporationStaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorLESLIE M. WADE, Project AssistantiiiKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDWILLIAM A. WULF, University of Virginia, ChairFRANCES ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
JEFF DOZIER, University of California at Santa Barbara
DAVID J. FARBER, University of Pennsylvania
HENRY FUCHS, University of North Carolina
CHARLES M. GESCHKE, Adobe Systems Inc.
JAMES N. GRAY, San Francisco, California
BARBARA J. GROSZ, Harvard University
DEBORAH A. JOSEPH, University of Wisconsin
RICHARD M. KARP, University of California at Berkeley
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Digital Equipment Corporation
BARBARA H. LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN MAJOR, Motorola Inc.
ROBERT L. MARTIN, AT&T Network Systems
DAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, University of California at Berkeley
WILLIAM H. PRESS, Harvard University
CHARLES L. SEITZ, Myricom Inc.
EDWARD SHORTLIFFE, Stanford University School of Medicine
CASMIR S. SKRZYPCZAK, NYNEX Corporation
LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel CorporationMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorLOUISE A. ARNHEIM, Senior Staff Officer
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer
JOHN M. GODFREY, Research Associate
RENEE A. HAWKINS, Staff Associate
GLORIA P. BEMAH, Administrative Assistant
LESLIE M. WADE, Project AssistantivKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONSRICHARD N. ZARE, Stanford University, ChairRICHARD S. NICHOLSON, American Association for theAdvancement of Science, Vice ChairSTEPHEN L. ADLER, Institute for Advanced Study
SYLVIA T. CEYER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley
ROBERT J. HERMANN, United Technologies Corporation
RHONDA J. HUGHES, Bryn Mawr College
SHIRLEY A. JACKSON, Rutgers University
KENNETH I. KELLERMANN, National Radio Astronomy Observatory
HANS MARK, University of Texas at Austin
THOMAS A. PRINCE, California Institute of Technology
JEROME SACKS, National Institute of Statistical Sciences
L.E. SCRIVEN, University of Minnesota
A. RICHARD SEEBASS III, University of Colorado
LEON T. SILVER, California Institute of Technology
CHARLES P. SLICHTER, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
ALVIN W. TRIVELPIECE, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
SHMUEL WINOGRAD, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
CHARLES A. ZRAKET, MITRE Corporation (retired)NORMAN METZGER, Executive DirectorvKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the
general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by Congress in

1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern-
ment on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce Alberts is president of the

National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of out-
standing engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of
its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility
for advising the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also

sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.
Dr. Robert M. White is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academyof Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The

Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr.

Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy ofSciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology
with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federalgovernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in
providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineer-
ing communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the

Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. Robert M. White are chairman

and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
This report on digital convergence is the third in a series of Computer Sci-ence and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) reports focusing on the competi-
tive status of the U.S. computer industry.  The first series report, 
Keeping the U.S.Computer Industry Competitive:  Defining the Agenda
 (National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C., 1990), provided insights from leaders of computer-related
businesses and research programs on the broad industry complex and its various
segments.  The second series report, 
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Com-petitive:  Systems Integration
 (National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1992),
presented expert examination of a technology and business arena in which the
United States has shown leadership, systems integration, to further understanding
of how to maintain if not extend that strong performance.  This third report builds

on a theme in the first two, the close coupling of computing and communications
in the development of new technologies, goods, and services.  It explores the

broader integration of information processing, communication, and generation
that is reflected in the convergence of computing, communications, and enter-
tainment.  It reinforces the importance of communications that has been evident

in each report by broadening the series title to Keeping the U.S. Computer andCommunications Industry Competitive.  In addition to discussing conditions,
opportunities, and risks for competitiveness, it also addresses implications of the
subject technologies and their uses for the daily lives of citizens.Digital convergence is the most volatile topic considered in CSTBÕs com-petitiveness series.  From the time CSTB selected the topic, through the time it

held a colloquium on it, to this time of publication, several waves of interest and
opinion have coursed through the news media and, by extension, the businessviiKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiPREFACEcommunity and popular attention.  As project special advisor and industry execu-
tive Robert W. Lucky observed, there has been a Òhype cycle.Ó  Opinions of
where digital convergence is heading and when and how it will get there have
varied over that cycle.  Although this is hardly a time of stability, enough has

happened to allow for greater reflection and more sober assessment of prospects
than at earlier times in the past two years.  Toward that end, this report is directed

to decision makers in government, industry, and academia.  Because so much of

its subject matter is new, time-sensitive, and lacking in scholarly consideration,
this report has drawn to an unusual degree on items reported in the news media.
News articles are cited in part to document the hype cycle that, as noted by
Lucky, itself has fed the very activity that was being reported.In keeping with the previous volumes in this series, this report draws directlyon statements made by principals from industry and academia (Appendix A) that
were aired at an invitational colloquium (Appendix B).  That stock of statements
was updated and enlarged in this instance by a series of interviews (Appendix C)
conducted by Virginia Quesada of VQ Productions Inc.  The interviews were

developed to support a CSTB experiment, the production of a video for limited
distribution to the federal policymaking community as a companion to this re-
port.  As a few colloquium participants noted, it is out of keeping with digital

convergence for CSTB to publish only in text form.  The concept for the video

and its initial framing were championed by steering committee member Alexander
Singer, an independent film director.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive:Convergence of Computing, Communications, and Entertainment benefited par-
ticularly from the advice and support of special advisors to the steering commit-
tee, Samuel Fuller, Robert Lucky, and Irving Wladawsky-Berger, each of whom
had contributed to the first two reports of this competitiveness series.  Early

drafting and organization, background consultations, and data gathering were
conducted by Laura Ost, an independent science writer retained as a CSTB con-
sultant.  As always, the anonymous reviewers provided criticisms and sugges-

tions that helped to refine and extend the discussion.Comments on this report and suggestions of topics for future activities in thisseries are welcome via Internet to CSTB@nas.edu or fax to 202/334-2318.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEixContents1  OVERVIEW1
Visions and Reality, 6
New Products and Alliances:  Industrial Convergence?, 8

Conclusion, 12
Notes, 122  TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS15
The Outlook for Multimedia Goods and Services, 15Software, 19
Networks, 22Expanding Bandwidth:  Is There Enough?, 24

Interconnection and Interoperability, 24Standards, 26Entertainment and the Entertainment Industry, 29
Notes, 363  SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS40
The Flow of Information, 42Diversity of Information, 44
Intellectual Property Issues, 46The Shape of Technology, 50The Need for User-Friendly Technology, 52
A History Lesson:  The Evolution of Books as Mass Media, 55
Using the Technology, 56ixKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACEGames, Play, and Life, 56Entertaining Education, 59Notes, 624  PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES
  AND OBSTACLES65
International Competitiveness, 66
Public-Private Tensions and the Information Infrastructure, 76
Perspectives on Regulation, 78
Other Useful Roles for Government, 83
Notes, 85BIBLIOGRAPHY88
APPENDIXESAColloquium Participants99

BColloquium Agenda103

CFollow-up Interviews105
xCONTENTSKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11Overview
Digital convergenceÑcombining computing, communications, and enter-tainmentÑis taking shape in the form of new kinds of business and consumer
products (goods and services) and new business ventures and alliances.  It has

become a regular topic in the business, trade, and mass media, yet it remains hard
to define and hard to interpret in terms of its ultimate technical, business, and
societal ramifications.  The very term ÒconvergenceÓ is itself a source of confu-

sion and ambiguity; see Box 1.1.  As Samuel Ginn, former chairman and chief

executive officer of Pacific Telesis Group, observed at the colloquium that served
as a basis for this report,The whole term ÒconvergenceÓ continues to take on new meanings.  Originally,
we thought it was the combination of media and telecommunications.  Then wediscovered that set[-top] devices were a key part of that convergence, and then
we understood that storage technology was important, and indeed, semiconduc-tor manufacturing, and then the whole applications arena and the programmingarena.  Now, we understand that games and transactions and retail firms are all

a part of this convergence.  So this whole idea continues to evolve.
As a result, the true nature of digital convergence may not be reflected accuratelyby either its advocates or the popular media.  Illustrating the swings in opinion,

sample headlines and news story themes between mid-1993 and mid-1994 in-
cluded ÒMultimedia Is Growing by Leaps and BoundsÓ; ÒRace for Multimedia
Crown Speeding Up:  Companies Team to Get Jump on Interactive ServicesÓ;

ÒMerger to Create a Media GiantÓ; ÒWith MergerÕs Failure, an Industry Seeks a
LeaderÓ; and ÒHurdles Slow Information ÔSuperhypeway.ÕÓKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEUnderlying digital convergence are advances in computer hardware, tele-communications systems, and software.  The unifying element is digital technol-

ogy, which reduces all information to a binary code of 1s and 0s.  Whereas

computers and software have been digital for decades, audio and video technolo-
gies have only recently begun to go digital.  Once information has a digital

representation, different forms can be blended together (although digitization is
not sufficient for such integration, which depends on the structures imposed on
the bits) and, eventually, transmitted by wire, fiber, or wireless means.  Thus,

digitized material can be defined by what it does rather than the medium on
which it is transported, stored, or used.  Moreover, digital devices can be pro-

grammed, something that allows them to be more than passive receivers of infor-
mation.  A current realization of digital convergence is associated with 
Òinterac-tive multimediaÓ products; see Box 1.2.
Digital convergence could build on, blend, and redirect the functions, prod-ucts, and cultures of many existing industries.  Although sales figures for existing

industries are neither directly comparable nor additive, they give an indication of
the potential economic impact:  catalogue shopping ($70 billion in current annual

U.S. revenues; WWD, 1994),
1 broadcast advertising (currently $27 billion; Turner,
Box 1.1  Meaning of Convergence
We have been applying the term ÒconvergenceÓ to the major information, elec-tronics, and communications industries with increasing fervor for over three de-cades, going back to the work and ideas coming out of Harvard University, theMassachusetts Institute of Technology, and other places in the 1960s.  It is time to

deal more gingerly with the term.  What do we really mean by convergence?  What
is it shorthand for?  A flurry of mergers and alliances?  The common use of bits?
Or is there something more fundamental to it than that?  Jacob Bronowski warned

of the classical error of regarding a scientific law as only shorthand for its instanc-es.  His caveat may apply here.
In mathematics, convergence is the property or process of approaching a lim-iting value.  That meaning of the term appears the exact opposite of the wildfire ofinnovation expected from the convergence of industries dealt with in this report.In physiology, convergence refers to a coordinated turning of the eyes inwardto focus on an object at close range.  Once again, we are confronted with a mean-
ing that is antithetic to the far-reaching and long-range changes in thinking andbehavior that we all expect.In biology, convergence refers to the adaptive evolution of superficially similarstructures in unrelated species exposed to similar environments.  This meaning
may be closer to what digital convergence may entail.More superficially, convergence may simply mean a meeting ground, or a pro-cess of coming together, for example, a place where two rivers join.SOURCE:  Adapted from Martin Greenberger, University of California at Los An-
geles, personal communication, July 30, 1994.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW3Box 1.2  Defining Interactive Multimedia
ÒMultimediaÓ usually refers to a blend of various forms of media (text, graphics,
sound, video) in a digital format, but the meaning of the term varies.  Multimedia
computing, for example, often combines numerical data, graphics, animation, and
audio, or some subset of these elements.  Multimedia as a term has also been
used to include interactive television and related services, such as video on de-mand, remote learning, home shopping, and teleconferencing.  It may involve gen-

eration of content from existing basic material (as in the generation of video gamesusing movie images and story lines, a movie aftermarket) as well as new content;the emphasis is on the composition of the media and their interaction with the
content.ÒInteractiveÓ products are sometimes treated as a subset of multimedia.  Wheth-
er so categorized or addressed separately, interactivity is regarded by some ana-
lysts as the pivotal feature of the new technologies.Interactive technologies emphasize the active involvement of the user, as op-posed to more passive reception of content, as via conventional broadcast media.
Interactive technologies range from remote control devices (e.g., for televisionoperation) at the low end to, at the high end, virtual reality, which may involvevisual and perhaps tactile and auditory immersion in a three-dimensional comput-
er-generated Òartificial worldÓ permitting multiuser actions and interactions.  Inter-
activity has been gaining attention because of evidence that it can enhance educa-tion and training, on the one hand, and because it is stimulating growth of such
leisure activities as games, on the other.  Thus, the Internet is often offered by
those familiar with it as a model for interactive communication and as a laboratoryfor interactive applications of digital convergence, from ÒnewsgroupsÓ and informa-
tion-access services to multiplayer games.  It is already moving to support two-way
digital services with high-quality sound, animated visuals, and other elements,
themselves the ingredients for products being developed or piloted by cable sys-tem operators, telephone companies, information service providers, hardware andsoftware vendors, and other companies.Robert Stein, a founder of the Voyager Company, said he never uses the ÒMwordÓ because the combination of multiple media per se is already available on
television and in movies.  ÒIÕm much more interested in the interaction, the relation-ship between the reader and the material, and the author and the reader, than I amin just the simple aggregate,Ó Stein said. 
ÒEventually, weÕre going to go past theaggregate.  We
Õre actually going to invent something new, although I think that isstill decades away.Ó1993a), home video (currently $12 billion; Turner, 1993a), information services(currently $9 billion; Turner, 1993a), video games (currently $6.5 billion; Tetzeli,
1993; Pereira, 1994), consumer electronics, including TVs, VCRs, audio equip-
ment, blank tapes, and accessories (currently $40 billion to $55 billion; Sims,
1994), and recorded music (currently $10 billion; Newman, 1994).  Unknown are

the new markets that digital convergence may spawn.  The commercialization of
the Internet and the growth of on-line services illustrate some of the possibilities.
However, near-term markets tend to be overestimated or at least misestimated:Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEestimates of the near-term market for interactive media (e.g., CD-ROM applica-tions) range widely from $4 billion to $14 billion annually by 1995.  Projecting

the fate of new markets is notoriously hard, given their small origins and uncer-
tain prospects.2A key indicator is the experience of on-line services (internal and inter-enterprise) in the business domain: computerized reservation services for air-
lines, legal and financial database services, 800-number help-lines, 900-number
services, and others have become profitable.  These services may use a somewhat

different mix of media (e.g., they place a heavy emphasis on telephones), but they
appear to offer an analogous experience base.  A note of caution comes from the
rocky experience of on-line services aimed at households; despite growth and
new entries, such services have had difficulty arriving at user interfaces, pricing
schemes, and product and service packages that would generate consistent prof-
its.3Computer-based services aimed at the mass market generally may becomemore successful, given astute marketing and management decisions as well as the
expanding base in household equipment:  about 95 percent of U.S. households

have telephones; most households have television sets, and industry analysts
estimate that up to 40 percent of all households will have interactive television in
the next decade (Schwarz, 1993); over 30 million have personal computers today,
and over 10 million of those have CD-ROM drives.4  Anecdotal evidence sug-
gests that the latter part of 1994 saw a surge in computer systems for the home,
attesting both to greater interest in digital convergence products and to an expan-
sion of the customer base from the technically sophisticated to more neophytes
(Markoff, 1995b).  This upgrading of home equipment could constitute a turning

point for educational products, suggested Nancy Stover of YourChoice TV in a
late-1994 interview.  Shortages of capital in schools and homes have constrained

the educational technology market for decades, but now there is a greater pros-
pect of teachers and students having access from their homes to technology and
content.  Cautioned Stephen Case of America Online in another late-1994 inter-

view, ÒDespite all the articles you now read, 5 percent of houses subscribe to anon-line service and 95 percent donÕt.  So there
Õs still a lot of opportunity forgrowth.ÓThe information infrastructure is the broadest concept that builds on theevolving mix of goods and services that embody various aspects of digital con-
vergence.  It has been described as 
Òall of the facilities and instrumentalitiesengaged in delivering and disseminating information throughout the nation,Óincluding facilities under public and private control for the mass media (tradition-
ally broadcasting, cable television, and newspapers); point-to-point communica-
tions (traditionally telephone and telegraph); and associated information appli-
ances.5  In the present report, the term 
ÒinfrastructureÓ is used in this general
sense to include all types of information technologies, with emphasis on deliveryKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW5systems (including set-top and other access-facilitating devices as well as com-munications facilities).Digital convergence is important to industrial competitiveness.  Computing,telecommunications, and entertainment are singular examples of U.S. strength in
export as well as domestic marketsÑentertainment alone generates some $6billion in export revenue, the fourth largest source of exports (behind defense,
aircraft, and agriculture), with Hollywood producing 85 percent of the worldÕsexports of theatrical and television programs (Flaherty, 1994).  They also repre-

sent activities that transcend the specific industries identified by the supply of
associated goods and servicesÑthe economic impacts of computing and commu-nications show up in the performance of those who use these technologies, and
much that falls under more mundane labels, such as news, can be seen asÑand,increasingly, is packaged asÑentertainment.  Entertainment adds emphasis on
creation of content to the more basic themes of productivity and other economic
benefits characteristic of earlier discussions of computing and communications
technologies.To help gain perspective on the impact of digital convergence on U.S. com-petitiveness, the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board of the Na-
tional Research Council sponsored a one-day colloquium in June 1993.  The

colloquium examined how digital convergence was taking shape and what eco-
nomic, social, and legal issues are arising as a result of this set of changes in
technology and associated industries.  Participants included representatives of the

computer, telecommunications, and entertainment industries; diverse government
agencies; the Congress; academia; trade associations; and the mediaÑstakehold-ers and independent analysts participated.6  The steering committee sought to
construct colloquium panels with a more diverse set of perspectives than those
typically aired in todayÕs press or in other venues such as industry conferencesand academic conferences.This report presents the principal insights and perspectives offered bycolloquium participants.  It relates colloquium discussions to events and observa-

tions that developed over the ensuing year and a half.  Supplementary materials

were used to augment or amplify points made by the participants and are refer-
enced.  In addition, selected colloquium participants and other experts were inter-

viewed in mid- to late-1994 to assess whether (and if so, how) views had changed.
The colloquium steering committee, through its deliberations before and after the
event, completed the interpretation of key issues.  Due to the limited time and

space available, this report provides only an introduction to this very complex
topic.  However, the content is selected and organized with the intent of framing

issues relevant to public policy.The remainder of this chapter describes the state of digital convergence,including visions of the future, new private-sector alliances, and the emergence
of public- and private-sector efforts to foster advances in information infrastruc-
ture.  Chapter 2 outlines directions in technology and aspects of the entertainment
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEindustry.  Chapter 3 addresses social issues that shape and derive from digital
convergence.  Chapter 4 outlines policy issues and obstacles related to promoting

competitiveness and the evolution of the information infrastructure.VISIONS AND REALITYThe early forms of interactive multimedia are only the primitive precursorsof diverse technologies that even now are transforming the way many Americans
live and work.  Colloquium participants offered an assortment of visions and

insights into how to realize the potential of such technologies.Richard Notebaert, chairman of Ameritech Corporation, outlined a vision ofbroad-based benefits.  Noting that 40 million personal computers were shipped in

1992, Notebaert said these Òislands of intelligenceÓ need to be interconnected sothat their capabilities can be exploited fully.  The availability of low-cost, high-

quality digital scanners means that information from libraries, shopping malls,
catalogues, and government agencies can be digitized and made available to all,
he said.  ÒWhat we need to do is take the technology that is available and exploitit to be part of the solution side of societal ills in this country.ÓEconomist and author George Gilder predicted that small, portable deviceswith computing and communications capabilities will become indispensable.
ÒThe most common personal computer of the next decade is going to be a digitalcellular phone,Ó he said.  
ÒItÕs going to be as mobile as a watch, as personal as awallet.  It will recognize speech, navigate streets.  It will collect your mail, open

your door, and do a great variety of functions that we canÕt really anticipatetoday.  And there will be a great variety of these PDAs [personal digital assis-

tants].Ó  Ginn, now head of a Pacific Telesis spinoff, AirTouch Communica-
tions,7 showed a Pacific Telesis video depicting life in the year 2005, when the
average citizen may have access to video telephones, PDAs, long-distance medi-
cal care and education, electronic yellow pages, and electronic libraries.Like most colloquium participants, Ginn remarked on the difficulties anduncertainties associated with realizing the various visions of the benefits prom-
ised by digital convergence.  Economist and economic historian Paul David of

Stanford University observed that visions, while constructive, can blind people to
near-term, practical impediments to implementing technological advances:Private investors and public decision makers are correct in thinking that theydisregard at their peril the real hazards of a condition . . . described as techno-logical presbyopia . . . .  It
Õs a form of far-sightedness which, in this case, makesit impossible to focus clearly on the existence of many immediate problems.  It
causes the sufferer to gaze too exclusively on the imagined bounties of a distantfuture.  And to do so risks overlooking how long it will likely take to get from

here to there, especially when the ÒthereÓ is defined in terms of the acceptance
of novel, complex consumer goods by mass markets or the pervasive adoptionKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW7of distributorsÕ systems of production, which require significant investments in
fixed capital assets by many parties.DavidÕs caution reflects the history of technological innovation, described byAnthony Oettinger (1993) as an Òanarchic, apparently tail-chasing, yet evolution-ary processÓ that generates both ecstasies and agonies:
The heroic and dedicated early adopters who dwell at the frontier outposts ofinnovation combine new tools, new information conventions, and new skills tocreate apparent wonders.  The entrepreneurial imaginations fired up by the

wonders of the early adopters promise those wonders to the prosaic, fickle old-time dwellers of the comfortable hinterlands as a wealth of new applicationsthat never could have existed within the old confines.  Hence the ecstasy.  But

some products and services will be ripe, others only hype.  Some products and
services will be ripe but unwanted.  Others will be seen as too complex; still
others as too simple.  And the ones successful at the expense of someone else
Õsmarket often enrage the losers into political action that changes the rules of themarketplace.  Hence the agony.
We are in the midst of a long period of experimentation aimed largely atdetermining what technological possibilities are also economically viable.  The

experimentation evident today continues a long-term process; since the early
1980s there have been many Òwired cityÓ projects in many locations that did not
work as planned yet generated significant incremental accomplishments in terms
of infrastructure development and insight into demand for different kinds of
entertainment (Dutton et al., 1987).Consistent with history and despite considerable and often highly publicizedmarket testing and formation of new ventures, the telephone, cable, and entertain-
ment industries still concentrate their resources on traditional technologies.  Their

caution is due in part to uncertainty over where wealth will be generatedÑuncertainties that themselves reflect economic, legal, and regulatory as well as
technical developments and conditions.  Will there be a central component of the

evolving information infrastructure, and if so, will it be a telephone, computer,
cable, or wireless network, or perhaps some combination?  Will information

services catering to the masses ever be profitable, or will significant public in-
vestment and private contributions be needed to assure both public access and the
flow of public-service information for which markets may never fully develop?The more elusive questions pertain to what people might pay to do withemerging technologiesÑthe word ÒcontentÓ becomes a kind of fetish naming this
empty space without beginning to fill it.  It is impossible to predict, for example,
what new forms of content may emerge; new possibilities for delivering content
provide greater assurance for predicting that some new forms may not be cen-
trally generated and packaged for consumers (as is common today).Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVENEW PRODUCTS AND ALLIANCES:INDUSTRIAL CONVERGENCE?Each of the principal industries associated with digital convergence is char-acterized by different processes of technological and product evolution.  The

computing and communications industries focus on delivery and tend to be tech-
nology-driven, although recent ventures and acquisitions by Microsoft Corpora-
tion, including its acquisition of the rights to display a number of famous artistic
images, illustrate the possibility for new, direct combinations of content, commu-
nications, and computing that are motivated by the computer industry (hardware
and software) culture.8  Meanwhile, the entertainment industry, with more con-
trol over content as well as a growing emphasis on delivery channels, regards
both computing and communications as tools or means to an end.  Whether or

when an audience large enough to be economically viable will emerge to con-
sume the new services and programs is unknown.  As a Viacom executive was

quoted as saying, ÒThe technology is all there.  What
Õs missing is the consumerand exactly what the consumer wants and what theyÕll pay for.Ó9Although a flurry of industry announcements following the colloquium madeit seem as if developments were accelerating through 1993 and early 1994,10subsequent events, including the failures of proposed alliances and delays in
delivery of planned products, illustrated the perhaps obvious point that true,
fundamental change takes time.  Most startling of all was the announcement in

October 1993 that Bell Atlantic Corporation, another regional Bell company,
planned to buy Tele-Communications Inc. (TCI), the largest U.S. cable company,
which would constitute one of the largest corporate mergers ever.  The proposed
merger received considerable fanfare; typical if breathless were remarks from an
article in the New York Times (Fabrikant, 1993):
The merger is of stunning significance because it creates a gargantuan companywith both the financial wherewithal and the management skills to chase the holygrail of home information and entertainment possibilities: a vast panoply of
programming and information offerings that are available at the flick of a wristwhenever a consumer wants to see them.The two companiesÕ plans were not consummated, leading to wholesale reassess-
ment in the media, by investment analysts, and in the business community gener-
ally about the merits of such deals.  The later demise of plans by Southwestern

Bell Corporation and Cox Enterprises Inc. further underscored questions about
cable-telephone company alliances (Ziegler and Robichaux, 1994).Quoting again from GinnÕs remarks at the colloquium,My sense is that as we begin to sort these things out, weÕre going to have aboutfive years of utter confusion.  You
Õre going to see a lot of alliances.  You
Õregoing to see some divorces.  You
Õre going to see the industry sort itself outamong people who provide programming, who provide telecommunications,who provide cable, who provide the underlying technology to offer these ser-vices.  There will be a lot of experimentation.
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW9Steven Wildman, director of the Program in Telecommunications Science atNorthwestern University, suggested in a late-1994 interview that the many ap-
proaches and separations between potential business partners reflect a pattern of
movement that companies hope will leave them in the right place once that
becomes apparent.The shifting industrial landscape reflects several underlying trends.  Most
obviously, given their large size, telephone companies are scrambling for growth
opportunities and diversification.  The traditional telephone business is stagnant

at perhaps a 3 percent growth rate, and these companies face possible loss of
customers and/or profitability as their traditional monopolies vanish and as prob-
lems of excess capacityÑconstraining profitabilityÑpersist or grow.  The tele-
phone network has been relatively low cost in part because of slow depreciation,
which may not be consistent with the rapid depreciation needed to deploy mul-
tiple advances in the information infrastructure, and the relatively high levels of
automation and standardization of installation, maintenance, service order fulfill-
ment, and other operations may be difficult to sustain in an environment with
rapidly changing and more diverse technologies, services, and applications.  Simi-

larly, broadcasters are facing challenges from digital direct broadcast satellite and
soon-to-be-digital cable and fiber television services.11  Meanwhile, the cable
industry is fragmentedÑsome 11,000 systems owned by some 1,700 indepen-dent operators are spread across the country, lacking scale economies for effec-
tive competition against telephone companies in many instances (Samuels,
1994b).  It is hard to predict the result of a situation in which, for example, both

regulated and nonregulated providers of voice and video services seek to use the
same technology and serve the same target markets, despite differences in ap-
proaches to standards, market share, pricing, and so on.Despite the raising of expectations and ambitions in many quarters, the merefact that new business activity or alliances have been launched does not mean that
industries are truly converging; that would require significant shifts in industry
cultures that will take a long time to achieve, as well as changes in fundamental
technologies and in consumer behavior.  Although much of the discussion about

digital convergence seems to focus on the development of a delivery infrastruc-
ture for entertainment and other products, many challenges remain for joining the
diverse cultures of computing, communications, and entertainment to make as
well as deliver globally competitive products.12  As Wildman observed when
interviewed, at the very least evolution and adaption are likely within each seg-
ment in response to new tools, product concepts, and distribution possibilities.How may dissimilar industries, which must cooperate on research and devel-opment and agree on how to implement technical solutions in standards, be
joined?  The computing, communications, and entertainment industries
Ñthem-selves aggregates of rather different component industriesÑshare certain charac-teristics, such as rapid growth in selected areas, but they are quite different in
terms of structure, size, regulatory tradition, corporate culture, and the expertise
they can contribute to digital convergence.  For example, in terms of approach to
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEinformation services, the telephone industry focuses on installing intelligence atthe heart of the network.  By contrast, the computer industry focuses on develop-

ing computer-based devices that can use intelligence at the periphery of net-
worksÑan orientation epitomized in the design and use of the multinationalcomputer network known as the Internet, which is itself an application of the
underlying telephone circuits in its backbone and various access networks.  Nev-

ertheless, like the computer industry, the telecommunications industry and sev-
eral segments of the entertainment industry have for years depended on
computer-based equipment and software for a variety of operations.  This inter-

nalization of common technological elements is fundamental to manifestations of
convergence in product, process, and corporate innovations.To hedge their bets, some companies, such as AT&T, have invested in virtu-ally every emerging information technology, although not all of the investments
or plans have endured.13 (AT&T is even getting back into the local telephone
business, having purchased McCaw Cellular Communications, the largest U.S.
cellular company; see The Economist, 1993a).  However, very few companies
have the resources to hedge so broadly.  Others pursuing a vertical integration

strategy may focus on specific segments.  Sony Corporation, for example, has

emphasized creating software and making machines to bring it into the home, but
not the transmission of the programming (Lubove and Weinberg, 1993). By
contrast, Time Warner and NewsCorp have investments in both programming
and delivery systems.Some of the joint ventures bring together all three industriesÑtelecommuni-cations, computers, and entertainmentÑfor example, the formation of ProdigyServices by IBM and Sears.  Another example is the diverse and international

group of computing and communication companies that invested in General
Magic Inc. to develop software for wireless communicators.14Some alliances demonstrate how technology is lowering the boundaries be-tween industries.  US WEST Inc. put down $2.5 billion for a 25 percent share of
Time Warner Entertainment (a unit of Time Warner), and NYNEX Corporation
invested $1.2 billion in Viacom Inc. (Washington Post, 1993).  Although there
has been conspicuous activity among telephone companies buying into cable
systems outside their service areas, interaction between telephone and cable com-
panies underscores how what is technically possible becomes confounded by
what is legally feasible and economically attractive (Kim and Wloszczyna, 1993).
The Time Warner Full Service Network experiment illustrates the compli-cating factor of evolving technology.  The day before the colloquium, cable

operator and entertainment supplier Time Warner Inc. and high-performance
workstation maker Silicon Graphics Inc. announced a joint field trial to deliver
video-on-demand services in Orlando, FloridaÑa major two-way interactive net-work implementation.  Several months later, however, the partners announced

delays attributed to technological difficulties associated with developing the nec-
essary software and combining computing and cable technologies in an arrange-Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW11ment involving video servers and special set-top boxes (developed by Scientific-Atlanta Inc.; Robichaux and Clark, 1994).  Actual service began in December

1994 (Shapiro, 1994).The electronic game arena may be a bellwether for a variety of corporate andproduct developments.  Electronic games are increasingly available over net-

works, but the principal market has been for access through special platforms
(e.g., Nintendo and Sega systems) and on general-purpose devices, including
personal computers and CD-ROM players, plus various hybrid devices, such as
that offered by 3DO.15  AT&T, Time Warner, and Matsushita Electric Industrial
Company backed the company 3DO, which in early 1993 unveiled its design for
an Òinteractive multiplayer,Ó a CD-based machine that hooks up to a television
set and combines graphics, text, and high-quality sound.  The 3DO venture epito-

mizes the uncertainties characterizing the digital convergence marketplace.  Al-

though over 300 software developers were estimated to have begun developing
programs for the 3DO platform, a new type of game system challenging others
that were already established, were available at a substantially lower initial sys-
tem cost, and offered yet more software was risky.  In late 1994, 3DO scaled back

significantly.16Some observers have questioned the wisdom of huge investments in a multi-media future that has yet to prove its market value.  This caution surfaced in

corporate finance circles early in 1994 in the wake of the termination of the Bell
Atlantic/TCI merger plans (Ziegler, 1994c).  The telephone industry in particular,

having built its reputation on conservative reliability, is seen by some to be
abandoning its core business and character, assuming the style of Hollywood
movie studios in gambling on huge payoffs in unknown territory.17  Observed
Robert Lucky of Bell Communications Research in a late-1994 interview,In the past 3 years the telco role has gone from doing nothing to doing every-thing, to something in the middle right now. . . .  So far, the telcos have not been
terribly successful or aggressive, IÕd say, in cutting deals with the content pro-viders, so that their role has been more that of providing a delivery vehicle.  But
whatÕs changed in these last 3 years is the reality of telcos being in the videodelivery business. . . .  If you went back 10 years to the breakup of AT&T,

nobody saw entertainment as the big plum where the big bucks were.  But it
Õsonly in the last 3 to 5 years that suddenly that has become the place where thenew opportunities are.Currently, ventures appear to be small relative to the telephone companiesÕ size,
and not especially integrated into core operations or operating styles; similarly,
cable company-based ventures appear to extend more traditional business pat-
terns for the most part (Markoff, 1993).An added complication is the difficulty in assessing what the real investmentrequirements may be.  The discussion of the anticipated improvements in net-

work (facilities) aspects alone, which imply huge investments in physical plant
(cable and switching), marks a contrast with the investment associated with dis-Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEtributing information in print forms, commented John Blair of the RaytheonCorporation at the colloquium.  High initial fixed costs, noted Paul David, are

characteristic of the economics of network industries.  On the other hand, as

noted by Lucky, industry estimates for the cost of installing fiber have fallen over
timeÑapparently due to the combined effects of competition and political jock-eying.CONCLUSIONNumerous obstacles must be surmounted in developing and assuring accessto new information technologies, as well as in promoting positive consequences
of their use over negative ones.  Some of the problems are technical:  for ex-

ample, high-bandwidth, two-way communications systems are neither cheap nor
widely available; there is a multiplicity of standards for representing raw infor-
mation, while lack of consensus exists on standards for integrating services across
different systems, a problem that threatens to grow as new interfaces proliferate.
New technical bottlenecks are appearing, since video- and image-rich interactive
communications require new systems, communications, and storage architec-
tures.On the other hand, technologists and industry analysts agree that the mostcritical problems are nontechnological, and also more diffuse.  Digital conver-

gence is generating a host of economic, regulatory, legal, cultural, and social
issues.  The atmosphere in which these issues must be resolved is chaotic and

volatile; the rise of expectations for and the ultimate failure of proposed telecom-
munications reform legislation during the 103d Congress is but one illustration of
the uncertain policy environmentÑitself affected by disagreements between com-panies, industry groups, and various other interests.This report puts the technological and business trends associated with digitalconvergence into a larger framework.  It seeks to advance what must be a long-

term process of relating commoditization and convergence of digital electronics,
communications, and entertainment products to changes in the nature of the
economy and the social fabric.  The intention is to provide a sense of the scope

and the pace of changes transforming a set of important industries, identify some
of the potential short- and long-term social and economic impacts, and frame the
policy issues and dilemmas that are going to have to be resolved for all of us,
whether directly or indirectly involved.NOTES1.According to one estimate, home shopping via television, which has $3 billion
in annual sales (after some 10 years), could reach $25 billion per year by the end of thedecade if the shift to sales of up-scale products succeeds.  This is still only a fraction of
the $245 billion in apparel and jewelry sales realized in 1993 but will likely be retailÕsKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW13fastest-growing sector.  Obstacles include high return rates from dissatisfied customers
and the possibility that only commodity items will sell over TV, not higher-quality items(McMurray, 1994).The medium is still dominated by down-scale products such as off-brand jewelryand clothing.  A first hurdle for new networks is obtaining channel space on cable systems
(Reilly, 1994).2.A Dataquest survey found that 45 percent of 200 firms had annual revenues
under $100,000; 90 percent had fewer than 50 employees (Kruger, 1994).3.See Weber (1994).  News articles differ considerably in how on-line service
subscribership is reportedÑProdigy Services, for example, is reported as having between1 million and 2 million customersÑbut they do point consistently to negligible profitsamong the larger firms, including Prodigy, CompuServe, GEnie, and America Online
(Lewis, 1994a,b; Ziegler, 1994b; Samuels, 1994c; Washington Post, 1995).  On the other
hand, smaller, niche-oriented on-line services, such as the Well, are reportedly profitable.4.By the end of 1993, the installed base of CD-ROM drives in U.S. homes was 7
million and was projected to reach 16 million by the end of 1994 (Samuels, 1994a).5.Egan and Wildman (1992) citing NTIA (1991).
6.Due to a scheduling conflict with a major industry conference, no representa-
tives of the cable television industry were able to attend the colloquium; their perspec-tives on key issues were solicited in the months following the meeting.7.The spinoff was approved by California regulators in November 1993 (Sims,
1993).8.See Hudson (1995).  See also Zachary (1994):  Microsoft announced plans to
buy Softimage (Montreal), a leading supplier of movie special-effects tools, for $130
million in stock.  ÒIn a recent interview, Microsoft Chairman William Gates said that thecompany was vigorously pursuing growth opportunities in the so-called multimedia field,where sound, images, and moving pictures are meshed together with the help of comput-ers and software.Ó9.ÒThe hard part is figuring out just which of these and a plethora of other ser-vices people wantÑand how to design them so they are as easy to use as television andyet bring improvements that are tangible enough so that people will pay for themÓ(Andrews, 1993).10.The trade newsletter 
Digital Media identified 348 alliances in multimedia ser-vices (Laderman et al., 1993).11.In Flaherty (1994) the senior vice president for technology at CBS described
progress toward HDTV.  CBS is also reported to be the first network to begin conversion
to digital broadcasting.  CBS plans to use Hewlett Packard video broadcast servers, in-

cluding software that controls scheduling commercials and programming (McCoy, 1994).12.Executives from at least two entertainment conglomerates (Walt Disney Co.
and MCA) have expressed disdain for interactive media, and even among the players
committed to some level of development there is a persistent assumption that the newtechnology will displace traditional forms of entertainment.  Executives made the same
assumption 20 years ago, when they took manufacturers of video cassette recorders to the
U.S. Supreme Court with the argument that the traditional movie business would end ifcustomers could view movies at home.  That construct requires a belief that consumers
are trapped in a compartmentalized universe where it is inconceivable to go to a movie
theater and rent a video, play a video game 
and read a novel.  Meanwhile, regional
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVErivalries have emerged among multimedia communities:  Los Angeles argues pop cultureis key, New York sees publishing and information as models, San Francisco is technicallyoriented, and Seattle follows MicrosoftÕs lead (Shrage, 1994).13.AT&T
Õs Consumer Products Group dropped plans to market a modem (calledÒThe EdgeÓ) designed to connect Sega game playersÕ equipment via phone.  Earlier,
AT&T had dropped plans for 3DO-compatible gear.  ÒAT&T executives said ConsumerProducts will aim its investments instead at 3 product areas:  digital wireless phones,
where it has been deficient against mounting competition; phones for foreign markets;and intelligent phones for the home that the company plans to begin marketing next yearÓ(Keller, 1994).14.Investors include Apple Computer, Motorola Inc., Sony Corp., AT&T,
Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. (owner of MCA Inc. and its Universal Studios), and
Philips Electronics NV.  See Hill and Yamada (1993).
15.Video games are now about a $6.5 billion business.  Lee Isgur, of a San Fran-
cisco investment bank:  ÒYou can talk all you want about the electronic highway andvideo on demand, but the only place anyone has ever sold anything interactive is ingames.Ó  Over the past seven years, Nintendo and Sega have sold [over] 64 million
machines in the United States.  Their tack is to sell hardware cheap and license the

software (classic bundling).  See Tetzeli (1993).
16.The saga of 3DO is chronicled in 
The Economist (1993b) and in Turner (1993b).
See also Pitta (1993), Carlton (1994d), King (1994), and Markoff (1994).17.The enormous risk of venturing into this unknown territory, particularly in col-
laboration with Hollywood executives, can be illustrated by a review of foreseeablechanges in the entertainment business. Established entertainment centers (i.e., Los Angeles, New York) are no longer se-
cure in their hegemony.  In the next few decades, they will find that the dominance
associated with physical concentrations of specialists, facilities, and mystique will besubject to profound change in the developing digital convergence matrix.  Location-

independent communities, improving microprocessor-based production tools and meth-ods, and the rapid dissemination of many skills in expanding world markets, all under-mine centrality.  Just as 
ÒDetroitÓ is a metaphor, so it will be with 
ÒHollywoodÓ also.
As fresh waves of creative people struggle for access to the ballooning field, theywill be far less bound to past organizational structures and practices (e.g., major studios,unions, traditional communities of the like-minded).  Although this industry has a

centuryÕs experience with change and readjustment, digital convergence exacerbates theprocess by another order of magnitude.  The increasing pressure of new recruits and the
human resources conflicts they engender will increase the level of disorder just enough to
suggest a new chapter on chaos theory.Meanwhile, it is clear that the corporate culture interface has been a low-prioritytopic in planning for digital convergence.  Sooner or later, computer and telephone com-

panies will have to confront the implications of collaborating with entertainment mogulswhose market studies have all the reliability of the average shamanÕs chicken bone read-ings, in spite of the Armani suits.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152Trends and Directions
Although it is premature to predict which technologies and applications willsucceed, general directions in underlying technologies can be discerned.  This

chapter outlines prospects in multimedia and interactive technologies and ex-
plores applications, particularly in entertainment and education.  Not intended to
be comprehensive, this chapter aims to depict the fluidity of the technologies and
the uncertainty of the trends they are motivating.THE OUTLOOK FOR MULTIMEDIAGOODS AND SERVICESEnabling interactive multimedia to flourish are rapid advances in computerhardware, driving changes in telecommunications and other industries.  Relevant

hardware includes basic devices (e.g., microprocessors, memory chips and other
storage devices, drives, access devices), larger computer systems that use those
devices (e.g., personal computers, telecommunications switches), and other in-
formation appliances (e.g., television systems, set-top boxes).Advances in hardware performance (and consequent reductions in the costrequired to achieved any given level of performance) as measured in quantitative
terms will continue to be made at very rapid rates.  In the past 30 years, for

example, the density of integrated circuits has improved by a factor of 10 mil-
lionÑseven orders of magnitude!1  Such incredible progress in such a short
period of time has led to significant changes in the kinds of products that can be
built from such powerful components.  This rate of improvement is expected to

continue at least until the turn of the century, when complex microcircuits mayKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEcontain hundreds of millions of transistors, David Nagel, senior vice presidentand general manager of AppleSoft, said.In a very real sense, convergence has been enabled by advances in digitalhardware technology, which have in turn been driven by development of engi-
neering processes that result in the ability to etch more and finer lines on crystals
of silicon.  Better lithography and more lines per millimeter enable the creation of

greater and greater numbers of the active elements of digital signal processingÑtransistorsÑon any given area of silicon.  One of the early pioneers of the inte-
grated circuit, Gordon Moore (now chairman of Intel Corporation), coined a
heuristic that describes the doubling in this ratio that has occurred almost like
clockwork for the past 25 years, a heuristic now known as MooreÕs Law(Karlgaard, 1994).  Having more and smaller transistors on a single chip of

silicon allows those transistors to be operated at lower voltages and with lower
switching currents.  This in turn allows the transistors to be operated faster and at

lower electrical power levels, with the net result that the microprocessors that
have evolved from the earliest 10-transistor integrated circuits now have comput-
ing speeds measured in hundreds of millions of instructions per second.  At these

speeds, real-time multimedia computing becomes possible; advanced compres-
sion algorithms that can reduce the required bandwidth of communication sys-
tems can be implemented with circuits at price points compatible with mass
markets.Although physical laws limit how small lines can be made using the currentoptical lithographic technologies (a limit that would be reached shortly after the
end of this century), new technologies using shorter-wavelength etching beams
(e.g., x-ray, plasma) that allow significant progress below the limits imposed by
visible-light lithography are now in early prototyping stages.  However, new

tools of all sorts are also needed to manage the incredible complexity of circuits
that contain tens or hundreds of millions of switch elements.  While design tools
are being developed that can automate much of the design, a new problem has
arisen for which no immediate solution is apparent:  How does one adequately

test these circuits?  But while the problems of designing and testing of massively

complex chips representing the very fastest hardware systems may begin to slow
progress by the end of the decade, it certainly will be possible to create systems
with the computing performance of todayÕs fastest chips and all that is needed toput a complete computer on a single chip by the end of this decade.  These

general-purpose computing systemsÑcomplemented by more limited purposelogic for performing tasks such as high-speed compression, decompression, and
even recognition of audio signalsÑwill enable engineers to build digital systemswith the overall computing power of todayÕs supercomputers in products pricedlike commodity consumer electronics.  In fact, the term 
Òcomputing,Ó which
implies numerical computationÑarithmeticÑno longer adequately describesproducts currently being designed and sold based on high-performance digital
technology.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS17Thus, quantitative improvements in process and component technologieshave led to qualitative differences in the products built from them.  One signifi-

cant change has been the creation of products described as multimedia personal
computers (PCs)ÑÒmultimediaÓ in this context emphasizing the real-time cre-
ation, processing, and presentation of sound and still and moving images or
video.  As discussed in Chapter 1, multimedia computing has enjoyed a rapid

ascendancy in the marketplace, since images and sounds can in many situations
be more efficient than text for transmitting information to humans.  Today, mul-

timedia PCs outsell by a wide and growing margin personal computers without
the ability to manipulate sound and video.For multimedia computing to be practical for products associated with massmarkets, microprocessors have had to evolve to the point that they are capable of
executing millions of instructions per second.  Equivalent advances in memory

and mass storage have also been key, because information in the form of high-
resolution images may contain tens or even hundreds of megabytes of informa-
tion in typical electronic publishing scenarios.Illustrating the impact of advances in hardware is the digitization of videogeneration and delivery, accelerating and enhancing the coding and decoding of
video signals, including associated compression of video signals (necessary for
all digital delivery formats, including cable, wireless, or packaged media).  Com-

pression is important for expanding the capacity to deliver a variety of telecom-
munications services over a given infrastructure (e.g., a network provided by a
telephone company or cable systems operator) and to increase the flexibility for a
company to offer different packages of services (possibly obtained from different
vendors) to different target audiences (Hodge, 1995).  Costs, quality, and trade-

offs between the two are changing with advances in the fundamental technology.
For example, signal processing on a microprocessor chip may obviate the need
for larger amounts of special-purpose hardware supporting multimedia applica-
tions; at least one such product has been announced.2  Major computer systems
and workstation manufacturers have meanwhile been developing and targeting
higher-end systems as engines for video-on-demand services and associated mar-
ket tests by cable and telephone companies.Experience with CD-ROM technology, popular for storage and retrieval ofmultimedia products, provides some insight into the current market.  CD-ROM

refers to a high-capacity compact disk that can store text and video as well as
sound.  The number of interactive CD players in U.S. homes has been growing

dramatically as a result of declining cost and proliferating software.  Estimates of

hardware sales and the installed base vary, but overall (homes and businesses),
some 4 million CD-ROM players were sold in the United States in 1993, and the
installed base in 1994 was expected to grow to 10 million to 16 million (Landis,
1993; Johnson, 1993; Flynn, 1994; Samuels, 1994a).Despite this growth and apparent potential, consumers have voiced dissatis-faction with the problems of configuring or affording PC technology to use CD-Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEROMs satisfactorily, and also with the quality of the CD-ROM software avail-able (Carlton, 1994b).  These problems, while possibly temporary and typical of

relatively new technology (and expansion into a relatively unsophisticated con-
sumer market), raise questions about consumer acceptance and about the durabil-
ity of the format over time unless early problems are solved quickly and
affordably.  At a minimum, there is a need to improve data rates
Ñwhich affectthe quality of the video image that can be accessed, storage capacity, digital data
reading technologies (e.g., through new laser techniques; Rosen, 1993), and re-
sponse time for interactive uses (Carlton, 1994c).  As Esther Dyson of EDventure

Holdings Inc. observed in a late-1994 interview, enhanced speed will be an
important factor in gaining broader applicability and consumer acceptance.In the next several years, even greater performance and higher levels ofcircuit integation will enable the development of products that have all of the
capabilities associated with multimedia personal desktop computers today but
that are much different in design and function from the PCs typically found in
homes, schools, and offices.  Based on established trends, we can expect several

lines of development.In one, characterizable by miniaturization and mobility, we will see thefunctions of desktop systems available in devices the size and weight of todayÕselectronic calculators.  Products of this sort
3 will be made possible because (as
noted above) as circuits of a given level of performance can be made smaller and
smaller they can be made to consume less and less electrical powerÑand thus canbe made battery powered and portable.  High-performance wireless digital com-

munication systemsÑpacket radio, infrared, digital cellular, and so forthÑhavealso been enabled by the general evolution in hardware technology.In a second line of development, the object is not so much to reduce the sizeand increase the portability of devices as to reduce the cost.  In this category will

be found digital television and other products that have been described as digital
information appliances.  Key to the commercial success of such products is the

achievement of manufacturing costs in the range of those for other kinds of
appliancesÑroughly a factor of 10 less than the costs associated with todayÕspersonal computer products.  Such improvements are achievable well before the

end of the decade because it will be possible to shrink the entire circuitry associ-
ated with high-performance multimedia PCs today to a single integrated circuit.
One indicator of this progress is the introduction of PC-based devices including
functions historically found in radios, televisions, telephones, answering ma-
chines, and fax machines (Associated Press, 1994).The addition of a central processing unitÑa computerÑcould enable televi-sions to select a personalized viewing schedule, automatically record material,
and provide memory in a hard disk, random access memory, or other solid-state
device (Rosen, 1993).  Development of such technologies is under way.
4  These
innovations not only store programming but also meet an important emerging
need, offering consumers assistance (often referred to as ÒnavigationÓ) in sortingKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS19through the expanding range of choices.  This type of information processing/
systems integration service illustrates the contention for consumers that is emerg-
ing between televisions and more general-purpose appliances, specifically PCs.
While PCs may come to play a greater role within the household, computers may
proliferate within the household without looking like computersÑthey may beincreasingly embedded into consumer electronics.5  What may continue to differ-
entiate appliances called computers is their general-purpose nature, including
their expected use with a wide range of software, while more specialized appli-
ances may run more specialized software.One product that has been widely discussed is the consumer product associ-ated with interactive television systems, a digital version of the so-called set-top
box (STB).  The first product that could be legitimately termed a digital STB has

already appeared in the consumer market in the form of a decoder for digital
satellite television broadcasts.  While only weakly interactive, since digital satel-

lite today supports high bandwidth only in the outbound direction (the current
systems allow ÒinboundÓ or customer response by virtue of an analog phone
connection in the back of the product), these products clearly point the way to the
future.6The communications companies and the entertainment industry have all be-come actively interested and involved in the development of both the infrastruc-
ture (see ÒNetworksÓ section below) and the products necessary to enable cre-
ation of interactive television.  But the key to commercial success for interactive
television depends on the ability to design and manufacture inexpensive STBs (or
comparable television set components).  Based on historical rates of improve-

ment, we can anticipate that the necessary technology base to support products
with the performance of todayÕs multimedia PCs and high-performance graphicsworkstations but with the price points of consumer electronics systems will be
achievable within the next two to three years.  Since interactivity will allow the

creation of entertainment, communication, and other products unlike anything in
the market today, these new capabilities could significantly alter the economics
of all three industries:  computing, communications, and entertainment.
SoftwareA major obstacle facing multimedia developers is the scarcity of appropri-ateÑcompatible and consumer-desirableÑsoftware.  Software products are pro-
liferating, ranging from crude translations from a traditional medium (e.g., print)
to more innovative (if experimental) designs that challenge or provide a sense of
control to the user (such as the computer game ÒMystÓ; see Rothstein, 1994).Also lagging are software design and computer programming capabilitiesÑre-flecting shortcomings in design and method as well as engineering effortÑwiththe result that new devices cannot be exploited fully.  Software will be the key

growth area in the years to come, according to Nagel, but it progresses on aKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEslower time scale than does hardware.  Explaining the centrality of software
during a late-1994 interview, Richard Notebaert of Ameritech remarked, ÒThereal question that we are faced with is not the technology.  It
Õs how we interactwith the technology.  How do we use point and click?  How do we get voice-

activated computers?  The real question is in the world of software
Ñthe abilityfor humans to be able to use the software in a way thatÕs as simple as dialing thetelephone.ÓNagel contended that two trends could bring about significant progress.  The
first trend is the development of object-oriented programming and component
software.  Today, software is monolithic.  To make software distinctive, develop-

ers add new features to existing applications, creating ÒbloatwareÓ that has mar-
ginal value, Nagel said.  But eventually software may be sold in pieces, and users

could assemble their own applications by selecting a framework and a set of
componentsÑincluding images, sounds, and text.  This practice could invite a
dramatic expansion of the software industry, allowing for more innovative appli-
cations, he said.A second emerging trend is platform-independent software, such as, forexample, software that can run on both PCs and Macintosh platforms.  Develop-
ers currently write software to conform to applications programming interfaces,
which are unique to each platform.  The platform-independent principle should

be incorporated into the national information infrastructure, Nagel said, because
it would invite broad participation and innovation, which would hasten the evolu-
tion of the system.  Software development tools for cross-platform systems are

immature (Millison and LaGrow, 1993).Generation of multimedia content implies a need for creativity as well astools and technology.  As with theatrical motion pictures and television program-

ming, experimentationÑwhich requires time and some freedomÑshould be ex-pected.  For example, the early motion pictures were essentially stage plays that

were filmed, using stage makeup and stage acting techniques.  As the producers

became more familiar with the medium of film they developed new techniques
that were specific to motion pictures.  On the other hand, digitization in the music

industry has until recently (Bermant, 1994) proceeded largely independently of
creative authorship (except, perhaps, for sampling).  Thus, while creative author-

ship, per se, may not drive technology change, it will respond to opportunities
presesented by new technologies and, over time, may generate new requirements.
In general, explained Steven Wildman in a late-1994 interview, the nature and
mix of creative talents that provide comparative advantage to individuals and
organizations will change.7SkillsÑincluding those of graphic designers, film and video producers,scriptwriters, and teachersÑwill be needed in how to communicate in new mediausing digital tools.  In a follow-up interview, Robert Stein commented on how

evolving multimedia products call for new approaches to narrative and story-
telling, approaches that will account for and anticipate the growing ability of theKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS21user or audience to control the pacing and sequencing of story elements.  Simi-
larly, in producing music products, Òover the next couple of decades musicianswill come to the fore with a broad set of skills.  They won
Õt just be able to singand play the guitar; theyÕll be able to do that in both a visual sense like with musicvideos, and then also in an interactive sense.  You
Õre going to see musical presen-tations that are almost like mini-operas, where a CD isnÕt just for sound, itÕs alsopictures and motion pictures, etc., and all under the control of the listener.Ó  At
present, the nascent market means that job opportunities are small in number.8But colloquium participants emphasized the need for skills and insight, particu-
larly the need for prospective authors who are bright, curious, and motivated.Alexander Singer, a film director, said the requisite mechanical skills can betaught and learned; what is more important is innate desire:I have taught this stuff and itÕs learnable . . . .  I taught film production tech-
niques to a group of disadvantaged minority youth 25 years ago, and I was
successful.  Some were barely literate; a number had police records . . . .  What
I found is, they were hungry to have a voice, and the hunger was three-quartersof the game.  Several of them found their way into the entertainment industry,

got paying jobs, and do good work.  The methods [for teaching] will be found.
I think in terms of backgrounds, I would infinitely prefer somebody who was athinking person and who had a background in the humanities, but who also had
the capacity to be wide ranging, to anybody who had a specific skill, all ofwhich I think is learnable.Stein agreed, adding that such ideal students are difficult to find.  ÒWeÕremissing young people who have minds that are working, that have the ability to
take complex subject matter and go out and wrestle it to the ground in a way that
is satisfactory, and to bring it back to a broad audience in a way that makes any
sense.  ÒThe schools are producing all kinds of kids with computer skills andgraphic skills, et cetera.  It
Õs one in a million that seems to be able to understandwhat to do with those skills . . . . ÓOn a more practical note, Sherry Turkle, a professor of the sociology ofscience at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), said cross-sector part-
nerships are needed to provide training in software-writing skills.  She offered as

evidence MITÕs $70 million ATHENA experiment with computers in education.The MIT faculty was to write the software in this project, on the theory that their
innate intelligence and professional expertise would be equal to the task.  How-

ever, the experiment demonstrated that writing appropriate software requires
specialized cognitive skills and an artistic as well as a scientific approach; new
skills or high-quality teamwork are required, Turkle has said.9ÒI think you really do need partnerships [involving] people who are in theentertainment business, who are in the computer business, [where] the technolo-
gists are learning the anthropology, the cognitive science, the psychology, the
sociology, or [they] are learning how to do studies of societal impact, of personal
impact, of how people think about thinking, of how people use software, howKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEpeople learn . . . .Ó  Whereas special talent and training may be needed to generate
commercial products, however, the Internet phenomenon also points to an alter-
native path:  that of enhancing the infrastructure to the point that individual users

and even commercial authors can develop content products without having to
ÒprogramÓ as we now understand that art.
NetworksBuilding on but also paralleling advances in hardware is progress in net-working.  The full exploitation of advanced information technologies depends on

networks that provide connectivity among input, display, processing, and storage
systems dispersed within offices, buildings, campuses, cities, and beyond.  From
the userÕs perspective, networks can facilitate instant access to resources andintegrated tools for collaboration, as well as more options for undertaking differ-
ent kinds of activity from the home.  George Gilder, for example, noted that more

and more PCs are being connected to networks:  the percentage of PCs that are

interlinked grew from only 7 percent in 1989 to 60 percent in 1992.  (Nagel

suggested that this number will approach 100 percent by the end of the decade.)
Improving upon and integrating various networks, advanced information infra-
structure can provide a delivery vehicle, user interfaces, and interfaces among the
components that make up interactive multimedia systems.Nagel put current trends in computer technology into a larger historicalcontext:Despite its young age, the computer has already gone through several wrench-ing and displacing changes.  In the 1950s and 1960s, the mainframe computer
was really the dominant paradigm or the dominant mode of interaction for
computing and calculation.  The mainframe was supplanted as the sort of center
of gravity in the industry, both economically and intellectually, shifted to theminicomputer in the 1970s.  In the 1980s, a third shift took place from the

minicomputer to the microcomputer, again driven in large measure by processimprovements and integrated circuit technology.  Today, we appear to be poised
for yet another major shift from microcomputing to perhaps intimate computing
and also, to an era of ubiquitous networking or universal networking.NagelÕs emphasis on connectivity of computer-based devices and uses of net-working contrasts with the current multimedia product emphasis on platforms
that may be used apart from networks, notably CD-ROM players and game
systems, although even these devices are being integrated into or substituted for
by network-based applications.Network-based applications facilitate interaction among people, whereasstand-alone applications emphasize interaction between people and computers.
As Dyson observed, ÒinteractiveÓ can cover both concepts, but the distinction
may be relevant to both the technology chosen and the impacts on the users.
Thus, although questions have been raised about the prospects for CD-ROMKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS23applications to devolve to on-line information services, observers differ as towhether the market will shift largely to one format or the other or whether it will
evolve in two tracks.An assortment of transmission networks is now operating or under develop-ment in the United States.  Each network has its strengths and weaknesses; to

date, none constitutes a complete national information infrastructure, but collec-
tively they are fragments of the foundation.  Telephone companies, limited today

by the existence of vast networks of twisted copper pair wiring in the local
subscriber loops, are seeking ways of upgrading these low-bandwidth analog
delivery systems to support digital transmission of information at rates required
for display and transmission of high-resolution imagery and sound toÑandfromÑdigital STBs.  Cable TV companies (multiple system operators) already
possess a high-bandwidth distribution system (coaxial cable can support trans-
mission of digital information in the range of hundreds of millions of bits per
second).  These systems, too, require significant upgrading if they are to support

interactive television services since they were designed for transmission of ana-
log television signals in one direction (outbound) only and lack both the neces-
sary topology and switching or routing capabilities for two-way transmission of
digital information.  Both the plant and potential mix of services are changing to
facilitate delivering the much-touted 500 video channels to the home that some
system operators may offer, and digital servers and other digital facilities for
delivery of movies on demand, interactive games, home shopping, and even
telephone services.  In particular, cable distribution is evolving to a combination

of fiber and (for short residential links) coaxial cable, a hybrid approach also
being adopted in many quarters of the telephone industry.10  Indeed the cable
industry is beginning to examine providing basic telephony services using some
small fraction of the great bandwidth provided by their distribution systems.The rapid advance of wireless technologies holds the promise that personaldigital assistants and other forms of wireless communications eventually will be
competitive with wired communications for a growing variety of applications.11,12Wireless technology is not new; television already is delivered by radio signals
broadcast over the air, wireless cable (microwave radio frequencies used to de-
liver signals to rooftop antennas), and satellites; satellites have fostered the devel-
opment of cable television, providing cable networks with an affordable method
of linking thousands of cable systems.  (Satellite broadcast services are growing

rapidly in Europe, and U.S. satellite capacity continues to expand; NTIA, 1993.)
The cellular telephone business, launched in 1984, has grown into a more than
$10 billion per year business with well over 15 million customers, with continued
growth expected.  Growing competition, miniaturization of computer power, the

imminent digitization of cellular phones (which will use the radio spectrum more
efficiently than do their analog counterparts), and the low cost of establishing
links to homes in comparison to fiber networks are among the factors behind this
trend.  The federal auctioning of licenses for personal communications systems
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEnetworks should provide a further stimulus to wireless technology, application,and market development.Expanding Bandwidth:  Is There Enough?
A fundamental issue in digital convergence is how to assure sufficient band-width to transmit huge volumes of digital bits very rapidly, over a wide area.
Video packaging and delivery require a substantial amount of storage and trans-
mission bandwidth in comparison to simple numbers, text, or even still images.
Video raises additional technical concerns related to multicast communication,
quality of service, protocol support with the increasing deployment of asynchro-
nous transfer mode (ATM), and so on.Gilder was extremely optimistic about the technological prospects, claimingthat the transmission speed of fiber-optic technology will multiply to the point
that bandwidth will cost virtually nothing.13  ÒThat changes fiber from a replace-ment for copper to a replacement for air,Ó Gilder said.  
ÒIt makes possible a hugeexpanse of bandwidth.  It means that all the various technologies that have been

based on the assumptions of scarce bandwidth are deeply problematical in this
next era.  I think a major driving force of the world economy over the next 20

years is going to be the plummeting cost of bandwidth, of communications power.
. . .Ó  Although optimistic, Gilder did not address timing or what it takes to
achieve a truly national capability in a timely mannerÑthe kinds of issues beingaddressed in the context of telecommunication and information infrastructure
policy debates.The meaning of available bandwidth is not always clear.  For example, the
fact that a given network may carry aggregated traffic at 2.5 Gbps on its Òback-boneÓ links does not mean it will be able to transmit large numbers of simulta-
neous multimedia sessions that include video (or that any individual user will
experience a 2.5-Gbps rate).  Although some commercial networks already oper-

ate at 155 Mbps, a very high speed that remains difficult to exploit, even 10 Mbps
or less to an individual user can support some very sophisticated interactive
multimedia applications.  But key technology goes beyond simple capacity to

include the ability to reserve adequate bandwidth for a given period and use, the
ability to use certain kinds of signaling in unswitched versus switched environ-
ments, and so on.Interconnection and InteroperabilityThe number and variety of networks give rise to concerns about means ofinterconnection and functional exchange of information or interoperability.  Eli

Noam, professor of finance and economics at the Columbia Graduate School of
Business, foresees a future Òsystem of systemsÓ managed by both traditional
carriers and the systems integration industry, which would buy transmissionKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS25capabilities and offer packages of services to consumers.  This scenario would
have the effect of Òtransforming the entire medium of communications into asystem of systems in a software sense, superimposed on a physical structure of a
network of networks,Ó  Noam said.
The complex of technologies, services, and systems integration activitiesanticipated by Noam is already in evidence in the Internet, where service devel-
opment has been initiated by individuals and research teams but subsequently
accelerated and diversified by commercial ventures (CSTB, 1994b).  Indeed, the
variety of services, service providers, and even customers is richer and the fit
between supply and demand greater in the Internet than appears evident in the
various interactive and other advanced television trials to date.  One reason for

that variety is the InternetÕs support for symmetrical (two-way) communications,with which individuals can supply as well as receive information or content
generally and services.  Whether the Internet leads or becomes subsumed in the

development of a yet larger and more complex information infrastructure, the
commercialization of the Internet provides a laboratory for observing the inter-
play of technology, business development, and ancillary policy considerations.14Michael Borrus, co-director of the Berkeley Roundtable on the InternationalEconomy, offered a somewhat different prospect.  He perceives a 
ÒportfolioÓ of
networks emerging at different rates, managed separately and for different pur-
poses.  He contends that there is no ideal configuration and that flexible design

permits specialized networks to meet the needs of particular user groups.  All

networks are evolving toward expanded bandwidth and increased intelligence,
Borrus said, but each is driven by different market and policy dynamics and is
evolving different applications.  ÒEach of these . . . networks, in very differentways, requires very different degrees of privacy, of liability and the like,Ó Borrus
observed.  ÒIt isnÕt at all clear to me that one all-singing, all-dancing infrastruc-ture can provide that diversity at the moment, or whether it should provide that
diversity.ÓBorrusÕ reservations foreshadowed the debates that have emerged subse-
quently over the federal initiative to advance the nationÕs information infrastruc-ture.  Those debates revolve around the issue of what it means to have 
ÒaÓnational information infrastructure, especially if such an entity is not monolithic
or homogeneous and is not financed or controlled by a single entity.  Borrus
Õargument suggests a greater polarity of alternatives than may be feasible, espe-
cially from the perspective that the information infrastructure will grow from
existing roots.  CSTB has explored these issues in its 1994 report 
Realizing theInformation Future, which argued the need for an overarching framework orarchitecture that could tolerate and accommodate multiple and competing tech-
nologies, facilities, services, and businesses as well as evolution in these ele-
ments.  Multiple networks are likely to persist, given the heterogeneity of con-

sumers and differentiation of offerings from different network providers.  This

multiplicity will give rise to both translation approaches (e.g., via STBs) andKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEmore direct integration of services.15  Given the reality of diversity, a key issue
for both information infrastructure and the broader phenomenon of digital con-
vergence will be standards.StandardsA standard is a set of technical specifications followed by manufacturers orservice providers, either tacitly or as a result of a formal agreement.  Standards

have emerged as a theme in CSTBÕs series of competitiveness colloquia, butdigital convergence magnifies the challenge as well as the opportunity associated
with standards setting in individual technology areas or industries.  A standard for

a mass media product can enhance both consumer and producer welfare.  The

success of the Internet, for example, is attributed in part to the standards that
permit the various member networks to link together.  Indeed, the Internet is

effectively defined by a set of standards that outline the minimum requirements
for connectivity and access to associated services, the essence of interoperability.Economic historian Paul David of Stanford University eloquently framed theimportance of standards, an otherwise prosaic topic that lies at the heart of achiev-

ing convergence across both technologies and industries:A fully articulated vision of the future and the future shape of any complextechnological system serves a crucial role in coordinating and stimulating the
diverse, decentralized undertakings on the part of many actors that the success-
ful, practical development of such systems typically requires in the context ofevery capitalist market economy.  Standards . . . are part of the set of coordina-
tion devices which are needed to engage the activities of the suppliers of many
components in developing the kinds of systems that are being discussed.  But,
there is also the conceptual standard, the vision, a coordinating vision whichplays an important role.  In the context of the evolution of network technology,

itÕs been especially true that technological visionaries have been potent as agentsof industrial progress.As suggested earlier, consensus-based technical standards are needed inmultimedia.  Decisions need to be made, for example, with respect to standards

for compression, which will affect how much full-motion video can be stored on
a CD-ROM and how cheap or expensive it is to communicate full-motion video
over different kinds of networks.16  Other areas where approaches differ and
standards may be valuable are in digital sound processing,17 STBs, and other
elements of interactive video systems (Ziegler, 1994a; Corcoran, 1994; Hodge,
1995).When and how to establish technical standards are contentious issues.18Timing is critical, David observed, because setting standards too early can fore-
close opportunities,19 but waiting too long can hinder technology development.
As David noted:Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS27A standard . . . has the properties of public knowledge. . . .  It
Õs a public good.You canÕt have a standard just by yourself.  Other people have to be able to
coordinate with it, if what youÕre producing is a system which has many partic-ipants forming a distributed system, and you want to have a continual processof incremental improvement and elaboration. . . .  The issue of standards is not
whether to have them, but  timing.  How soon and how long do you hang up the

development in the field by not having standards, or how soon do you foreclosepossible opportunities by setting standards too early?  I think these are the
timing questions that we should be thinking about.Although standards may have the qualities of public goods, they may containproprietary elements; Òopen,Ó Òpublic,Ó and 
ÒproprietaryÓ are not necessarily
exclusive.  This issue arises in a wide variety of standards relevant to digital

convergence.  For example, Cable Television Laboratories Inc. has proposed

establishing a clearinghouse for intellectual property rights for components of the
Motion Picture Experts Group (MPEG)-2 standard for digital video transmission.
MPEG-2 core technology includes many different patents from companies and
individuals worldwide; a reasonable, fair, and nondiscriminatory way to access
such patent rights will speed adoption of an international standard.  As Borrus

noted, the fastest-growing products in todayÕs electronics systems marketsÑwhether computers, telecommunications equipment, or consumer electronicsÑare developed around proprietary standards that evolve rapidly in the market-
place through competition.  Game companies are competing to invent the next

unique platform, which, if it becomes the dominant standard, would bring its
creator substantial rewards, Nagel said.20  The reconciliation of 
ÒopenÓ standards
with proprietary technology is debated among executives and scholars.21Different players in the digital convergence arena have different experiencesand traditions when it comes to standard setting.  Older technologies, such as

televisions, fax machines, and telecommunications equipment, evolved around
publicly developed standards.  Standard setting here has been relatively formal

and slow.  In the communications arena, the Internet Engineering Task Force and

the ATM Forum illustrate two venues in which standard setting has proceeded
relatively quickly, belying the notion that standard setting is always very slow.The market-contention approach to standards setting, which originated in thecomputer industry, is the strategy Nagel favors for advancing the national infor-
mation infrastructure. ÒBasically,Ó Nagel said, 
Òthe idea is that, rather than get-ting in a committee room and arguing about the nature of standards and the ideal
standards for any given application, the practice in the personal computer indus-
try has been for groups of engineers to get together to build systems that demon-
strably work.  The best of these systems eventually comprise a de facto standard.
ÓAn approach based on working implementations is epitomized by Internet stan-
dard setting, which involves ratification of demonstrated technologies.  When it

comes to de facto standards, however, it is not always clear that the best technol-
ogy wins, a point made by observers of videocassette (VHS vs. Beta) and otherKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEarenas; strategy, marketing, and other factors relating to market presence can beat least as important as Òtechnology,Ó per se.
This process stimulates innovation and elevates the standard, with the inven-tor owning and profiting from the intellectual property that defines its value,
Nagel said.  ÒI think the whole standard-setting process is becoming a lot moresophisticated . . . the telecommunications industries and the computer guys are
beginning to get together [to develop standards], and it almost binds them.Ó  Theprocess remains imperfect and contentious, however, with cultural differences as
well as different technical preferences constituting impediments to more rapid
resolution.  Another factor is market power:  in the software arena, Microsoft has

sufficient market presence that its products often serve as de facto standards, a
phenomenon that has motivated rival standards-oriented consortia.One effort to keep the software and other digital convergence arenas as fluidas possible is the Òopen referenceÓ platform, which has 
Òmaximized the impact ofindividual innovation, particularly in the software world,Ó Nagel said.  This term
refers to abstract or generic software and hardware combinations, which are open
in the sense that anyone can exploit them.  An example is the IBM Corporation
ÕsPC, which spawned a series of ÒclonesÓ; software designed for the IBM versionwill run on all clones.  More than 600 companies now build specific products

based on that concept, Nagel said.In the entertainment industry, standards traditionally have been set either bydominant companies or through cooperative efforts;22 the latter approach is being
pursued with multimedia and other digital technologies.  For example, the MPEG

has developed criteria for the compression of moving audio and video (Yadon,
1993), and the cable industry makes use of MPEG-2 chip sets, anticipating econo-
mies of scale and interoperation with other digital coding applications, as in
consumer electronics devices (NCTA, 1993c).23Some standards for digital convergence are being developed through forumsinvolving all three industriesÑcomputer, telecommunications, and entertainment.One avenue is the Interactive Multimedia Association, which sponsors an open
forum (the Compatibility Project) to develop recommendations on cross-platform
compatibility of multimedia data and applications.  An issue for progress in

digital convergence is the proliferation of standard-setting groups, some formed
explicitly to compete with others.  Even where there may be overlapping corpo-

rate membership it is not clear that people in industry A are fully involved in
standard setting dominated by industry B, and so on.  Further, with so many
standard-setting activities, the ability of a given company, even a leader in its
field, to participate adequately will be inherently limited given the need to devote
time, talent, and other resources.  The problem is magnified by the increasingly

international nature of relevant standard setting; U.S. efforts must reflect and
anticipate global deployment and competition.  The nature of the standards-

setting process varies somewhat across countries, and delays are compounded by
the need for cross-national consensus in international standard setting.  The Infor-
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS29mation Infrastructure Standards Panel launched by the American National Stan-dards Institute in 1994, with the involvement of multiple trade, standards-devel-
oping governmental, and other organizations, represents an effort to forge a
broader consensus, although the broader the group the more difficult the process
of reaching consensus.Symptomatic of the problem is the tendency of some to look to industryconsolidation as a way around the standards-development problems.  For ex-

ample, the collapse of the proposed Bell Atlantic/Tele-Communications Inc.
merger led some observers to wonder about the consequences of not having a
Òunified force that might have set nationwide technical and operating standardsfor networks delivering video-on-demand, home-shopping and high-speed data
servicesÓ (Andrews, 1994b).  The need for and alternatives to recognizable mar-
ket leadership remain subjects for debate and analysis, although the demise of the
Bell Atlantic-TCI deal is generally accepted as a sign of the slowing of the pace
of both industry consolidation and technology deployment.24  The challenge of
developing standards is recognized as a pacing factor for the enhancement of the
information infrastructure.ENTERTAINMENT AND THE ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRYIf entertainment and creative content are what differentiate digital conver-gence from the narrower merging of computing and communications, the enter-
tainment industry becomes a central player.  The approximately $6 billion U.S.

market for home-based video games is hard evidence of the business potential
from creating programming for interactive technologies.  Yet such first-order

product revenue estimates do not capture the larger, second-order revenues asso-
ciated with service, manufacturing, and other activities.  And the game market

illustrates the fact that it may be hard to ascribe revenues to any one industry,
since electronic/video games are offered as computer software, on-line services,
and programs for special-purpose game systems, and they may draw on compo-
nents derived from other products (e.g., motion pictures or television shows),
giving them the character of an aftermarket product.  Similar questions arise for

home shopping, whichÑas a television offeringÑcan be considered entertain-ment by some and retail distribution by others.  In this instance, the differentia-

tion of revenue passed through to product vendors from revenue associated with
the delivery medium (e.g., a cable television shopping show) is important, along
with determination of the extent to which new shopping activity is stimulated as
opposed to diversion of shopping to the new media from more conventional ones
(e.g., on-site store shopping, mail-order, or conventional catalogue and phone
shopping).  If, as suggested by Nagel, the way to maximize returns is to dominate

a particular layer or link in the multimedia production and distribution chain, the
difficult task of understanding the structure of the industry complex and how it is
evolving becomes essential.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEThe entertainment industry is far from monolithic; it is really a set of differ-ent industries that produce such products as feature films, television programs,
recorded music (records/CDs and tapes), and games.  Each of these areas faces

different production problems and different distribution and marketing problems.
Further, individual entertainment industries have different cultures and concerns,
resulting in a situation where those who work in one of these industries do not
usually have much to do with the others unless there is some overlap of interests
(as when the makers of theatrical motion pictures see that one can design and
market games based on hit movies).In evaluating how the new digital technologies and media interact with theentertainment industries, it is important not to generalize too much.  For example,

many of the technologies most heavily discussed in the context of digital conver-
gence have to do with new methods (e.g., optical fiber cable to the home) of
distributing existing products but will not make major changes in the type of
product that is distributed.  Thus, for example, the recorded music industry em-

braced digital technology some time ago but has begun to go interactive only
recently.25   Other technologies (e.g., CD-ROMs) allow for new types of products
that have not previously existedÑalthough they may be used initially to repack-age traditional products (e.g., as a substitute for vinyl records) or to complement
them (e.g., on-line discussion groups organized by fans of television shows;
Barron, 1994).The entertainment industry will use digital technology in the following ways:(1) as a new delivery system for existing products (e.g., video on demand),
providing essentially a new aftermarket for existing products;26 (2) in electronic
games (and other ways of using digitized material, thereby increasing the variety
of delivered products;27 (3) for direct-response sales (
Òhome shoppingÓ); (4) fornew entertainment products that are in the process of being invented (e.g., Robert
WinterÕs musical ÒbooksÓ demonstrated at the colloquium); (5) for potentially
new distribution systems that would allow distribution of products to audiences
that are not reached today; (6) for location-based entertainment, such as Òhigh-techÓ theme parks based on visual simulation and other offshoots of both the
aerospace and electronics industries; and (7) for new production methods to
enhance and/or lower the costs of existing products (e.g., computer animation or
using virtual reality to design set lighting, or use of nuances of sound as dramatic
elements).  Digitization allows for new types of special effects and production

technologies, often building on technologies and applications developed for sci-
entific research contexts (e.g., visualization), that can be incorporated into exist-
ing types of media.Given these opportunities and possibilities, it is important to consider thedifferentiation between those parts of the entertainment industry complex that
produce the programming (software) and those that distribute the programming
that is produced.  For example, in theatrical motion pictures, box office receipts

compose only a part of the market, and producers look to the aftermarkets (for-Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS31eign, videocassette, sale to television (pay, network, and syndication)) to show aprofit.  The production of television programming is a deficit business:  to cover

its production costs, a TV program needs to be sufficiently successful to stay on
the air for some 65 episodes, a threshold for sale to syndicated television.  The

issues facing these two areas of production are different from those facing the
cable television owner or the over-the-air broadcaster that distributes the pro-
gramming already produced.Another distinction pertains to those who wish to distribute existing types ofprogramming in a digitized format and those who wish to create new types of
programming using digital methods.  The former category allows for a broader

concept of the entertainment industry, one that would embrace cable television
operators and computer network operators and possibly telephone companies, for
example, as well as possible changes in the role of movie theater operators.
Consider, for example, group interactive electronic games, which provide a new
form of distribution.  They may employ large-screen, sophisticated computer-

graphic imaging, and programming at a level of narrative complexity and charac-
ter depth well beyond that available in current video and arcade games.  Develop-

ments in interactive storytelling concepts alongside advances in computer
software and hardware are evolutionary corollaries of present systems.28Although the actual ÒworkersÓ in interactive media may be at secondary
levels of the industry, it is clear that all major entertainment companies at their
top levels have made a commitment to exploring ways that the digital conver-
gence can interface with their products.  Virtually every major Hollywood studio

has established a subsidiary to create interactive products, typically computer
adventures games based on movies.  So far, most are repackagings of existing

products, but that could change with the recent focusing of industry attention on
games and the recognition that game revenues (over $6 billion per year) now
exceed box office receipts (over $5 billion per year) (Siegel, 1994; Rothstein,
1994).  Similarly, record components, seeing music production innovations being

led by specialized multimedia (software) companies, are adding interactive me-
dia functions to their staffs (Bermant, 1994).29,30
  The new Academy of Interac-
tive Arts and Sciences has been established to confer awards in the field, the
Houston International Film Festival has established new prizes for interactive
multimedia products, and the American Film InstituteÕs (Apple- supported) com-puter-based graphics, editing, and multimedia classes are overflowing (Siegel,
1994; Turner, 1993a).  The process of exploration is highly fluid and uses a wide

range of information and technological dissemination, networking, alliances,
seminars, schooling, capital investments, and research and development.In terms of generating and delivering creative products generally, the UnitedStates has dominated the global mass entertainment market since the turn of the
last century.  ÒThere is an accusation from almost every civilized country onEarth that America is a cultural imperialist,Ó Singer observed.  
ÒIf you talk to aJapanese anthropologist about how many pieces of Japanese electronics there areKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEin America, heÕll tell you, ÔYes, but youÕve captured our children.  They walk
around in Batman masks all over Tokyo, and UCLA T-shirts. . . .ÕÓ  Similarly,
Nagel has observed that daily activities in Bali have been undertaken to the
accompaniment of broadcast U.S. rap music.31Singer attributed this dominance to the many generations and networks ofcreative talent that have resided in Southern California over the years.  Holly-

wood always has catered to a mass audience, he said, beginning with the nickel-
odeon, which for a nickel would entertain viewers with a womanly form, a couple
kissing, the barrel of a gun, or horses or trains moving.  Significantly, Japan

adapted the nickelodeon for the intellectual aristocracy, Singer said.HollywoodÕs inventive tradition can be traced to the unique nature of Ameri-can culture, according to Singer.  The nation
Õs relative youth Ògives us permis-sion to play,Ó and, as immigrants, Americans have an innate sense of adventure
and dreams of possibilities.  Moreover, Californians traditionally have been ex-

plorers; the early leaders of the entertainment industry, such as Louis B. Mayer,
were itinerant salesman, Singer noted.  The early influx of immigrants from other

states, as well as foreigners escaping turmoil overseas, brought new ideas and
excitement to Hollywood, a phenomenon that continues.  Los Angeles today

is characterized by Òan anxious and driven spirit of reinvention,Ó he said.  See
Box 2.1.Market forces also play a role in the global dominance of the U.S. entertain-ment industry.  Wildman said the industry is more commercial than its foreign

counterparts and, furthermore, it commands not only a huge domestic market but
also the worldwide market for English-language products.32  About half of major
U.S. producersÕ earnings from movies and television come from foreign mar-
kets,33 and so entertainment is a major positive contributor to the U.S. balance of
trade,34 Wildman said.  The large audience for U.S. video products
Ñfor whichthe costs of distribution are small compared to the initial cost of producing the
creative productÑhas enabled producers to command huge production budgets,allowing them to invest heavily in entertainment value and audience appeal,35and thereby propelling the export advantage, he said.  U.S. film producers spend
some four to ten times the budgets of European counterparts, resulting in pioneer-
ing special effects (embodying digital convergence) and higher production values
generally.The introduction of new technologies is transforming the structure of theentertainment marketplace.  As more outlets or channels are added, the return to

each individual producer shrinks, Wildman explained.  For example, the rise of

cable television was paralleled by a decline in the three major broadcast net-
worksÕ share of the prime-time audience (U.S. DOC, 1993).  Smaller shares mean
lower advertising revenues and smaller production budgets for prime-time pro-
grams, Wildman said, as evidenced by the proliferation of low-budget ÒrealityÓshows (although the impact of changes in share depends on the type of audience
affected, which itself affects advertising revenues).  On the other hand, the emer-
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS33Box 2.1  A Message from Hollywood
Serious-minded executives may doubt they have anything to learn from Holly-wood.  To be sure, film director Alexander Singer acknowledged, Hollywood is a
peculiar place, a land of fantasies and dreams.  ÒThere are people who wear suitsand sit in an office when in fact Ôvisions of sugar plums dance in their heads,ÕÓ he
said.  ÒThey are filled with the fantasy of boundless possibility.  The brass ring of a
$500 million-grossing film is so intoxicating that it leaves ordinary and sensiblepeople dizzy with desire.ÓMovie makers are gamblers, taking wild chances on expensive bombs such asIshtar and unexpected blockbusters such as 
Home Alone.  ÒThey do not knowwhat it is that works,Ó Singer said.  
ÒThey cannot know.  They never know.
Ó  Yet,
ironically, they are highly paid to know.  This environment of high risk, high stakes,
and relentless pressure to appear in control makes the entertainment businessprofoundly insecure and unstable, Singer said.  Moreover, the odds against suc-

cess are astronomical.  For example, about 30,000 screenplays are registered
every year by the WriterÕs Guild of America; only a few hundred are purchased,and a fraction of those are actually made into movies, he said.  All of this fosters a

creative atmosphere, but one with Òa sickly quality . . . a sense of addiction.ÓThis creativity is struggling to find the application to multimedia. Hollywoodexecutives are notoriously fearful of venturing beyond the familiar; Singer found
senior entertainment executives to be ÒconservativeÓ and 
ÒanxiousÓ when confront-
ed with virtual reality technology entertainment concepts during the early 1990s.Such reactions cast doubt on the prospect of the entertainment industry serving as
a model for systematic innovation.Yet in one way the industry does serve as a prototype for survival in the infor-mation age, according to Singer, who believes Hollywood is a kind of precursor forcertain forms of work forces and lifestyles of the future.  A large part of this culture
is one of impermanent but highly skilled production group teams.  These tempo-

rary task forces, brought together for a single movie or televisions series, workintensely with a high degree of skill, quickly building personal relationships andteamwork comparable to that of a string quartet or a baseball team, Singer said.  At

the completion of the assignment the team dissolves and the individuals search fornew employment.  They are motivated as much by professional pride as by mon-
etary gain.These workers must be highly independent:  they need to inform themselves
about industry activity, network to find jobs, and upgrade their skills regularly.  They
also must raise families and stay sane and healthy while living this moment-to-
moment lifestyle. (Time lost for illness is among the lowest in any industry.)  It is amodel that could serve as a useful variant for the business community, Singersaid, as job impermanence comes to characterize much of American life.gence of new media creates new ÒwindowsÓ in the distribution chain
Ñnewaftermarkets.  The overall effect is to increase the aggregate audience for a given

production, Wildman said.Another transforming factor may relate to financing.  For example, film
industry financing changed with the introduction of sound in motion pictures.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEPreviously, most film production had been financed by entrepreneurial individu-als working in the industry or their associates.  Sound imposed serious new

technical demands on filmmaking that required expensive equipment and talent,
prompting Hollywood to turn to New York capital markets, which had underwrit-
ten earlier stages of the industry.  This experience provided the rudiments of the

current film industryÕs financing structure, with profound consequences for thecharacter (both technically and in terms of content) of a major part of the enter-
tainment industry.  Thus, beyond its effect on what it is like to see a movie, sound

changed the movie industry into something new, and that new thing produced
different products than the old thing.36  By analogy, the long-term effects of new
digital convergence technologies may be more profound with respect to altering
the traditional definition of the industry than on the industry as currently defined.
Overall, a major part of that transformation may be from a goods-producing to a
service-producing orientation.Wildman also observed that as channels and programming proliferate, muchof the Òvalue addedÓ starts to reside in the technology that allows us to sort,
sample, and select what we want to use.   As noted above, competing industries

are offering different methods and approaches for those processes of finding
entertainment content to consume.Only technologies that provide meaningful benefits to the creative commu-nity will take hold in the entertainment industry complex.  The integration of new

technologies will be driven by (1) enhancing the creative tools used by the enter-
tainment industry to create its art form; (2) demonstrating cost economies and
operational efficiencies; and (3) enabling new forms of entertainment and/or
innovative ways to simulate reality.  For example, with its 360-degree stereo-

scopic computer-graphic universe, individual spatial volition, and simultaneous
interacting multiple players, fully evolved virtual reality currently is the most
potent and problematic technology of the whole interactive spectrum.  This me-

dium gains particular relevance in the way it reflects aspects of the ÒvirtualcommunitiesÓ emerging from the computer networks (Rheingold, 1993).
Thus, while the popular and business press tout prospective impacts fromgreater bandwidth in communications capacity, applications of virtual reality
from CD-ROMs and other new devices, and other digital convergence compo-
nents and products, it remains premature to determine what difference individual
developments may make.  The bandwidth breakthroughs of today are impressive,

but in context they may prove no more earth-shattering than earlier transforma-
tional jumps in communications capacity such as multiplexing of telephone trunk
circuits or transformations in entertainment such as the addition of sound and
color to film.  The changes brought about by todayÕs instances of digital conver-gence may be changes in degree or in kind; some may be changes in degree that
are so significant as to be changes in kind.  Ginn contended that ability to satisfy
audiences is more important to success than is the kind of business:  ÒIf your viewis that markets will segment, and I think they will over time, then those compa-Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS35nies that have the understanding of markets and how to satisfy customer needs,irrespective of where they are in this value chain, will be able to be very profit-
able.  This includes cable companies and telecommunication companies and

others in the distribution end.ÓReinforcing GinnÕs view that it is insight as much as origin that matters wasthe apparent confusion at the January 1994 Information Superhighway Summit, a
government-industry gathering that addressed, in a group more heavily domi-
nated by entertainment industry executives, some of the issues raised at the CSTB
colloquium.  As reported in the 
Los Angeles Times (Lippman and Harmon, 1994):
Not atypically for Hollywood, the most compelling reason many gave for at-tending the conference was that everyone else was.  For the last year, represen-

tatives of the communications and media industries have demonstrated an al-most compulsive need to trade information highway metaphors at symposiumsand conferences with titles such as ÒDigital World,Ó ÒMultimedia ExpoÓ and
ÒDigital Hollywood.Ó  Although everyone agreed that the highway is comingÑand soonÑthere was little consensus about how it will evolve, how much it willcost or how quickly people will be able to access it through their computers,
telephones or television sets . . . .  Yet members of the Hollywood crowd
seemed unsure of their place in the sparring between phone, cable and computerexecutives over how digital age entertainment and information will be deliv-
ered.  ÒI feel like an English major in an organic chemistry course,Ó said Dis-
neyÕs [Michael] Eisner.Notwithstanding the many ways that digital convergence can affect and beaffected by the entertainment industry, there is likely to be a broader interaction
with entertainment, per se.  Entertainment is an essential part of human activity as

well as an industrial classification signifier.37  The latter does not encompass theformer in any meaningful way.  Conventional measures of activity regarding the
entertainment industry reflect no more accurately on the human activity of enter-
tainment than measures of fertilizer production reflect accurately on the state of
world nutrition, obesity in the United States, or changing fashions in cuisine.
Failure to see the breadth and depth of entertainment as a central element in
human activity, extending into many other realms of Òproduction,Ó probably
accounts for the consistent misprediction of growth in markets for such products
as consumer electronics and such services as long-distance telephone.  These

markets, at least from an economic perspective, have appeared to be almost
completely Òsupply-drivenÓÑthe economistÕs euphemism for the fact that no onepredicted the growth that actually occurred when the market took off.  Yet they

clearly have tapped deeply into some fundamental demand structure.  Wildly

optimistic and misplaced expectations for the picture-phone and interactive tele-
vision illustrate the same confusion about the real nature of entertainment.  The

simple fact is, we donÕt understand the issue of entertainment very well.In looking for and predicting the impact of digital convergence, it may beuseful to consider the potential of existing information goods and services asKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEentertainment:  newspapers are information services catering to the masses, and
commercial television almost defines that concept.  Commercial television news

is clearly a kind of information service, reporting facts, but it is also largely an
entertainment product.  A significant fraction of network television news budgets

come from the networksÕ entertainment budgets, and the proliferation of 
ÒnewsyÓshows with celebrity anchors shows just how profitable such ÒinfotainmentÓ can
be.  Some would even argue, a la H.L. Mencken, that government itself is a

source of entertainment (certainly supported by the success of the cable television
network, C-SPAN), raising questions about some fraction of political expenses
(polling, campaign consultants, and other election costs) relating to entertain-
ment.  As discussed in Chapter 3, related arguments might be made
Ñand aremade, seriouslyÑin the context of education.  The question is not what will
happen with the new technologies and entertainment, but rather, what will these
technologies add to the technology/entertainment mix already well in place?NOTES1.In 1962, an integrated circuit (IC) contained 10 transistors; today, one IC con-
tains millions of transistors.2.ÒIntel Corp. and Spectron Microsystems, Inc. [plan] software that will supportnative signal processing on a Pentium chip, allowing multimedia software to run on theprocessor instead of requiring dedicated hardware . . . .  The Pentium processor, though
not fast enough to handle Joint Photographic Experts Group- and Motion Pictures Expert
Group-type compression, will be able to compress and manipulate audio signals.  This

means that recorded speech can be slowed down or sped up . . . .  The initial release will
support audio only; video and communication will be supported laterÓ (Mohan, 1994).  Avariety of specialized hardware components is used to support a variety of functions, from
sound to graphics to communications, increasingly displacing specialized boxes and sub-systems.  Much innovation is taking place in more miniature and more integral communi-
cations componentry, for example, providing phone, fax, and voice mail capabilities
within personal computers.  See Corcoran (1993).
3.New terms
ÑÒpersonal digital assistants,Ó Òpersonal communicators,Ó and the
likeÑhave already been coined to describe these products.4.For instance, AT&T and a small company specializing in digital signal compres-
sion are developing an electronic Òblack boxÓ for television set tops, to provide for recep-
tion and decoding of movies and other video services using telephone lines (Klein and
Aston, 1993).  Hewlett Packard and TV Answer collaborated to build a set-top box that
provides interactive services; the system uses a portion of the radio spectrum to uplinkand download signals from a satellite (Millison and LaGrow, 1993).5.The overlap between computers and conventional consumer electronics was noted
in connection with the newcomer role of Microsoft and Intel at the 1994 Las VegasConsumer Electronics Show.  ÒTheir inclusion illustrates just how blurred the line hasbecome between computers and consumer elecronics.  While sales of more traditional
consumer equipment languish, computer concerns hope to spur purchases of multimediaKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS37personal computers, hand-held Ôdigital assistantsÕ and sophisticated computer games
Ó(Carlton, 1994a).6.See Hodge (1995) for a discussion of technical and design issues for STBs that
could support interactive television.  Hodge asserts that an STB consistent with open
architecture is Òa remote control unit for the video server, to which it connects through anATM network.  This is the distinction between this unit and pre-ITV [interactive televi-

sion].  It provides bilateral, full duplex communications to the video server
Ó (p. 154).
7.Wildman commented on how the introduction of sound in film ended careers of
actors with poor voices and enabled careers of actors whose voices carried well.8.Ò[W]hile virtually every major publishing house and Hollywood studio has an-nounced plans to develop sophisticated, high-quality multimedia software, and thoughcable, telephone and computer companies are forming alliances to test interactive TV
systems, many of these ventures are in their infancy and wonÕt translate into large num-bers of jobs for yearsÓ (Kruger, 1994).
9.Sherry Turkle, personal communication, November 11, 1993.
10.With research under way in numerous technical areas aimed at leveraging its
network architecture, the cable industry is billing its infrastructure as Òthe missing link tomyriad multimedia applications,Ó including personal communications services (Dukes,
n.d.).11.Information can be carried on electromagnetic impulses or waves in various fre-
quencies, the sum of which is known as the spectrum.  The full electromagnetic spectrum
ranges from radio waves (relatively long wavelengths) to x-rays and cosmic rays (at shortwavelengths).  Transmission through the air is concentrated in a narrow portion of the
radio spectrum; radio frequencies that are very low cannot carry enough information for
video, while radio signals at high frequencies cannot penetrate objects.  Competition is

growing for the prime bands of radio frequencies (Chiddix, 1991).12.A comprehensive analysis of wireless technology may be found in 
The Econo-mist (1993a).
13.This argument hinges on the development of amplifiers that can increase the
speed of fiber-optic transmission.  Today, fiber-optic technology is constrained by an
electronic bottleneck:  every 22 miles, the signal must be converted to electronics and

then regenerated, Gilder noted.  This means that, despite its wide bandwidth, fiber optics
is limited in speed to 2.5 gigahertz (2.5 billion cycles per second).  But the true capacity
of fiber optics is 25,000 gigahertzÑ1,000 times all the frequencies used in the air today.ÒIt could accommodate all phone calls in America on the peak moment of MotherÕs Day,ÓGilder said.14.Experimentation with real-time audio and video conferencing over the Internet
has begun using the so-called Mbone multicast backbone (Eriksson, 1994).15.This phenomenon is discussed in Katz and Shapiro (1994).
16.The Motion Picture Experts Group (Radcliffe, 1993) and a variety of corporate
alliances and consortia (Markoff, 1995a) have pursued standards for video compressionand video storage.17.Sound systems for films with digital sound are expensive and variable.  Digital
Theater System places the soundtrack on a disk separate from the film and synchronizesthe two.  Sony Dynamic Digital puts the soundtrack on the outer edge of the film, while
Dolby uses the space between sprocket holes (Fantel, 1994).Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVE18.An overview of the standards-setting process for information networking is pro-
vided in CSTB (1992), p. 56.19.For example, the standard for audio CDs is lower than current recording capabili-
ties.  The 
ÒRed BookÓ standard calls for music to be stored in a 16-bit format, meaning
the sound is sampled at 16 places along the sound wave 44,100 times per second; bycontrast, studios now can record digitally using a 20-bit system, sampling 16 times more
information and creating richer sound (Herschman, 1993).20.See Pereira (1994) and Carlton and King (1994).
21.The intersection of standards setting and intellectual property rights management
has been tracked in the annual Telecommunications Policy Research Conference seriesand in a 1994 workshop on standards setting for information infrastructure sponsored bythe National Institute of Standards and Technology.22.For instance, the de facto standard for studio film productions
Ñ35-millimeterfilm at 24 frames per secondÑhas survived for more than 60 years; the ÒRed BookÓstandard for CDs was set by Philips NV and Sony Corp. (NTIA, 1993).23.In addition, the Multimedia and Hypermedia Experts Group is developing coding
for multimedia to manage throughput on distribution networks (Dukes, n.d.).24.According to Farhi and Sugawara (1994), 
ÒNone of the experts is suggesting thatthe information superhighway wonÕt get built, just that early predictions of its quickcompletion were grossly overstated.Ó25.A number of major artists are pursuing interactive ventures, and consumers can
buy products that allow them to create music out of preconstructed parts, or experiencecombinations of music, art, and games (David, 1993; Goldberg, 1993; Bermant, 1994).26.Where material can be confined to digital formats, economies can be reaped, for
example through the electronic cinema concept, reducing the need to undergo the expense
of conversion of motion pictures to film (especially likely where material is producedexpressly for electronic distribution rather than traditional theatres).27.Walt Disney Co. licensed Microsoft and Sony Imagesoft to develop multimedia
titles featuring Disney characters.  ÒIndustry analysts say collaborations of this kind willproliferate as entertainment companies like movie studios seek new media to exploit forlicensing revenue and as software publishers seek characters of proven appeal for interac-
tive games and storiesÓ (Fisher, 1994).
28.A rare insider
Õs perspective on the difference between storytelling structure andvideo games may be found in Parkes (1994).29.See Landis (1993), Lohr (1994), and Schwarz (1993).  Multimedia projects under
development by major studios include interactive cartoons; explanatory versions of oldmovies showing, for example, how certain dance sequences were created; a virtual
biopark, which will enable children to experience an animalÕs lifestyle; interactive televi-sion shows, including games, dramas, and mysteries; and interactive amusement parkrides.30.A notable late entrant was the Walt Disney Co., which initially stayed out of the
multimedia technology business and instead licensed its standard programming for multi-media use.  Chairman Michael D. Eisner said of interactive media, 
ÒI donÕt like it so wewonÕt invest in itÓ (The Superhighway Summit, Academy of Television Arts and Sci-
ences, Los Angeles, January 11, 1994).  Eisner also has expressed concern that more
channels will mean more mediocrity:  ÒA real nightmare is finding out that the superhigh-way has turned into a detour . . .Ó  (Laderman et al., 1993).  In late-1994, however, Disney
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRENDS AND DIRECTIONS39announced plans for greater activity revolving around interactive software products(Turner, 1994b).31.David Nagel, personal communication, October 1994.

32.The United States is 
Òby far the worldÕs most important supplier of films forinternational trade,Ó Wildman has written, citing UNESCO statistics (Wildman and Siwek,
1988).  These authors suggest there is a strong, positive relationship between the purchas-

ing power of native speakers in any languageÑthe English-speaking population happensto be wealthy and populousÑand the importance of trade in films and television pro-grams in that language.33.This figure comes from Wildman
Õs analysis of a period of 30 years ending in1988 (Wildman and Siwek, 1988).34.The U.S. film industry had a positive trade balance of approximately $1 billion in
1985, even though foreign earnings are reduced significantly by a number of trade barri-ers, as well as by piracy (Wildman and Siwek, 1988).35.The value of film and television products to consumers is 
Òdetermined almostentirely by such public-good elements as the appeal of the story portrayed, the quality ofthe writing and acting, the perspective of the director, and the competence of cameracrews and other technical personnelÓ (Wildman and Siwek, 1988).  A public good is
nonexclusive; that is, its value is not diminished by its use.36.Of course, new, foreign sources of investment may also provoke major changes
in segments of the entertainment industry, but that issue was beyond the scope of this
project.37.See Huizinga (1950) for a discussion of the role of play in society.
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVE403Societal ImplicationsDigital convergence is expected to transform every field and every aspect ofU.S. society, from business and education to health care and libraries, from the
structure of the nationÕs economy and laws to the psychology of the individual.
Samuel Ginn observed:  ÒAt a minimum, [digital convergence] is going to impact

how we work and play, and that is to say that itÕs going to affect our standard of
living.  Indeed, it will influence our competitiveness as a nation.  ItÕs going to

influence how we relate to one another, how we educate ourselves, how we
administer health care, how privacy is protected.  Even the whole concept of

national sovereignty is going to have to be dealt with.ÓAdvanced communications services, fostered by digital convergence, areseen by many as key contributors to social and economic prosperity (Egan and
Wildman, 1992).  Several trends make this possible, including the development

of powerful new technologies, growing pressure to address social problems such
as inadequacies in public education and rising health care costs, and a new appre-
ciation among businesses, other organizations, and analysts of the role of infor-
mation and communications in economic productivity (Egan and Wildman, 1992).

The Internet demonstrates some of the possibilities:  for example, there are a

growing number of efforts (e.g., OncoLink from the University of Pennsylvania)
to use the Internet as a kind of electronic ÒPatientÕs Desk ReferenceÓÑa source
of hard to find or anecdotal information for people with rare or serious diseases
such as cancer or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)Ñor for self-help discus-
sion (Bulkeley, 1995; Foderaro, 1995); there are the network pedophiles (among
the first, it would appear, to exploit both the anonymity possible through elec-
tronically mediated conversations and the vulnerability of precocious adoles-Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS41cents); there are the first ÒexperimentsÓ with attempts to use the great efficiency
of the information distribution capabilities of the Internet for advertisingÑandthe first squeals of protest from those who (probably rightly) see a whole new
world of electronic junk mail opening up; there is an Internet Òradio stationÓbroadcasting music from Santa Cruz, California, and beginning to strain the
current limits of copyright law and performance; and there are merchants ranging
from a small used clothing store in Los Gatos, California, with World Wide Web/
Mosaic access through which customers can query a database regarding available
stock, to Digital Equipment Corporation, which derived some $100 million worth
of sales for a particular product line from publishing product literature and en-
abling benchmark testing over the Internet.1Although many activities and products will not change, there will be newoptions in various arenas, and corresponding changes in market share for options
on how to spend time as well as money.  The frenzy of activity and 
ÒhypeÓ noted
in Chapter 1 points to the problem of differentiating a long-term vision from
unrealistic promises of near-term products.  The expectation for change in many

quarters raises questions about what can be done as a nation and a people to learn
from past mistakes with other media.Discussion at the colloquium underscored a fundamental reality:  while many
executives and scholars recognize the potential for achieving social good, actual
offerings of goods and services will depend on what sells, and perhaps as well on
some broader vision of what is possible.  While the profit motive is expected to

promote multimedia programming for entertainment and various business appli-
cations, many colloquium participants emphasized the importance of developing
other applications (e.g., for health and education).  Their reasons were cultural,

intellectual, and altruistic, and, in the context of debate over telecommunications
policy reform, politically astute.  By way of illustration, Richard Notebaert out-

lined a number of applications of telecommunications and information infrastruc-
ture to the improvement of health care.  For example, the Wisconsin Health

Information Network (WHIN) enables at least seven hospitals, over 250 doctors,
and insurance companies to send and receive patient information electronically,
through the public network.2,3
  While such experiences arouse interest in advanc-
ing the information infrastructure, the goal of maximizing benefits for health
care, education, and libraries as well as more business-oriented domains raises
practical questions of how to achieve sufficient scale, affordability, and
interoperability.Perhaps the most important theme of the colloquium discussions was therecognition by technologists, industrialists, and social scientists that there is no
one way that digital convergence technologies and applications will or must
develop.  This variability is a principal reason that the social consequences of

new media are among the most difficult of all effects to predict.  Who, for

example, would have predicted the emergence of ÒThe Patriot NetworkÓ of the
1990s (Farley, 1994), which links ad hoc citizen militias, based on looking at theKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEuses and users of networking as a preferred means of communication in the 1970sand 1980s?  The existence of alternative paths for development of content and

programming and for the mechanisms by which they are delivered will allow a
variety of businesses to emerge and grow.  Public policy, in turn, can affect the

appeal of specific alternatives.This chapter outlines some of the social issues raised by digital convergence.It focuses on issues where colloquium discussion clustered, including the en-
hanced flow of information, the shape that technology and applications may take,
and the contrast between multiuser games and education as instances of the use of
digital convergence technology.  The chapter is intended to illuminate areas

where choices by industry, consumers, and government will influence the ben-
efits received from digital convergence.THE FLOW OF INFORMATIONEven excluding entertainment, the proliferation of computing systems andtheir integration with communication systems has led many to predict that people
will increasingly face a deluge of information.  The human information process-

ing system clearly is limited in capacity, leading many to wonder how growing
information processing burdens will affect society.  The social phenomena asso-

ciated with TV and radio (e.g., the emergence of the Òcouch potatoÓ in modern
society) seem to signal a risk of potentially stupefying effects of sensory signal
overload.  The tighter integration of entertainment will compound that situation

by providing more attractive packaging and delivery as well as more creative
forms for that information.  Eli Noam remarked that the challenge will be to sort
through all the options.  To date, he observed, computers generally have been

used to produce new information rather than to manage it.  He predicted that the

technologies and business of systems integration will help process and reduce the
glut of information.  Others speculated about a need for wholesale rethinking of

the business, public policy, and cultural aspects of information generation and
management.Most elaborate in his analysis was Richard Lanham, a professor of English atthe University of California at Los Angeles, who called for a Ònew economics ofhuman attentionÓ (a somewhat different usage than customary in psychology).
Information used to be more difficult to locate and assimilate in commonly
available raw and often bulky formats, but no longer:  technology is facilitating

access to information.  Today, the rarest fundamental resource is human atten-

tion, which gives information meaning and direction.  LanhamÕs use of the wordÒeconomicsÓ emphasizes the problem of allocation of attention as a scarce re-
source.As the market for multimedia products develops, manufacturers must ana-lyze human attention structures to learn what sells.  Thus, the filmmaker and the

literature professor who are skilled in getting attention, whether from viewers orKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS43students, assume central roles in the new economics.  ÒWhat is converging is notonly the technology of digital computation with the technology of mass entertain-
ment.  A larger conversion has occurred. . . .  The arts barter the crucial economic

goodÑattention,Ó Lanham said, principally because digital-electronic expressive
space differs from the printed page and analog-based icon and sound.Lanham argued that it is time to rethink and reorient our approach to theinformation marketplaceÑin terms of both structure and social implications.ÒWe have to bring the new economics of human attention to focusÑnow,ÓLanham advised.  ÒWe canÕt afford to study the problem to death.Ó  In defining
the economics of human attention, Lanham outlined five fundamental differences
between print and digital information:1.  Print, being fixed, is more authoritative than digital information, which is
volatile, interactive, conversational.2.  The transition from print to pixel alters the text from a two-dimensional
printed surface to a three-dimensional mixture of word, image, and sound, and
thus requires a new mix of human attention skills.3.  These new skills introduce the process of modeling, with dramatic results.
The viewer is encouraged to contemplate Òwhat ifs.Ó4.  The meaning of 
ÒoriginalityÓ changes radically, with the result that cur-
rent intellectual property law becomes obsolete. (This issue is discussed below in
the section ÒIntellectual Property Issues.Ó)5.  Finally, as ideas move into the rich space and sounds of digital expres-
sion, human motives change, with competition and play animating practical pur-
pose in a fundamentally new way.  This particular concept appears to emphasize
the positive contributions that entertainment may bring to otherwise more serious
endeavors.  As discussed below in 
ÒEntertaining Education,Ó however, achieving
a net positive effect will not be automatic.To benefit the most from digital convergence, society must acknowledge andrespond to these transitions, Lanham warned.  In education, for example, Lanham

argued that the campaign to improve literacy is based on the old economics:  no

multimedia-based attention structure has yet been chosen to replace the tradi-
tional textbook, and there has been no accord on how to train librarians, or how to
reconceive school ÒbuildingsÓ now that information is disembodied rather than
fixed.  Nevertheless, there are indicators that these conditions may be changing,

however slowly (CSTB, 1994b).  There is, for example, a substantial corpus of

work developing on Òconstructive learning,Ó which does begin to challenge the
centrality of the hardbound textbook and does begin to explore and exploit new
ways to Òmanage attentionÓ through, for example, use of simulation and 
Òcon-struction environments.Ó  Experiments with electronic publishing and the ele-
ments of digital libraries may provide other examples.Lanham identified two fundamental barriers to addressing such issues.  The
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEprofessional barrier, recognized by a number of colloquium participants in othercontexts, is the rare and awkward nature of communication among the various
disciplines involved.  That challenge was noted by musicologist Robert Winter in

commenting on his demonstration of multimedia music exploration applications:
ÒI almost never do this in front of musicians.  TheyÕre converted and they love itand they go do it.  I preach to surgeons and physiologists and groups like this

because what IÕm addressing here and what Bob [Stein] showed you in his veryexciting new projects are issues that are cross-platform, cross-discipline, cross-
whatever.ÓThe second obstacle is cultural.  At one extreme is the camp that resists
transforming the arts into commodities, while the opposing contingent seeks to
maximize profits above all.  ÒJust networking these two warring camps togetheris no solution,Ó Lanham said.  
ÒOptical fiber, no more than twisted copper pairs,cannot heal a religious war.ÓDiversity of InformationRobert Stein of Voyager related the influence of profit-making strategy tothe level of diversity in the information products delivered, building on his status
as a publisher in both entertainment and education as well as on his personal
philosophy.  He said multimedia software appears to be developing along two

tracks, the movie model and the book model, with the former prevailing.  That is,

Hollywood movie companies and game companies, and some traditional publish-
ers, are focusing on expensive, large-scale productionsÑequivalent to moviescosting tens of millions of dollars to produce.  As a result, the number of U.S.

films produced is limited;4 the figure has been consistent at about 300 a year,
Wildman has written (Wildman and Siwek, 1988).  By contrast, approximately

150,000 new book titles are published in the United States each year,5 thereby
ensuring diversity in the marketplace.ÒIt is extremely important in society to have this breadth and diversity ofmaterial,Ó Stein said.  
ÒWouldnÕt it be a shame if there were only dozens of newthings produced in new media and that was how our entire culture was being
distributed . . . as a society, IÕm not sure itÕs in our long-term interests to focusonly on the blockbusters where you can make the money.  I think you also have

to have some diversity of thought. . . .Ó  Compounding the need for diversity is the
greater ability to exploit aftermarket opportunities, as discussed in Chapter 2,
afforded by digital convergence technology.  The impact of any one idea may be
amplified by the ubiquitous, attention-commanding power of recursive delivery
systems:  the movie is the television show is the video game is the magazine is the

cereal box is the talk of the schoolyard and the office.True or full diversity of information is not necessarily an unmitigated good.Some observers have warned that, if the medium is the message, then advanced
technology is bound to undermine cultural values.  Such a concern was implied
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS45by Janice Obuchowski, president of Freedom Technologies Inc., who noted thatin simpler times the cultural message was clearer.  ÒAs we move into this distrib-uted, interactive, somewhat under-surface, almost anarchic environment,Ó she
said, Òwe need to at least concern ourselves to some degreeÑwithout becominghystericalÑabout the issues of our society and who will communicate the cul-tural center.Ó  Although that center may become obscured by the ability of emerg-
ing systems to deliver an ever widening menu of cultural inputs and outputs, that
diversity and pluralism are also positive developments, as noted by Robert
Johnson of Black Entertainment Television (BET) in a late-1994 interview.
Johnson related the proliferation of programming options to the recognition that
the audience need no longer be assumed to be in one place, or homogenous.
Others put on the table the fact that greater flow of information in general implies
greater (and qualitatively different) flow of information that some find undesir-
able.Ethical questions concerning programming shadow all the new conduits andforms of delivery, some of which, like the electronic theater, naturally attract
social pressure.  Society finds itself moving unwillingly into an uncomfortable,

open-ended, and confrontational discourse to define ÒpornographyÓ in media and
calibrate damage to the young, the psychologically unstable, and the economi-
cally vulnerable.6,7
  In the same interview, Johnson observed that while a rough
consensus may exist on the inappropriateness of pornography for children, it does
not for other material that might be considered undesirable by some because of its
political or hate-mongering character.8The potency of pornography, violence (Kolbert, 1994), and gambling de-mand that mechanisms be developed to satisfy the ever-changing parameters of
social values and government regulation, Alexander Singer has said.9  Indeed,
there is a skeleton at the feast of the entertainment industryÕs success, because itsmost profitable segment is the ÒactionÓ genre, usually a euphemism for violence/
sadism.  Also chafing to get into the starting gate is the $30 billion gaming

industry (including lotteries, off-track betting, and local bingo games).10  With its
deeply addictive overtones and its appeal to vulnerable populations, this industry
is not likely to enhance the reputation of interactive services, although it may
enhance profits. Singer has warned that if the private sector is unable to regulate itself then
political and social extremists will impose rules from outside (Harmon, 1993;
Jensen, 1994; Lippman, 1993).  Singer has predicted that the complicated ques-

tions posed by new technologies will lead to the emergence of professional
specialists in communications ethics.  Recent announcements about voluntary

standardization and labeling by the video game industry illustrate the kind of self-
regulation that is possible, especially when the threat of government regulation
appears imminent to an industry.11  The telephone industry has also responded
with mechanisms to control access to certain 900-number services.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEEsther Dyson of EDventure Holdings Inc. commented in a late-1994 inter-view on the interplay between private ground rules and individual choice:Private organizations have a strong role in creating and managing environmentswhere there are rules.  People can decide for themselves which kind of environ-

ment they prefer, and go into those, as long as there are competing sets of ruleswhere people can go.  One of the nice things about cyberspace is that you can
easily pick your environment.  In the physical world, if you don
Õt happen to likewhere youÕre living, itÕs hard to move.  It
Õs expensive, and there may not beroom where you want to go.  But in the Internet world, it
Õs fairly cheap tochange your environment, and I think itÕs very important that the governmentallow different outfits to set up places with different rules and then people canjust decide where they want to go. . . .  There should be some way to keep kids
out [of inappropriate environments].  But I hope thatÕs going to be more the jobof the parents than of the government.Singer emphasized at the colloquium that, regardless of attempts at control,the market will be flooded with information products of questionable value.  This

phenomenon will not spell the extinction of artistic merit, but it will exploit
business opportunities and consumer demands.  The existence of demand for

digital pornography is already well in evidence.12  Noting that pornography was
the driving force behind VHS videocassette technology, Singer said the sheer
volume and diversity of new products may obscure the quality work.  ÒNone ofthose groups will control anything,Ó he said.  
ÒThis is not a controllable phenom-enon.  You will get a tidal wave of garbage, of excitement, education, penetrating

intelligence and appalling degeneracy.  Count on it . . . .  It is appropriate, I think,

for regulatory agencies to have certain limits on obscenity, privacy, and so on.
All of that seems well advised, but you cannot stop the flood of junk . . . .ÓIntellectual Property IssuesThe supply of information available will reflect a variety of environmentalfactors and incentives, which relate to risks, rights, and responsibilities for buy-
ers, sellers, and others (CSTB, 1994c).  The most identifiable and at the same

time most controversial area of incentives is that of intellectual property protec-
tion.13  Intellectual property rights command special attention because the con-
tent dimension of digital convergence consists of intellectual property.14  The
discussion below highlights some of the issues; a comprehensive assessment is
beyond the scope of this report.  The issue of intellectual property elements in

associated technical standards is noted in Chapter 2.As many have observed (CSTB, 1994c), digital technology effectively in-vites piracy:  audio, video, and textual material can be copied perfectly, easily,

and inexpensively.  Broadcast networks, for example, have begun to face the

problem of finding images to which they own rights (e.g., from programs that
they own) rebroadcast over the Internet, where they are accessed for viewing andKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS47other uses on personal computers.15  This situation is one of many that raise
questions about how rights owners will be able to track down or even find out
about infringers.  Some suggest that it may be time for a new model of intellectual

property rights that takes into account these changing conditions; others observe
that copyright, introduced for printing, has been successfully adapted for cam-
eras, radios, player pianos, and so on and will adapt yet again.Multimedia introduces unique problems into the copyright arena, because itsvarious components have different legal traditions.  For example, the book pub-

lishing industry relies on comprehensive contracts, while the movie industry
frequently employs short ÒdealÓ memos, and the computer industry has little
experience with copyright issues such as Òperformance rightsÓ (Radcliffe, 1993).
Whereas the movie industry typically asks for compensation up front, the music
industry has traditionally sought royalties based on performances.  Compounding

these differences among producers of multimedia materiel is the new control
afforded the customer:  the number of times something is performed, displayed,

or distributed is up to the user, and therefore hard for the producer to measure or
estimate in advance.  For example, new video-on-demand systems that allow

viewers to watch a program any time of the day could involve thousands of
ÒbroadcastsÓ a day of a given program (Chartrand, 1994).  Such patterns are
driving media industries (e.g., publishing, TV/video, movie, music, and soft-
ware) to explore new approaches to collecting money for use of their intellectual
property, including various kinds of blanket payments in lieu of paying at each
instance of use.A related issue pertains to enforcement and administration.  For example, the
distribution of songs through databases offered by such commercial providers as
CompuServe has raised questions about who is liable for copyright infringement:
the person who provides a copy of the copyrighted material may clearly be
infringing, yet the owner of the database may be much easier to target (Woo,
1993).  Case law is beginning to define or refine expectations, although the

possibility of legislative reform remains.The very nature of interactive mediaÑits malleabilityÑcan make it difficultto pinpoint the original ÒauthorÓ or even the confines of a 
ÒworkÓ itself.  As one
expert in the field has observed, ÒIn a certain way, the distinction between theauthor and user of material becomes blurred, if not obsolete.  Therefore, in the

not-too-distant future, there might hardly be any more authors, but a multiplicity
of Ôcontributors.ÕÓ16A fundamental issue is the interplay of creativity, communication or sharing,and compensation.  This was illustrated by Singer, who recounted the networking

experience of the WriterÕs Guild of America (WGA), an association of script-writers.  WGA members developed a network for conversing and exchanging

ideas.  According to Singer, the network fostered 
Òwitty, bright, and rich inter-change between some hundreds of people who were rather isolated and need oneKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEanotherÕs support.Ó  But after a year and a half, uproar over alleged theft of ideas
led to the dissolution of the network, Singer said.A new arena in which existing law may be tested is that of fine art.  Com-
puter and software companies are negotiating with museums around the world for
rights to scan images of famous photographs or paintings for distribution of
copies via CD-ROM or electronic networks.  Technology allows both high-

resolution image storage and display plus copying via printing by users.  To date,

a typical arrangement has been a nonexclusive license to reproduce the high-
quality photographs museums make for other purposes (Hudson, 1995).U.S. copyright law was strained even before the digital revolution.  In prac-
tical experience, originality involves borrowing elements of the past, blending
memory, repetition, chance, and invention in a new mixture, Lanham said, offer-
ing insights based on his own experience as an expert witness in some 50 copy-
right violation cases.  By contrast, copyright law is based on the premise that

there can be absolute originality.  ÒIn this view, the ÔoriginalÕ is the poet, alone in
the garret, coming up with something absolutely new and, of course, redemptive
for mankind.  The history of copyright law in America has been a series of

attempts to adjust this exaggeration to how originality actually works in human
life.  The new space of digital expression now forces us to make this adjustment

in theory as well as in practice,
Ó he said.
Copyright law could constrain multimedia development, Lanham warned.He identified three problems that need to be resolved.The first problem is how to define Òsubstantial similarityÓ of visual images.
That is, if a generative code can create images, and those images can change in an
interactive environment, then what is being compared to what?  When this issue

arose in a case involving an Apple Computer user interface, the judge invoked an
even stronger standard of Òvirtually identical,Ó which is even more difficult to
meet for images, such as computer-screen desk-top representations, that change
all of the time as a function of their use.  Increasingly, that dynamism is charac-

teristic of user interfaces as well as multimedia titles.The second problem is structural.  Multimedia technology, by enabling the
reader to rearrange, rewrite, and link text in a nonlinear manner, has eliminated
the fixed concepts of beginning, middle, and end, which traditionally have been
the principal points of comparison between two works.  Third, any discrimination

between idea and expression is impossible when a digital code can generate
music and images, Lanham said.ÒWhat emerges, for better or worse, from the multimedia environment as ithas operated on young people and as I think it is going to operate in the future, is
really a redefinition of human reason,Ó Lanham asserted.  
ÒItÕs a redefinition ofthe nature of propositional thought. . . .  If that changes, then the whole nature of
the relationship of expert testimony, for example, to how a jury thinks about the
ordinary common reader, common viewer, common listener experienceÑandhow they judge a caseÑis going to change.ÓKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS49In the information age, the law of real property may become secondary to thelaw of intellectual property, Lanham suggested.  Inasmuch as digitization broad-
ens and increases the volume of information access, there may need to be a
rethinking of whom rights owners really want to protect against.  Thus, for

example, according to Lanham it may be appropriate to establish two levels of
intellectual property, one for software professionals and another for amateurs that
extends the principle of fair use (i.e., a copying that is not an infringement).
Given scholarly traditions regarding proper citation and crediting correct sources
of ideas and other inputs, questions arise about prospects for greater flexibility
and acceptability in situations that involve Òborrowing,Ó say, of pieces of film ortext for student projects.  The act of borrowing is becoming easier; the context,

constraints, and culture are therefore becoming stressed.The debate over compensation for intellectual property revolves around thefundamental premise of intellectual property protection:  that compensation in-

duces production, and that therefore intellectual property issues must be ad-
dressed if new information technologies are to be developed fully.  As suggested

above, interesting and vexing intellectual property issues are associated with
multimedia ÒmaterialÓ other than content or interactive titles, such as the multi-
media interfaces of computing or other digital information systems.  In the area of

computer interfaces, courts have weakened laws over the past few years.  Can
copyright and patent laws be evolved to protect what in many cases are vastly
expensive research and development investments in, for example, human inter-
face design?  These issues are actively being contested in courts today
Ñif theÒlook and feelÓ of a human-computer interface cannot be protected by current
copyright statutes, as many have argued, will it be possible to protect multimedia
content or interactive ÒtitlesÓ?  Or is content easier to produce than interfaces,
suggesting a different set of issues?The intellectual property conundrum is compounded when the issue of pat-ents is added in, although patents have received less attention in this context than
copyright (because of the volume of activity involving some form of publishing
or expression of ideas, which is the domain of copyright).  However, a few

controversial patent cases illustrate the potential for small businesses to substan-
tially influence industry directions as well as costs.  For example, in 1989

ComptonÕs New Media, a division of the Tribune Company, applied for a patentrelating to indexing functions that could apply to both CD-ROM and on-line
services, described as the Òmultimedia search system using a plurality of entrypath means which indicate interrelatedness of information.Ó  A patent was
awarded in August 1993 and announced, together with ComptonÕs intentions tocollect royalties, in November 1993 at a major trade show, Comdex/Fall (Lewis,
1993b).  The legitimacy of the claim was reevaluated by the U.S. Patent and

Trademark Office (PTO), and the patent was disallowed shortly before the 1994
session of Comdex (Chartrand, 1994).  Another recent patent case involved data

compression technology, affecting a variety of software and electronic communi-Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEcations and resulting in a settlement combined with equity interests between theparties, Microsoft and Stac.  A recent change in PTO hiring policies to increase

the computer science-related skill level in its work force is a step in the right
direction.  So is PTO
Õs own moves to exploit information technology by creatinga digital library of patent information.THE SHAPE OF TECHNOLOGYPrecisely how new information technologies will change American cultureremains a matter of conjecture, but also a matter of choices to be made by many
parties.  Noam observed that, historically, analysts have been overly optimistic

about the short-term impacts of technology but have underestimated the long-
term effects, such as the extent to which the automobile or the television has
changed how people live, work, and interact.  Stein, who questioned whether, in

hindsight, the automobile in its present form was a positive invention, empha-
sized the need for a long-range vision in technology development.  He acknowl-

edged that,No doubt technology is going to get better and stronger and weÕll find lots ofuses for it, but fundamentally, it comes down to where we want to go.  These

are questions which I think particularly this society, the American society, isnot very good at asking.  We don
Õt usually ask ourselves where, as a society, dowe want to beÑwhich machine do we want to build, and for what purpose? . . .[E]specially because weÕve had so much experience now with technology in the20th century, itÕs the question that, it seems to me, we could start to ask our-selves.  What is the long-term meaning
Ñnot just in terms of next yearÕs profits,but the long-term in terms of decades and centuriesÑof the machines that weÕregoing to build?  I don
Õt believe for a minute that machines are neutral.Colloquium participants suggested that intelligent management of new in-formation technologies is the key to maximizing their benefits.  This view was

most optimistically advanced by George Gilder:I think the technology is enormously beneficial . . . I donÕt think there is anysignificant downside.  I think that technology is what we are as human beings.
We create new tools.  That
Õs how we emerge from the muck.  This is the
adventure of our lives and our culture.  To pretend that itÕs somehow an option-al or negative force is to deny the very essence of human beings.  I just think
that itÕs a positive force that has to be intelligently managed, but itÕs entirelypositive.ItÕs particularly an egalitarian force.  These technologies are getting cheaper
and cheaper, and they will be most beneficial for poor people, who currently
suffer most from our school system, for example.  These technologies really
will allow any person [in any neighborhood] to take instruction from the bestprofessors on the face of the Earth, or to walk through the halls of the Louvre
with close examinations of the paintings.  The world opens through this door
. . . .Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS51By contrast, Donald Norman of Apple Computer Inc. cautioned about overlyoptimistic predictions:The history of technology shows that every successful technology has beensuccessful in directions that were not forecast by the people at the time. . . .  The

fax machine was invented in 1870 and it still has not made major inroads intothe homes.  Technologies have to meld themselves into the fabric of society, but
if weÕre not careful, itÕll lead us in ways that we donÕt want.  You can
Õt controlwhat really happens, but we might be able to prevent the negative from happen-ing and thatÕs my message for today.Noam remarked on the complex interplay of technology, behavior, and institu-tions or norms:The notion that somehow everything will be the same except that you now havea more convenient way of getting to Joe Smith is simply unrealistic.  We
Õll haveto develop protocols of who can talk to whom and when.  Then, the sense of

community is going to radically change because again, we have certain con-stants.  If it
Õs much easier to talk to some people with whom it was moredifficult to talk in the past, it means that something has to give.  Certain forms

of communications atrophy as other forms of communications become cheaperand more convenient.  The sense of community changes and you begin to de-
velop electronic communitiesÑtelecommunitiesÑ[raising] all kinds of inter-esting political issues.Stein remarked on how difficult it can be to predict the full impact, includingbenefits, of entertainment-related technology by observing that while the placing
of a person on the moon had been long anticipated, one of the significant aspects
of that milestone was not predicted:  that it would be televised, allowing hundreds

of millions of people to watch it together.  Stein noted that from the 1930s

through World War II, machines were portrayed in educational films as liberating
people, whereas advertisements in the 1950s paired housewives and domestic
machines.While Gilder appeared to assume relatively steady demand for bandwidth interms of the applications he mentioned, Stein emphasized that the adequacy of
available bandwidth depends on who the users are, and by extension, the kinds of
uses and therefore the kind of bandwidth needed per communications channel.If you think about sending video out the way it is sent out now, there is plentyof bandwidth.  But if you think about the possibility of everybody on Earth

communicating with everybody else, and high resolution with moving picturesand sound, under GeorgeÕs definition of what is enough bandwidth, there prob-ably isnÕt enough bandwidth.  I don
Õt doubt that humanity will solve the prob-lem and weÕll eventually have more bandwidth, but I think the question is,What kind of society do you see?  Do you see a society where a small group of
people is talking to everybody, or do you see one where everybody is talking to
everybody else?Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVESteinÕs comments underscore the challenges of achieving scale and universalaccess in supplying new services and the associated questions about who controls
what.  The benefits Gilder described, for example, are attainable once fiber is

deployedÑbut the high cost of that deployment, combined with investorsÕ needs
to reap returns on that investment, suggests that considerable cost barriers remain
to redeploying moderate bandwidth.Stein contrasted the big investments associated with things like game tech-nology with a paucity of investment that supports good thinking.  ÒI would loveto see somebody think about making a machine whose goal was to present a
program that encouraged people to think about somethingÑto reflect and also tocommunicate with other people who are thinking about these things.Ó  Explained
Stein, ÒIÕm obsessed with two things.  One is getting people to think.  The other
is getting them to think with each other.Ó  Stein suggested that, given the different
kinds of computing and communications systems already being developed, some
kind of hybrid system to achieve his vision is technically feasibleÑbut technol-ogy alone is not sufficient.  ÒThe problem is itÕs probably not a machine thatanybody wants to buy in terms of itÕs not a productivity tool, a game machine, butitÕs something our society probably needs desperately.ÓOne reason that such a machine seems elusive may be the divergence incultures and approaches of the industries that might have to combine to make it
work.  As Norman noted, technologists focus on producing technology while the

entertainment industry focuses on producing content.  ÒI would imagine what weneed is what Singer and Stein were arguing for, which is some attention to the
content . . .  what our media are about and not simply the technology that links

people, but perhaps in a mindless way.Ó  A full convergence remains to be
achieved.The Need for User-Friendly TechnologyA call to action was submitted by Norman, who said it is more importanttoday than ever before to develop ÒhumaneÓ technology that takes into account
user needs and capabilities.  The current approach to technology development,

Norman said, has barely evolved since the 1933 Chicago WorldÕs Fair, for whichthe motto was ÒScience finds, industry applies, man conforms.ÓThe technology-centered approach requires users to operate in ways notconsistent with their natural or learned predispositions; often the human behaves
in Òappropriate waysÓÑit is the technology that does not!  This mismatch results
in a high proportion of industrial accidents caused by human error, making occu-
pational safety and health a motivation for progress in human-machine and hu-
man-computer interaction.  A more human-centered approach could reduce hu-

man error, decrease training time, increase acceptance of technology, and bolster
U.S. competitiveness, Norman said.  Although the United States leads the world

in research, development, and application of human-centered design principles,Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS53especially in industries such as personal computers, the lead is tenuous, and mostindustries still rely on extensive training to reduce errors.ÒThis is a critical issue as we move toward a fully interconnected, fullycommunicating world in which the social and organizational issues will be as
important as the technological ones,Ó Norman said.  Part of what is required,
observed Nancy Stover in a late-1994 interview, is reducing the emphasis on how
technology works.  This is essential to making the technologies of digital con-

vergences less intimidating.  A sign that a technology has succeeded, according

to Stover, is a focus on its benefits; how many of us know or need to know how
the telephone works?Singer suggested17 that added complications arise in connection with deci-
sions that are, at a fundamental level, aesthetic.  What appear to be primarily

technology choices profoundly affect the most powerful existing communica-
tions mediumÑthe picture.  He went on to observe that the consequence of what
will be a significantly more compelling image could have broad social and eco-
nomic ramifications.  For example:  What would be the impact on local econo-

mies if the huge increases likely in TV ÒcatalogueÓ sales (via the shopping
channels) seriously displaced conventional retail sales income?Information processing will alter video consumption options, according toSteven Wildman.  ÒAs we add more channels, what weÕre changing is the logic ofthe consumption of the video product,Ó he said.  
ÒIf we change that logic, then thenature of the assistance provided to consumers or programmers by the industry
itself changes as well.Ó  Although opportunities for greater user or audience
control and format choices are expanding, it is likely that consumers will con-
tinue to receive, in the traditional manner, the well-established and well-received
forms of passive entertainment that now exist.  As BET
Õs Johnson noted, whenpeople use a television, they do not expect to ask it to retrieve or analyze data.Johnson speculated that computer-based technology may permit a return totraditional behaviors:It used to be [that] youÕd sit around a campfire, or the living room, and someonewould start telling a story.  And if you didn
Õt understand something, you couldsay, ÒWait, tell me about when the knight came upon the dragon, what hap-pened?Ó  And you could ask, ÒDragon?  How big was this dragon?Ó  You couldinteract, and get the information you wanted.  Well, it
Õs only since televisioncame along that you canÕt stop, and you canÕt ask somebody to explain whathappened because the film is running, or the tape is running.  Interactivity is
something that has been a part of our information access for a long time.The introduction of the remote control device increased viewer control overvideo consumption, but providers still ÒnurtureÓ the consumer to some extent,
Wildman said.  For example, cable operators prefer to position their channels

near a broadcast network, to increase the likelihood of attracting viewers who
ÒsurfÓ the channels.  But the market will respond with new techniques for search-
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEing across channels, Wildman said.  He suggested two possible paths:  program-
ming services offering a preselected menu of different types of shows (i.e., pre-
packaged video magazines), and set-top converters or ÒintelligentÓ television
sets, which would help viewers make their own selections of programs and ser-
vices.  In a variation on the latter concept, the cable television industry is devel-

oping interactive program guides that viewers will be able to operate using a
remote control device (NCTA, 1993c).  Interactive program guide work at

CableLabs will enable consumers to search for programs by time of day, channel,
and theme, and facilitate selection for taping.  The StarSight program guide

technology, drawing on broadcast control codes, is being licensed to TV and
VCR makers as well as satellite and cable TV operators (Fleischmann, 1995).  In

a late-1994 interview, Robert Lucky cautioned that the design of program selec-
tion technology will affect its impact:Even if all content providers have equal access to a telephone line, if the personthat builds the interface to your set-top box is making it difficult for you to
choose someoneÕs programming, youÕre not going to ever get there.  And there
Õsgoing to be such a plethora of material that the way youÕre gently steered, oneway or another, is going to make all the difference in the world.  This is some-

thing even more than a technical problem.  It
Õs going to be a problem for ethicsand culture to truly make this open.  Actually it will be very difficult.
Although too new to receive much attention at the colloquium, the explosivegrowth of the World Wide Web and its Mosaic interface suggest a computer
network variant of the user selection concept, one that has even spawned business
ventures aimed at helping individuals and businesses to use the Web (Churbuck,
1994).  The contrasts between the Internet and emerging television-based interac-

tive environments underscore that ÒinteractiveÓ and 
Òtwo-wayÓ may be matters of
degree.  Argued Stein in a late-1994 interview,
The thing about the Internet is that it isnÕt two-way communication, itÕs every-way communication.  That
Õs where the big struggle is going to be, to maintainthat kind of environment, because weÕre going to have very different kinds ofprogramming if we maintain every-way communication than if we go to simple
two-way communication.Other speakers stressed that technology should be related to context.  Stein
noted that, in Pacific TelesisÕ conceptual video of life in the year 2005, advanced
technology was in wide use but apparently had not improved the quality of life:
the neighborhood was run down, workers suffered job stress, and student skills
and parent-child relationships were poor.  ÒThere is no sense that peopleÕs actualexperience has changed at all . . . the reality is, unless we are conscious of the
kind of society we are building, the machines are not going to make equality for
us.  They never will,
Ó Stein declared.
SteinÕs comments underscore the importance of making improvement of thequality of life an explicit objective in introducing new technology.  But they begKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS55the question, Whose objective should that be?  Stein, an entrepreneur, acknowl-
edged that businesses competing in the information marketplace focus on objec-
tives supporting the quest for profit and growth, raising yet other questions about
the role of government and other players.A History Lesson:The Evolution of Books as Mass MediaIn an ideal world, technology would be available on an equitable basis to all.One model for achieving universal access is the distribution system for print
media.  This infrastructure includes a taxpayer-supported system of postal carri-

ers and roads for the physical movement of publications, as well as public librar-
ies.  The far-reaching system has provided for a richness and diversity of print

resources, encompassing a wide range of perspectives and unfiltered sources of
information.18Whatever the possibilities of an idealized future, Paul David warned againstoverlooking near-term realities.  The issue is not the technology itself, David

said, but the need to develop and apply it by acting within social organizations, to
address problems of trying to mobilize resources, especially other peopleÕs moneyand talent, for the uncertain and unproven.And the difficulties donÕt end there, David said.  ÒWhen all the foregoingdaunting challenges have been met, and when the innovations and questions are
perceived by others to be potentially competitive with and, therefore, disruptive
of their established interestsÑas all important innovations turn out to be in somerespect or otherÑthen there may ensue the life-and-death struggle against seeingthe whole venture aborted by hostile takeovers, or crippling regulatory restraints,
or outright suppression of its use by political authority.ÓAs an example of tortured evolution of technology, David recounted thehistory of the book as a platform.  It is a tale of long delays, significant technical
advances in multiple fields, and strategic intervention by authorities.Movable type was invented around 1440.  But initially the Gutenberg revo-
lution transformed the reading habits of only elite European society, not the
masses.  It took more than two centuries for the first popular novelÑPamela, bySamuel Richardson (1740)Ñto be printed, ushering in the era of books as massmedia, David said.There were difficulties concerning standards, concepts, and layout, and thebookÕs ultimate form was shaped by its development under a set of monopolyprivileges that had nothing to do with authorship, but rather protected an industry
that was unstable because of high first-copy costs, David said.  Predictably, the

monopolists focused on the luxury market, packaging books with bindings and
other expensive attributes. ÒIn that sense, they delayed the development as a massmedium, which could have been developed at an earlier stage using graphics,ÓDavid said.  ÒGraphics was available, and there was a market for it.  Cheap books
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEwere available, too, but the market structure . . . that existed pushed it in adifferent direction.ÓThe evolution of printing hinged on technical progress in various trades;these advances set the stage for eventual exploitation of the small market that had
created the culture of the manuscript book.  Developments in the linen industry

provided an inexpensive paper medium, and advances in optics made reading
glasses possible for the far-sighted.  The practice of metallurgy was affected as

well, because GutenbergÕs invention essentially signaled a breakthrough infoundry work and processes, David said.Finally, the Venetian aristocracy promoted development of the printed bookby underwriting and financing the work, coping with related political problems,
and using books for government publications.  ÒThey developed the book togovern what was VeniceÕs growing empire, as an aid in that as well as in pursuitof a set of humanistic values which were embodied in the culture of the book,ÓDavid said.USING THE TECHNOLOGYThe nature of the content and the delivery system will evolve more or lesstogether, in the context of the ways in which they are used.  Games and education

capture two ends of the spectrum and yet are increasingly discussed as elements
of common applications.Games, Play, and LifeThe growth in the popularity and profitability of electronic games has in-spired interest from many quarters.  Indeed, cable industry moguls John Malone

and Ted Turner have speculated publicly that games may be an ideal vehicle for
encouraging consumers otherwise accustomed to passive television watching to
become more interactive users of TV (Lippman, 1993).  A variety of entrepre-

neurs have begun to find business opportunities in the new means and mecha-
nisms for play, providing striking echoes to the scholarly description by Huizinga
(1950):Summing up the formal characteristics of play, we might call it a free activitystanding quite consciously outside ÒordinaryÓ life as being 
Ònot serious,Ó but at
the same time absorbing the player intensely and utterly.  It is an activity con-

nected with no material interest, and no profit can be gained by it.  It proceeds
within its own proper boundaries of time and space according to fixed rules andin an orderly manner.  It promotes the formation of social groupings which tend

to surround themselves with secrecy and to stress their difference from thecommon world by disguise or other means. (p. 13)Interactive games and services delivered over computer and other networksKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS57expand the potential beyond that offered by stand-alone game platforms.  Ad-
vanced information technologies allow individuals who have never met, who are
separated by thousands of miles, to get to know each other.  For example, many

students use the Internet to participate in Multi-User Domains (MUDs), virtual
communities that were designed initially as sophisticated role-playing games.
Since the first MUD program was written in 1980,19 several hundred similar
games have been developed based on various concepts, such as the television
program Star Trek: The Next Generation.  Researchers and scientists also are
becoming interested in these communities.As identity workshops for issues related to control and mastery, MUDs canserve a therapeutic purpose, according to Sherry Turkle, who called the phenom-
enon a Òdeadly seriousÓ game world, 
Òprecisely because they are not simpleescapes from the real to the unreal, but because theyÕre betwixt and between,theyÕre both in and not in real life.Ó  Turkle has argued that a computer is like a
Rorschach test20 in allowing for projections of the self, but that the computer goes
even further than a standard psychological test because it is part of daily life.
Extending this metaphor, virtual communities not only enter into daily life, but
can also become daily life, because unlike conventional games, they do not havean end-point.  Explained Turkle:
The boundaries are more fuzzy.  The routine of playing them becomes part of
their playerÕs real lives.  Such blurring of the boundaries between role and self
presents new opportunities to use the role to work on the self, and not the least
of these is the opportunity to play an aspect of yourself that you embody as aseparate self in the game space.Thus, virtual communities extend the potential value of role-playing games byblurring the line between the game and the real world, she said.In the Star Trek MUD, more than 1,000 players spend up to 80 hours a week
engaging in intergalactic exploration, creating new roles for themselves, and
interacting with others.  A player explained the attraction of the game to Turkle:
You can be whoever you want to be, you can completely redefine yourself ifyou want.  You can be the opposite sex.  You can be more talkative.  You can
be less talkative, whatever.  You can just be whoever you want really, whoever

you have the capacity to be.  You don
Õt have to worry about the slots otherpeople put you into as much.  ItÕs easier to change the way people perceive youbecause all they have is what you show them.  They don
Õt look at your body andmake assumptions.  They don
Õt hear your accent and make assumptions.  All
they see is your words . . . .The situation is a little more complex, since through grammar and diction wordscan be quite revealing, yet there is evidence that at least among school children
the desire to present the best appearance to oneÕs peers can promote greaterattention to writing skills (CSTB, 1994b).The MUD experience has transformed Peter, an isolated physics graduateKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEstudent whose life revolves around his work, Turkle said.  Peter never has trav-
eled.  MUDs offer him an opportunity to interact with people, travel, and create

an ideal self.  ÒHis favorite MUD is actually located on a computer in Germany.He calls this travel.  It
Õs from MUDs that Peter has learned what he knows ofpolitics, economics, and the differences between capitalism and welfare state
socialism . . . the room [space] he inhabits on the MUD is elegant, romantic, out
of a Ralph Lauren advertisement.  Beyond expanding his social reach, MUDs

have brought Peter the only intimacy and romance he has ever known.ÓIn a larger cultural context, such role playing provokes examination of notonly individual identity, but also cultural identity.  Using MUDs, Turkle said,

 Ò. . . people are exploring, constructing, and reconstructing their identities.  They
are rethinking social issues about gender, about privacy, about property, and
about what constitutes legitimate authority in a community.ÓThe MUDs, their parallels in computer group gaming, and virtual realitytechnologies doubtless provide a unique and invaluable laboratory for social
psychologists.  This utility comes at a price, however.  Unlike the withdrawal into

the interior, reflective world of the book, the new environments vastly amplify
their effects.  As systems become more refined, complex, and compelling, their

explorers enter terra incognita.  Some of the less stable pioneers may become

addicted or, as biologists say, Òlost to the gene poolÓ (O
ÕNeill, 1995).  Indeed,
one incident that generated media and cyberspace attention involved the suicide
of a young man who immersed himself in electronic network environments,
environments that close observers maintained had sustained rather than alienated
him.21  More recently, attention flowed to a situation in which network users were
able to mobilize assistance from afar to avert a suicide (Bowles, 1994).Turkle underscored how rich the concept of digital games really is:Sometimes, this dismissive notion of Òall theyÕll do is play gamesÓ [ignores the
fact that these are] a very serious and, in many ways, very constructive kind ofgame. . . .  [What] I
Õm describing is a mixture of the creation of text, thecreation of literature, and programming.  It really is the first best example that
IÕve ever seen of [the] potential for an entertaining crossing of the two-culturedivide.  People who are working in these worlds need to create objects with the

programming language and also create text as they work.  Many of them are
kids.  They are learning by building objects
ÑtheyÕre actually learning to con-struct and make thingsÑwhich is the best way to learn.  They
Õre forming com-munities of people with whom they remain in contact, often breaking theiranonymity and finding another setting.  So, if you allow this revolution to reach
people, theyÕre going to do what kids enjoy:  at this point, what gives people joy
is communicating with other people.The social dimension of interacting over a network and the combined entertain-ment and educational value of that interaction were recurring themes in late-1994
interviews with Esther Dyson, Stephen Case, Samuel Fuller, and David Nagel.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS59For example, Samuel Fuller of Digital Equipment Corporation commented on thevalue ofa distributed learning environment where a group of a dozen people could workon a topic, maybe moderated by a teacher, but where the content that is flowing
back comes from asking questions or responding to other questions, so that theyas a group of a dozen people begin to learn about a topic.In addition, the individual and group interactions that take place over networkshave important secondary effects.  Observed Nagel in another interview,
You are seeing new cultures, new forms of journals or magazines, which aredevoted to a growing, and I think an avant garde, subculture of people whospend a lot of time in what they refer to as cyberspace.  It
Õs becoming, in thesame way that MTV did a few years ago, . . . a general understanding among the
general population, even if they donÕt participate in it. . . .  The idea that it
Õs animportant phenomenon is becoming part of the popular culture.Entertaining EducationThe potential benefits of interactive multimedia in education are perhapsobvious, and colloquium participants were poetic about the possibilities.  Singer,

who developed entertainment programming concepts for virtual reality, foresees
breathtaking applications of this technology in education:  ÒImagine taking a tripthrough the brain, for example, for a group of surgical students.  A brain the size
of a cathedral, in the presence of a master surgeon or a master teacher . . . .Ó  Such
applications could be all the more stunning in an electronic theater, he has noted.
Progress toward this vision is under way with release for access via the Internet of
a three-dimensional, computer-generated body produced by the National Library
of MedicineÕs Visible Human Project (RSNA, 1994).  As Paul David said, just as
the printing press has done, multimedia learning environments will Òempowerindividuals, unlock worlds of knowledge, and forge a new community of ideas.ÓSee Box 3.1 on the benefits of interactive media.  Publishers, news services, cable

companies, software companies, and others have been experimenting with PC-
based, on-line, and broadcast multimedia programming for education, with mixed
success.On a broader level, several participants emphasized the promise of long-distance learning, which could bring the best teachers and latest techniques to
even the poorest districts.  The telephone and cable industries are involved in

interactive distance learning projects, as are various segments of the Internet
environment (state and regional networks, supercomputer centers, universities,
and so on).22Notebaert pointed to Ameritech projects as illustrations of the potential.  For
example, the SuperSchool traveling demonstration model involves more than 30
applications for education available through the public telecommunications net-Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEBox 3.1  The Benefits of Interactive Multimedia
Some interactive products permit the type of reflection and experimentationthat Donald Norman describes.  A successful purveyor of this approach is the
Voyager Company, which has published electronic books, plays, and music on
CD-ROM and movies on optical video disk.  Managing partner Robert Stein focus-
es on the Òexperience that is developed for the reader or user in conjunction withthe author,Ó rather than on the nature of the medium.Interactive multimedia offers a number of advantages over conventional media,according to Stein:¥It allows the user to 
experience history.  Voyager
Õs CD-ROM version of aU.S. history book adds approximately 5,000 original documents to the basic text,along with audio, video, and animated graphics. History books are essentially a
filter of the authorÕs analysis of original documents, Stein said, whereas CD-ROMprovides for a dialogue with the author and Òallows the reader to become muchmore of a participant in the process of history.Ó  Of course, CD-ROM does not
eliminate biases.¥It can further understanding of cinematic history.  Voyager
Õs optical diskversion of the BeatlesÕ movie 
A Hard DayÕs Night contains added material such asfilm outtakes, script excerpts, background information on songs, and profiles of thecast and crew.¥It can attract a new audience to an old art form.  Voyager
Õs interactive ver-sion of Macbeth allows the user to play a chosen character
Õs role, a karaoke fea-ture that could make ShakespeareÕs play come alive for reluctant readers.  Similar-
ly, a CD companion to BeethovenÕs Symphony No. 9 allows music students toexperience and learn by ÒbrowsingÓ through the composition, repeating sections
as desired and calling up information about particular instruments.work, including distance learning classes between the United States and theMontreal World Trade Center, a user-controlled weather laboratory featuring a
thunderstorm simulation, a computer-simulated voyage through the human body,
and a homework hotline.23  Another project, ThinkLink, connects the classrooms
of 115 Michigan fourth-graders to their home television sets via fiber-optic
cables.24  Ameritech has an agreement with the school district to procure pro-
gramming, schedule it, and package it; local teachers select the programs, such as
a drama series on solving math problems (Ameritech, 1993a).25  Observed
Notebaert, ÒItÕs hard for me to accept the fact that children go to school today ina 19th-century classroom and then go home to Music Television (MTV), which I
think is far more entertaining and educational, although on the wrong end.ÓExpanding on that concern, Donald Norman, a cognitive scientist who is anApple Fellow, warned that the MTV model is not entirely appropriate for educa-
tion, in that television programming and advertisements are divided into very
small segments so as to retain viewersÕ attention.  
ÒThe experiential mode ofthinking that this creates, I think, is the opposite of the reflective mode, which isKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS61what is required for new thoughts. What I am afraid of, as we merge theseindustries, is that this fun and enjoyment of the experiential mode might tend to
dominate and take over from the reflective mode,Ó he said.  The ease with whichmultimedia can incorporate recreation and fun into educational material is well
established, but that capability may not be an unequivocal benefit.  Educational

applications should be longer term and deeper in substance than entertainment
applications.ÒMTV is a good model for the entertainment industry, but school isnÕt meantto be entertaining; itÕs meant to be educational, profound, and deep,Ó Norman
said.  ÒItÕs meant to allow people to reflect and to experiment.Ó  BET
Õs Johnsonpointed out that ÒedutainmentÓ is not new
Ñthere were occasional instances in1950s and 1960s television programmingÑbut that the new media are fosteringmore of this kind of programming.  Norman explained that what is at issue is how

capabilities presented by new technologies are selected and used:This is not really a statement for or against technology.  This is a statement
about the ease of doing something with one technology that may drive out other
things.  We know that we can create technologies that lead to reflection and we
saw a wonderful example at the prior lunch demonstrations.  Robert Winter
Õsdemonstration of a music program, which allows you to reflect, to compare, to
play this segment of music and play that segment of music and go back andforth and compare and contrast them, and to count the rhythms and watch thescore and to read an analysis is a kind of reflective medium that comes out of
that technology.  What I
Õm trying to argue for is that when we develop ourtechnologies, we worry a lot about what they make possible, whether it is easyto do and whether it is hard to do.  What I
Õm afraid of is that we will be tooeasily driven to a machine-centered view and to this experiential view.Several speakers argued that, if distance learning is to be successful, entirelynew approaches must be developed.  Notebaert explained that new media drive

the need for new approaches:  ÒWe are currently working with Indiana Universityin teaching distance learning in Indiana.  The professors that are doing the course

development, the curriculum, have had to go back to school using what the
entertainment industry already knows and redefine the content and the methodol-
ogy for delivering the content in this different medium.Ó  This teaching method
can have a remarkable effect, he said.  ÒEach student is then able to interact at hisor her own pace and own speed, so those kids that normally would have been
called hyperactive, all of a sudden we find being different individuals,Ó he said.
Similar explorations are being applied to adult education and (re)training.26Another factor creating a need for new networks may be the increasingemphasis on visual material.  In a late-1994 interview, Janice Obuchowski ex-

plained,People are reacting much more to the visual than to the textual.  You see that inthe declining readership of newspapers.  That is very much a generational thing
. . . .  In fact, IÕve heard it said that video has become the language of the home.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEThatÕs going to present a real challenge to teachers.  They
Õre going to need tocommunicate more visually.  At the same time, they
Õre going to have to per-suade their students that thereÕs still some value in something other than thatmore right-brained visual response.  To make it in a highly competitive world
economy, you have to be analytical, you have to be literate, you have to benumerate and some of that doesnÕt get learned just visually.Despite the emergence of the technical capabilities, however, it is not clearwhether they will necessarily resolve the motivational issues that underlie reflec-
tion and learningÑand that drive the markets for the goods and services thatembody these capabilities.  Educational experts have noted, for example, that the

supply of good software and other content materi”l for computer- and communi-cations-based education remains limitedÑthere are lots of products, but the qual-ity is often disappointing.  Moreover, the relatively limited penetration of per-

sonal computers into both homes and schools and the difficulties experienced by
educators in incorporating computer- and communications-based technologies
into schools underscore the fact that a range of financial, cultural, programmatic,
administrative, and technical hurdles must be overcome for these technologies to
achieve the potential envisioned by Gilder and others (CSTB, 1994b).  As Johnson

observed, the profit remains in the business market, which serves sophisticated
customers willing and able to pay for new technologies; the pace of implementa-
tion in education will continue to be slow, reflecting the existing technology base
and limited availability of funds.Winter of UCLA, who developed the Beethoven CD with Stein, was enthu-siastic about the new technology, asserting that, while education is indeed a
matter for Òserious, profound, and deeply appropriateÓ work, it is also true that
children learn by having fun.  The traditional method of teaching novices to read
music is about as captivating as giving a beginning swimmer Òa lecture on fluiddynamics,Ó Winter said.
WinterÕs goal is to attract new customers, Òpeople who absolutely hated highculture, who hated Beethoven. . . .  I think this technology, in a sense, is a way of

getting new customers for whatever youÕre doing . . . .  We
Õre hearing Beethovenor Stravinsky or Dvorak or anybodyÕs music in ways they couldnÕt hear it.ÓNOTES1.Samuel Fuller, Digital Equipment Corporation, late-1994 interview, character-
izing a late-1993 new product line launch.2.A doctor can fill out a generic insurance form, for example, which the software
translates into the particular form required by the patientÕs insurance company.  The
system is expected to improve patient care and to reduce paperwork generation and ad-ministrative training needs.  Administrative costs have been reduced by over 19 percent,
according to Notebaert.  Information concerning WHIN was drawn from Notebaert
Õspresentation at the colloquium as well as Ameritech (1993b,d).Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS633.The cable television industry also is involved in the health care arena.  For
instance, nursing students and faculty members in Idaho can watch live surgery underway at a local clinic on a cable system originally designed to broadcast college basketball
games; the students also can ask questions of the operating team.  See NCTA (1993b).
4.Approximately 800 hours of cinema production compare to some 8,000 hours
of television production in Hollywood (Flaherty, 1993).5.Reed Reference Publishing, New Providence, New Jersey, personal communi-
cation, November 8, 1993.6.Some research has provided examples of TV-linked increases in violence
(Kristol, 1994).7.This concern must be considered within the current context of extreme
intergenerational conflict.  While it always has been true that the primary injunction for

younger generations seems to be to agitate and defy the establishment, contemporaryvariations on this theme suddenly make the game meaner-spirited (imagine interactiveÒgangster rapÓ) and oddly disquieting.  The cacophony not only has turned nasty but also
suggests a questioning of values hardly seen since the years of the flower children and theVietnam War.  For instance, a popular rap song encourages murder of the police; a
syndicated cartoon show, Beavis and Butthead, has incited mimetic behavior resulting insuicidal arson and delivers its enormously popular message in a form seemingly ÒdumbeddownÓ to witlessness; and within a two-week period the three major television networks
broadcast competing versions of the same murderous teen-aged sexpotÕs Òreal lifeÓ story.
The principal changes in moral values and particularly in pop culture across the last halfcentury may be less fundamental than the result of a confluence of symbiotic phenomena.These phenomena are readily identifiable.  Also consider the very real cultural chasm

between age groups. The propensity of successively younger age cohorts to live increas-
ingly in electronic environments accentuates the erosion of cross contact between agegroups:  12-year-olds cannot make contact with 16-year-olds, who have little in common
with 20-year-olds.  Clearly, the familiar 25-year generation separation is splintering into

shortened cycles of generational change, reflecting the shortened cycle of technologydevelopment.  Older forms of expression are beleaguered and seem ill-suited to the times.
The discourse sometimes seems to be in an unfamiliar tongue, given the profound im-
pending cognitive change in the way humans think about and use language (see Lanham,1993).8.See Schwartz (1993); CSTB (1994c).

9.The material in this and the next paragraph was drawn from Alexander Singer,
personal communications, February 1994.10.In March 1995 St. Martin (Caribbean)-based Internet Casinos Inc. announced
plans to launch a casino accessible through the World Wide Web by mid-1995 (IISR,1995).11.Video game cartridges will be rated by the Interactive Digital Software Asso-
ciation, and PC software and CD-ROM games will be rated by the Software PublishersAssociation (Farhi, 1994).12.At the major computer trade show Comdex in 1993, hundreds of new software
titles were on display, moving beyond early generation of reference books to includechildrenÕs games and X-rated items.  ÒOne Japanese computer dealer, who asked that hisname not be used, said it appears that pornography may be the long-awaited ÔkillerÕapplication that will spur the sale of CD-ROM drivesÓ (Lewis, 1993a).
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEÒÔIn the privacy of their own home, people will try things and do things that theywould never be caught dead going to an adult bookstore for,Õ said Howard Rheingold,
author of Virtual CommunityÓ (Garreau, 1993).  Interactive entertainment over a network
has unique properties: ÒComputer sex has obvious similarities to 900-number phone sex,not to mention magazine sex.  But this new medium is also quite different.  After all,
these are real people finding each other in cyberspace, not a paying customer calling a
professional.Ó13.There are several legal issues associated with the evolving national information
infrastructure (NII), such as privacy, security, free speech, and intellectual property rights.
Considerable attention was paid to these issues in 1994, through the administrationÕsInformation Infrastructure Task Force and its Information Policy Committee and throughcongressional hearings.14.Disney, for example, is noted as recognizing the value of its copyrights for
creative content as a critical asset, one giving it relatively high levels of flexibility; seeTurner and King (1993).15.Personal communication with Minna Taylor, Fox Broadcasting Company, Oc-
tober 10, 1994.16.See Dreier (1993); Dreier is department head at the Max Planck Institute for
Foreign and International Patent, Copyright and Competition Law in Munich.17.Alex Singer, personal communications, February 1994.
18.This analogy is drawn from Kapor (1993).

19.A brief history of MUDs can be found in Kelly and Rheingold (1993).
20.The Rorschach test, named for Swiss psychiatrist Hermann Rorschach, is a
personality and intelligence test in which a subject interprets inkblots.21.Ò[Nathaniel DavenportÕs father] eventually understood how some people havefound something so compelling in this on-line computer world that they have all butpulled up stakes and moved into cyberspace, paying little attention to what most of therest of us think of as real life.  And in the end, Davenport came to believe three things:

That computers did not kill his son.  That he had not known his son.  And that his son had
been a bold and gifted pioneer in something exciting and creative and scary and cool, astill-furtive revolution in art and expression . . .Ó (Schwartz, 1994).
22.An extensive listing of cable projects, including those related to the 
ÒCable inthe ClassroomÓ initiative, may be found in NCTA (1993c).
23.The applications have been used by students in Washington, D.C., and the
Great Lakes region (Ameritech, 1992, 1993f).24.The system is based on the 
Òvideo dial-toneÓ concept.  A switch in the neigh-
borhood telephone center feeds signals between the homes and the two schools; televi-
sions and computers are connected to data sources by high-speed telephone lines.  The
system includes a set-top box and special remote control unit and ÒmouseÓ pointing
device.25.Sixty-seven percent of the homes accessed the ThinkLink system at least 20
times during a two-week sample period; parents indicated the material not only has en-hanced their childÕs learning but also has allowed them to be more involved.  See
Ameritech (1993a,d) and Lashinsky (1993).26.In work settings, electronic training systems involve virtualizing tasks with
intensive use of simulation, and providing just-in-time knowledge and learning systems
(including groupware) to front-line workers (Perelman, 1993).Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.654Promoting Competitiveness:
Policy Issues and Obstacles
Digital convergence introduces new problems into the ongoing debates overinternational competitiveness, telecommunications policy reform, and the evolu-
tion of the information infrastructure.  Policymakers are challenged to balance

the different priorities, national interests, and legal and regulatory traditions of
the telecommunications, computer, and entertainment industries.  At the same

time, there is pressure on government to actÑboth to relax existing laws and
rules and to enact new onesÑbecause information technologies are evolving
more rapidly than ever before.Central to the policy debate are the prospects for an enhanced informationinfrastructure, which galvanized private- and public-sector attention during 1993-
1994.1  Legislative efforts during that period constituted the first major attempt
since passage of the Communications Act of 1934 to alter the goals and frame-
works for state and federal regulation and the constraints on business entry by
common carriers provided by the Communications Act of 1934 and the Modified
Final Judgment codifying the breakup of AT&T.2  Although telecommunications
reform legislation failed to pass in 1994, new legislation was introduced in 1995.
Contention about the specifics suggests that whatever legislation does pass will
launch a process in which various parties will seek to fix and fine-tune those
aspects that affect them.3Developments over the ensuing months indicate that comments at thecolloquium were symptomatic of the kinds of concerns being expressed in mul-
tiple forums.  They reflect the political process that has driven legislative efforts

to overhaul the legal and regulatory framework for telecommunications.  For

example, Samuel Ginn, speaking then as the head of a regulated common carrierKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVE(Pacific Telesis), was perhaps the most forceful in criticizing the constraints ontelecommunications firms, contending that Òpublic policy and regulatory policieswill be the most significant factor in determining whether these kinds of services
can be made available to the public, not technology.Ó  Ginn asserted that public
policy and regulation will be the most important factorÑand one of the toughestchallengesÑin making advanced information services available to all.  Similarly,
AmeritechÕs Richard Notebaert said government policy is the 
Òmajor speed bumpÓinhibiting the application of technology to solve societal ills.  Beneath these

general statements lie concerns about the mechanisms (e.g., delays and uncertain-
ties associated with multiyear proceedings) as well as the objects (e.g., ability to
enter certain markets, terms of participation in certain markets, and pricing con-
straints) of regulation.  Those concerns were aired universally in a series of late-

1994 interviews (Appendix C lists those interviewed), suggesting that between
1993 and 1995 both interest in market entry and concern about constraints had
grown among the various players in the digital convergence arena.Despite concerns about the impact of regulation on the cost and profitabilityof a given investment, comments by several participants suggest a broad recogni-
tion that absent government intervention, the owners of key capabilities control
timing and access.  Thus Ginn observed, 
ÒItÕs not clear to me, given the way themarkets are developing, that there is an opportunity here to serve all elements of
society unless you have intervention in terms of social policy.ÓThe proliferation of public interest advocacy groups in the 1993-1994 periodattests to a broadening concern about how the public policy agenda for informa-
tion infrastructure is being set and how various objectives are weighted when
decisions are made.  Yet another face on this concern was provided by the change

in the Congress with the 1994 elections.  This process of politicization also

reflects a recognition that the distribution of benefits from digital convergence
will vary over time:  costs come down and access can broaden over the long term.

The question raised by public interest advocates is, How long will and should be
the wait for mass access to technologyÕs benefits?  The question emphasized by
business is, Who pays to direct or accelerate receipt of benefits that do not derive
directly and naturally from the evolution of various markets?INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIVENESSBecause of leadership in the fundamental markets associated with it, digitalconvergence, in the judgment of the colloquium steering committee and other
observers, should contribute significantly to the economy and international com-
petitiveness of the United States.  U.S. companies lead the world in most aspects

of computing and communications technology and entertainment programming;
in addition, innovation-stimulating market competition is more prevalent in the
United States than in rival nations, and English increasingly is becoming the
international language of commerce and entertainment (Memmott and Maney,Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
671993).  David Nagel asserted that, despite recent erosion of U.S. dominance in
computers, ÒitÕs clear still that nearly all of the interesting innovations, both incomputing and in telecommunications, are being driven in the U.S. industrial
base.Ó  Whether this dominance is sustainable, Nagel said, depends on whether
U.S. firms have learned the lessons of the past and can apply and profit from their
own innovations.Entertainment adds a new and unknown variable to the mix:  it is seen as a
source of economic benefit to its purveyors, but unlike computing and communi-
cations tends not to be seen as an Òintermediate goodÓ or vehicle to broader
benefit except as an item of mass consumption.  There are therefore more as-

sumptions than facts when it comes to assessing entertainmentÕs contributions tocompetitiveness.  In a late-1994 interview, Peter Cowhey, formerly a professor of

international relations and political science at the University of California at San
Diego, noted that entertainment products are receiving more attention in trade
policy, with leaders in some countries showing growing concern about the preva-
lence and impact of U.S.-originated programming.  It may require explicit action,

he suggests, to point out and ensure that the expanding, advancing global infor-
mation infrastructure will provide capacity for distributing cultural outputs from
everyoneÑit is not an exclusive vehicle for distributing U.S. content, althoughglobal distribution outlets (of which Music Television may be a crude forerunner)
are likely to emerge, and it broadens the market for cultural outputs generally
(i.e., it makes the pie larger).A sister issue, notes Cowhey, is the issue of ownership of media.  Current
U.S. policy restricts foreign ownership of broadcast media to 25 percent,4 and
some countries are introducing reciprocal restrictions or program quotas to limit
U.S. entry, in particular.The National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA)also warned in a 1993 report that the United States Òcannot afford to be compla-cent about the success of U.S. media firms in international markets.  Recent

regulatory and technological changes require U.S. policy makers to continue to
adapt in order to promote the development of international mass media markets
that are open and competitiveÑthe type of markets in which U.S. firms histori-cally prosperÓ (NTIA, 1993).  The NTIA made a series of recommendations
designed to foster economic growth in the mass media industry, not only in the
United States but alsoÑbecause of the global nature of the industryÑworldwide.The United States has provided fertile ground for development and applica-tion of a number of services that provide a working foundationÑin the form ofcorporate learning and consumer familiarity and expectationsÑfor digital con-vergence.  As Michael Borrus has argued, technical progress depends on an

economyÕs potential for Òlearning by doing and by usingÓ (Borrus, 1993).  See
Box 4.1.  Use of digital technologies has not only benefited organizations and

individuals within the United States, but has also provided the basis for the
development of global enterprise, including global service industries that tap andKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEdeliver knowledge and talent wherever it resides or is needed (CSTB, 1992,1994a).  This phenomenon has itself resulted in a refocusing of trade policy and

trade negotiations on trade in and conditions for service industries as opposed to
physical product or commodity distribution.  Cowhey remarked on these devel-

opments in a late-1994 interview:Digital technology made it possible to start thinking about global service enter-prises. . . .  A bank in Cleveland can be a bank in Tokyo.  So the digital
revolution allowed services to imagine themselves to be global enterprises, andnow the trade negotiators are starting to say that means we have to integrate and
liberalize these markets and bring them together.  A second great revolution is
that trade negotiators are now tackling the problem of foreign investment rights,and starting to bring some notion of what are minimum rights of foreign invest-
ment.  And in turn that means that these high-technology enterprises start to be
able to define the fact that yes, I can go to my customers, and yes, I can find away of bringing my technologies to bear in your market by being on the ground
and seeing what people need.Box 4.1  Contributions of Business-oriented
Network-based ServicesSeveral successful, highly profitable on-line services (legal, financial, and med-ical) serve professionals and specific industries (e.g., computerized reservation
systems (CRSs) in air transport).  CRSs have dramatically improved the efficiency,
speed, and effectiveness with which travel agents can make and change reserva-tions, and they have improved load and resource management for the airlines.
They are also increasingly accessible to individual consumers for direct reserva-tion transactions.800-number services now generate about $10 billion per year for telecommuni-cations companies; they constitute a major portion of long-distance telephone net-work traffic during certain hours, are profitable, and are growing.  Almost everyone
uses them to make reservations, to order merchandise, and to contact the custom-
er service organizations of providers of goods and services.  900-number services,
which tend to be more entertainment-oriented, are also a large and profitable busi-ness, as are automated voice response systems.All of these information systems are enabled by the convergence of computersand communications, and sometimes entertainment as well:  the customized call-
processing in 800-number service is enabled by complex computer systems; inter-
active voice response systems (for inquiries about an account, to change invest-ment options in a 401(k) account, to issue a buy or sell order for securities, and soon) involve consumer use of touch-tone pads to communicate upward to a server,
which communicates downward with synthetic speech.  Although these systems
use a different set of multiple media, they are completely analogous to using akeyboard on a terminal to communicate upward, and the display on the terminal tocommunicate downward from the server.  The apparently large and growing eco-
nomic impact of these on-line services provides a basis for expecting growth in
other services combining various computer- and communications-based media.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
69Cowhey noted that the large and diverse installed computing base has led toan artificially large U.S. lead in digital convergence.5  He observed that it is
reasonable to expect greater diffusionÑand associated benefitsÑof personal
computers and other systems in at least the industrial nations.  Moreoever, ex-

plained Fuller in another interview, ÒBy its very nature, an information utility oran internetwork will be global as well as national in scale, and issues of geogra-
phy will become less important.Ó  As Cowhey noted, the 1993-1994 public state-
ments of President Clinton and Vice President Gore focused attention on infor-
mation infrastructure across the industrialized world, making it folly to assume
that only the United States would place emphasis in that area.  Indeed, the 
ÒG7Óindustrial countries held their first ministerial summit devoted to a single industry
when the European Union hosted the February 1995 ÒG7 Ministerial Conferenceon the Information Society.Ó  The European Union particularly championed the
event in order to build political support for European regulatory reforms neces-
sary to catch up with the United States.  Box 4.2 lists 11 multinational pilot

projects agreed upon at the G7 summit, which also resulted in agreement on
several high-level principles:6¥Promoting fair competition;¥Encouraging private investment;¥Defining an adaptable regulatory framework; and¥Providing open access to networks while¥Ensuring universal provision of and access to services;¥Promoting equality of opportunity to the citizen;¥Promoting diversity of content, including cultural and linguistic diversity;and¥Recognizing the necessity of worldwide cooperation with particular at-tention to less developed countries.European nations have recently moved to launch their own video-on-demandtrials, often drawing on U.S. technology.  The cable television business is more

advanced in the United States than elsewhere:  U.S. firms are supplying cable

equipment and programming worldwide.  Further, as George Gilder observed,

ÒNo other country in the world has broadband connections to 60 percent of homesor passing 90 percent of its homes.Ó  Although there have been publicized in-
stances of high-level capabilities in specific locations overseas, the actual aver-
age capability available to almost all households appears higher in the United
States than elsewhere.  On the other hand, foreign suppliers of consumer and

other electronics, such as Thomson Consumer Electronics, are a significant pres-
ence in the U.S. market.  Although slower European progress has been attributed

to the high cost of installing high-bandwidth communications facilities, advances
in data compression and other technologies for more fully exploiting copper wire
and advances in computer systems have been cited as encouraging EuropeanKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEBox 4.2  G7 Project Matrix
Theme AreaMain Project Objective
Global inventoryTo create and provide an electronically accessible
multimedia inventory of information regarding major
national and international projects and studiesrelevant to the promotion and the development ofthe global information society.  An assessment of

social, economic, and cultural factors impacting onits development will also be undertaken.Global interoperabilityTo facilitate the establishment of international links
for broadband networksbetween the various high-speed networks and
testbeds supporting advanced applications.Cross-culturalTo provide innovative approaches to language
education and traininglearning, in particular for students and for small and
medium enterprises.Electronic librariesTo constitute from existing digitization programs a
large distributed virtual collection of the knowledgeof mankind, available to the public via networks.This includes a clear perspective toward the
establishment of a global electronic library networkthat interconnects local electronic libraries.Electronic museumsTo accelerate the multimedia digitization of
and galleriescollections and to ensure their accessibility to the
public and as a learning resource for schools anduniversities.Environment and naturalTo increase the electronic linkage and integration of
resources managementdistributed databases of information relevant to the
environment.efforts.  Moreover, cellular telephony has spread relatively rapidly in Europe,
aided in part by agreement on a supporting standard (GSM).Tempering the discussion of competitive advantage and disadvantage, Borrussuggested that evolving international business relationships may become more
complex and cooperative.  He noted that the United States controls the 
ÒsoftÓ side
of the electronics industryÑfrom design, architecture, and marketing to softwareand systems integrationÑbut that key hardware technology and manufacturingactivities have been migrating to Asia.  ÒNo one geographic region, and certainlyno individual company, has all of the necessary know-how to develop this next
generation of electronic systems,Ó Borrus said.  Yet the persistence of U.S. lead-ership in software and U.S. reliance on offshore manufacturing raise questionsKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
71about what trends and indicators are most reliable.  Moreover, it may be that
digital convergence represents an opportunity to reclaim areas lost to foreign
competitors, such as consumer electronics, to the extent that such areas become
more computer-like.Eli Noam has said that international asymmetries hamper the global systemof systems, which will function effectively only if it is competitive at each stage,
and if regulation establishes nondiscrimination.  At present, the information in-

frastructure stands at uneven levels of development in technology and policy
across the globe; most countries still have an established monopoly communica-
tions provider, and outside of the United States monopoly remains the dominant
communications paradigm.  Government policies and limited competition abroad
Global emergencyTo encourage the development of a global
managementmanagement information network to enhance the
management of emergency response situations,
risks, and knowledge.Global health careTo demonstrate the potential of ÒtelematicsÓ
applicationstechnologies in the field of telemedicine in the fight
against major health scourges; to promote jointapproaches to issues such as the use of data cards,
standards, and other enabling mechanisms.Government on-lineTo exchange examples of experience and Òbest
practiceÓ in the use of on-line information technologyby administrations in establishing procedures forconducting electronic administrative business
between governments, companies, and citizens.Global marketplace forTo contribute to the development of an environment
small and mediumfor open and nondiscriminatory exchange of
enterprisesinformation and to demonstrate the interoperability of
electronic and information cooperation and trading
services on a global scale for the benefit of smalland medium enterprises.Maritime InformationTo integrate and enhance environmental protection
Systemsand  industrial competitiveness for all maritime
activities by means of information andcommunication technologies, including applicationsin the area of safety and the environment, intelligent
manufacturing, and logistics networks.SOURCE:  Matrix reproduced from a document found on the World Wide Web at
http://www.ispo.cec.be (EC Information Society Project Office Webserver) underG7 Information Society Conference category and 
Key Documents subcategory.
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEmay be a greater impediment than available technology; certainly, those factorshave limited both deployment and experimentation with computing and commu-
nications technologies in the past, to a far greater extent than have policies in the
United States.  Telecommunications reform is emerging in many countries

(Hudson, 1994; Lavin, 1995), and considerable discussion has surfaced over the
desirability of more market-oriented regimes (Bangemann et al., 1994).In a late-1994 interview, Cowhey seemed to anticipate the 1995 ÒG7 Minis-terial Conference on the Information SocietyÓ by describing the importance of
policy relating to broad social objectives as a factor in the international competi-
tiveness dynamic:Now Europe, for example, has been very strong in emphasizing public servicethrough the digital technologies, but theyÕve been weaker on benefiting fromcompetition, and theyÕre trying to change their mix today.  And if the Europe-
ans get the mix right and we donÕt, then they may become the model for the restof the world. . . .  The United States has to show that this digital revolution does

speak to larger concerns about making schools work, making hospitals work,and making it possible for people to share in the benefits of information tech-nology, not just in New York, and Washington, D.C., and London, and Tokyo,
but also in the many poorer countries of the world.Borrus also pointed to the need to address international asymmetries in tech-nology access.  He has warned that the U.S. supply base is likely to be more

accessible to foreign rivals than is the Japanese market, and that software skills
and technology can be appropriated more easily than can manufacturing compo-
nents and expertise (Borrus, 1993).  Borrus outlined the problem of how to assure

equitable access to both U.S. and foreign companies.  It is easy to invest in a U.S.

company and thereby gain access to know-how,7 but very difficult to gain similar
access to a Japanese company, for example.  The Japanese have discriminatory

public procurement policies (COC, 1993), and their keiretsu system of business
alliances establishes preferential sales, supply, and capital allocation arrange-
ments that impede market access by new entrants.8  Also, there are far fewer
publicly held companies in Japan (2,000 as of 1987) than in the United States
(24,000; Gerlach, 1992).  Borrus anticipated a shift in U.S. trade policy to deal

with the access problem.  Experiences in the semiconductor arena illustrate the

possibilities; see Box 4.3.  In pursuing open markets worldwide as a trade policy
objective, suggests Cowhey, the United States must attend to concerns in other
countries that they not open their markets at a point in time when the United
States appears to be closing its own.Another, more perplexing problem, according to Borrus, is to identify theforeign technologies and know-how that should reside in the United States, and to
find ways of moving them here.  An example is flat panel displays, used in

applications such as laptop computers.  Flat panel displays were invented in the

United States over 35 years ago, but Japanese companies now control over 95
percent of the burgeoning $3.5 billion market and outspend U.S. firms on displayKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
73research by more than 20 to 1.  Various means have been explored for strengthen-
ing the U.S. base in display technologies.  ÒDumpingÓ duties were imposed on
imported Japanese displays in 1991, but that trade policy has had mixed results.
The Advanced Research Projects Agency launched a research initiative to pro-
mote innovation.  A broader approach may be called for.  However, the Republi-

can congressional leadership has expressed strong doubts about such programs,
worrying that they constitute little more than subsidies for large electronics firms.Symmetrical international access to technologyÑincluding increased U.S.access to certain technologiesÑwill not emerge unaided.  There is no unanimity
on the precise mix of policy.  For example, Gilder has criticized the semiconduc-

tor agreement praised by Borrus.  But Borrus captured the terms of the policy

discussion when he wrote that trading blocs need Ò(1) to agree on a set of prin-ciples that endorse reciprocal access to regional markets, investment opportuni-
ties, and supply base technologies; (2) to negotiate for tangible results that miti-
gate the disruptive impacts of domestic practices that violate agreed norms of
behavior; and (3) to develop new multilateral institutions for coordinating bilat-
eral regional movesÓ (Borrus, 1993).
Cowhey has noted that trade pacts have limited effect, in part because somuch of world commerce is now determined by investment flows and global
production strategies of multinational firms.  This has heightened the importance
Box 4.3  Semiconductors and Trade Policy
The United States relies on foreign suppliers for some computer hardware com-ponents, such as dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) computer chips.*  The
semiconductor chip was invented some 30 years ago in the United States, but in
the mid-1980s Japan gained a majority share of the global semiconductor market,and U.S. companies were virtually eliminated from the critical DRAM market due toJapanÕs system of industrial organization and its dumping (below-cost sales) ofchips in the U.S. market (COC, 1993; Cowhey and Aronson, 1993).  In the U.S.-
Japan Semiconductor Arrangement of 1986 (renewed in 1991), Japan pledged toprevent dumping, to help U.S suppliers gain access to its markets, and that U.S.
firms would have 20 percent of the Japanese chip market by 1991.  In addition, the
U.S. government and industry cooperated to form the research consortiumSEMATECH.  Both of these approaches have had some success, and by the end
of 1992 the United States had regained its leadership in the global semiconductormarket, and Japanese firms were moving some of their production overseas (COC,1993; Cowhey and Aronson, 1993).*See Borrus (1993) for an accounting of gaps in the U.S. technology supply archi-tecture for components and U.S. dependence on foreign semiconductor equip-ment and materials.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEof emerging industrial alliances in international competition.  For example, IBMCorporation has established a joint factory with JapanÕs Toshiba using the latterÕsliquid crystal display technology, and the two companies are working with Si-
emens of Germany to develop an advanced (256-megabit) dynamic random-
access memory (DRAM) chip (Cowhey and Aronson, 1993).  Of particular sig-

nificance is the location of development teams at IBMÕs facilities in New YorkState.  Such alliances permit the development of common, global infrastructures

for technology development and allow firms to reduce the costs and risks of
producing extensive product lines, Cowhey has noted (Cowhey and Aronson,
1993).  National technology and trade policies, especially those for the informa-

tion infrastructure, have to be evaluated in light of their impact on these alliances
because much of the worldÕs information infrastructure will be developed bysuch alliances.How to design policies to stimulate innovation and promote competitivenessremains a subject of contention.  A Council on Competitiveness project recently

concluded that, if policymakers determine that U.S. development of a certain
technology is in the national interest, Òthen they must create an integrated, sys-tematic approach to the industry which includes capital market reform, the estab-
lishment of consortia, [and] support for the underlying technology infrastructure,
along with trade policyÓ (COC, 1993).  That report argues that policies to stimu-late technological innovation in the United States are a necessary complement to
trade policy.Unfortunately, achieving an integrated, systematic approach is elusive.  Ex-
perience in economics and industry suggests that chaos and conflicting efforts do
better.  The high-definition television (HDTV) situation, subject to a variety of

interpretations, is a case in point.  See Box 4.4.
One area where there appears to be consensus on the need for governmentaction is international aspects of intellectual property protection, a source of
growing concern as the information infrastructure becomes more global.  The

federal government has recognized the need for stronger intellectual property
laws worldwide and in recent years has promoted international standards in this
area.  For example, the United States joined the Berne Convention for the Protec-

tion of Literary and Artistic Works9 and has bargained with other countries
through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and other regional and
bilateral negotiations.  Since digital transmissions are increasingly global, and

since our evolving national information infrastructure is effectively part of a
global information infrastructure, some mechanisms will be needed to handle the
problem of differences among countries as to what constitutes a copyright in-
fringement.  For example, the concept of a parody as a fair use does not exist in

all countries.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
75Box 4.4  High-definition Television: A Case Study
The United States was a late entry in the high-definition television (HDTV) are-na.  Research on HDTV was initiated in the 1960s in Japan, where the first HDTVtransmissions and prime-time programming were offered (COC, 1993).  Even in

the late 1980s, the conventional wisdom was that an analog HDTV standard wouldbe pursued, until General Instrument Corporation demonstrated the potential for adigital approach (General Instrument unveiled the first all-digital system in 1990).
That development encouraged constructive engagement by the Federal Commu-nications Commission (FCC),* which established an industry-led and industry-funded advisory committee to evaluate competing HDTV standards (COC, 1993).
The Japanese standard was disadvantaged by the FCCÕs decision to try to getHDTV into 6-MHz channels to make it easier for the established broadcasters,earlier lukewarm toward HDTV, to play.The FCCÕs standards advisory committee began evaluating HDTV systems in1991; in 1993, JapanÕs system, acknowledged as inferior to the digital systems,was pulled from the competition, and the European Community indicated that it
probably would adopt the U.S standard (COC, 1993).  The three remaining elec-
tronics teams in the contest announced they would collaborate to produce a stan-dard system (COC, 1993).The saga of HDTV illustrates that government action may be perceived in dif-ferent ways.  The Program on Digital Open High Resolution Systems at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology has outlined two views of HDTV standards de-
velopment.**  The industry view is that the government refrained from either
subsidizing or designing HDTV technology, acting merely as an arbitrator in indus-trial development.  The alternate view is that the innovative U.S. proposals derive
from a government-industry partnership, in which agencies such as the Depart-ment of Defense*** support academic and other private research on underlying
technologies, such as image compression, high-speed computing, communica-tions, encryption, flat panel displays, and viewer requirements.  Relatively small
U.S. governmental research investments in fundamental computing and communi-
cations technologies have had large payoffs in the form of U.S. industry and com-petitive advantage (CSTB, 1995).*For example, the FCC established the standards evaluation group, required thatHDTV transmissions be compatible with existing television systems, and devel-
oped a timetable for the selection of a standard (without allocating new spectrum,thereby motivating video compression research).  Such actions stimulated the pri-
vate sector to attain world leadership in underlying technologies, such as digital
transmission (COC, 1993).**ÒAmericaÕs Approach to HDTV:  a Government-Industry Success Story,
Ó a paper
prepared in May 1993 by the MIT Program on Digital Open High Resolution Sys-
tems (DOHRS) for Rep. George Brown (D-CA), then chair of the House Space,Science, and Technology Committee.***Over a four-year period, the [Defense] Advanced Research Projects Agency
funded close to $300 million in research and development of high-resolution videodisplay, digital signal processing, and data compression technologies (COC,1993).Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEPUBLIC-PRIVATE TENSIONS ANDTHE INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTUREThe tension between cultivating an integrated approach and leveraging theunexpected fruits of competition and some degree of market chaos is epitomized
by policy debates relating to the evolving information infrastructure.An overview of the U.S. approach to managing digital convergence wasprovided by Cowhey.  The forces driving the domestic market are the pursuit of

profit, political opportunity, long-standing industrial and technological structures,
and cultural values, he said.Essentially, the American bet has been to ride the back of the rise of distributedintelligence and processing power, to break apart the traditional hierarchical
telecommunications networks, to distribute computing power, and to open upnew types of software avenues.That, in turn, led to a regulatory policy emphasis upon rewarding new entrantsin the market as a policy priority, emphasizing cost cuttingÑnot just simplybecause lower costs and lower prices are nice, but because it encourages grow-
ing use of the communications network.  Because use is sensitive to price,
lower prices have encouraged users to experiment with new ways to use newinformation services [and] new ways of getting interaction among these com-
peting computer and communications technologies.  Much of the most impor-
tant innovation comes from users, not producers, and this has proven a majorcompetitive advantage for the United States.Regulatory policy has also emphasized the idea that weÕll accept fragmentationamong the different pieces of the industry, although today weÕre all trying totalk to each other across these market segments.  What we have to recognize is

that one of the curses of AmericaÕs experimentation is that fragmentation of theindustrial structure makes it very hard to get technical cooperation in a poolingof efforts.But foreign rivals have their own difficulties, Cowhey said.  Europeans have
encouraged technical cooperation among producers to achieve early integration
of knowledge and effort. They have discouraged new entrants in the market and
have not encouraged price cutting.  The growth of interactive information indus-
tries is constrained by the slow changes in pricing and service practices of the
telephone companies, and hardware development is sluggish because networks
are providing the wrong types of incentives.  Japan, meanwhile, has introduced

some competition into its telecommunications industry, but the new telecommu-
nications carriers are owned by equipment suppliers and, to some extent, by their
large corporate customers.  Moreover, public policy still tilts toward subsidizing

equipment suppliers at the expense of users.  And regulators have not allowed the

dominant telephone companies to get into cable television.10  But even this bar-
rier may fall, as Bell Atlantic CorporationÕs progress in pursuing judicial andKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
77regulatory authorization to offer commercial video programming over its tele-phone distribution system attests (Landler, 1995; Carnevale, 1994).ÒWeÕre living through a great moment of experimentation here, and part ofour problem in making public policy is that itÕs not self-evident which bet isright,Ó Cowhey said.  Both the European Union and Japan decided in 1994 that
their approaches had to change.  The European Union required the introduction of

competition in voice telephone services by 1998.  Japan reformulated many

regulations that had hindered competition and actively debated breaking up NTT,
its dominant phone company.The United States also wrestled with changes in 1995.  It was trying once
again to legislate permission to allow the regional Bell operating companies,
cable systems, and long-distance carriers to enter each otherÕs markets.  It also
promised (in a speech by Vice President Gore at the 1995 summit of the G7) to
remove the 25 percent limit on foreign ownership of spectrum, a limit that the
foreign firms cited as a bar on their market access to the United States.  The Vice

President promised to achieve this goal by either legislation or regulation by the
end of 1995.  The one condition was that restrictions on foreign investment would

be removed only for countries that liberalize their own markets.  In short, this was

an offer to liberalize on a bilateral basis with like-minded countries.The same speech by the Vice President affirmed an even more sweepinggoal, that is, success in the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS)
trade negotiations on liberalizing basic (i.e., voice) telecommunications services
scheduled to conclude by April 1996.  If successful the GATS pact would make

true competition in telecommunications services into a binding trade obligation
for major industrial and some developing countries.  Such a pact was considered
unthinkable even 10 years ago.The promise of information infrastructure clearly depends on considerableinvestment by private parties.  At issue are not only competing technological and

business approaches, but also the degree to which facilities and services offered
by different parties can interoperate.  Technical features
Ñincluding those relat-ing to openness and symmetry in communications, equity in access to infrastruc-
ture, and who gets to enter what marketsÑare among the key issues that in-formed colloquium discussions and more recent debates.  These features have

figured in the development of regulatory reform legislation, and they are also at
the heart of initiatives relating to standard setting for voice, video, data, and
multimedia services as well as to the formatting and transfer of various kinds of
information and documents.  For example, the Cable Act of 1992 provided for

measures to foster greater compatibility between consumer electronic devices
and cable television systems, resulting in digital convergence-related standard
setting by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and industry.  Also,

the administration sponsored a mid-1994 workshop to identify key issues and
options for facilitating standards development.  But it is an open question as to

how far the government can or should go in promoting the kinds of standardsKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEneeded for digital convergence; its efforts are likely to focus on points at whichdifferent networks and other infrastructure come together.PERSPECTIVES ON REGULATIONColloquium participants suggested that government policies with respect todigital convergence should be guided by two general principles: first, that relax-
ation of traditional forms of regulation and increased market competition are
beneficial in general; and, second, that there will continue to be a need for
government intervention, but in different forms and areas than in the past.  For

example, many referred to growing (perceived) needs to protect intellectual prop-
erty rights and to ensure that those who control a conduit not have a monopoly on
the content that goes through it.  Behind such comments lies the recognition that
a growing portion of the investment in and returns on information infrastructure
relate to information or content.  Although most of the policy discussion reflected

conditions in the telecommunications industry in particular (and within that the
telephony component), many comments were relevant to information industries
in general.  On the other hand, there is little foundation in terms of regulation and

other legal constraints affecting entertainment technology, and possibly even less
constraining the computing industry.The first principle may be obvious, because the benefits of market competi-tion are well known.  Noam and Cowhey have documented, in separate papers

(Noam, 1995), the benefits derived specifically from the breakup of AT&T.
Noam, in an analysis of the accuracy of various predictions concerning deregula-
tion, has concluded that the doomsayers generally were wrongÑthat few benefitsattributed to the monopoly system were lost.  He found that proponents of de-

regulation were right more often than were pro-regulators, although liberalization
evoked new issues that have been addressed effectively by regulation.  In addi-

tion, Noam has concluded that the telecommunications sector is more dynamic
and innovative as a result of deregulation.Cowhey also has pointed to the benefits of liberalization, citing a number ofstatistics:  since the breakup of AT&T, long-distance service cost has declined

about 50 percent, the average household has seen a reduction in service costs, and
the productivity of telephone companies has climbed an estimated 40 percent, all
while these companies have introduced greater innovation in services and in-
creased flexibility for users (Cowhey, 1990).The second principleÑconcerning the changes in policy needsÑrequiresthorough exploration.  The breakup of telecommunications monopolies and the

emergence of new media are having two primary effects on the policy-making
landscape, Noam explained.  First, there is less need for regulation to balance the

power of small users facing giant, often monopolistic suppliers.  Second, price

and quality regulation also becomes less important as a systems integration in-
dustry emerges and begins to compete for consumers.11Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
79According to Noam, government should not react to this transformation bypicking favoritesÑthat is, by influencing or impeding change to favor any par-ticular technology or carrier.  Expanded Robert Johnson in a late-1994 interview,

even the best-intended government intervention can distort the market, interfer-
ing with market demand and entrepreneurial creativity.  Noam and others gener-

ally agreed that policymakers may need to promote rules of the road for the
Ònetwork of networks,Ó such as in interconnection and common carriage.
Policymakers need to assure access to scarce facilities that could become Òbottle-necksÓ in the marketplace, and they need to address international access asymme-
tries, he said.As noted earlier in this report, with the development of specialized networksand the evolving need for content-selection aids, the economics of basic carriage
become less attractive.  The real advantage to a network owner increasingly will

accrue from diversity in programming and services, and so there will be ex-
panded opportunities for niche marketing; a network owner will become, in
effect, a manager of a shopping mall, housing many Òboutiques.Ó12In their quest to enter new markets, telephone companies have contendedthat substantial traffic must be generated to justify the building of fiber networks,
that voice alone will not generate such volume.  The NTIA, in a 1993 report,

maintained that freeing telephone companies to provide cable programming
would stimulate competition in the video market and provide incentives for infra-
structure development, and, furthermore, any resulting increased demand for
video programming could stimulate international trade (NTIA, 1993).  Wildman

has argued that, given the substantial costs of desired network upgrades and the
nationÕs dependence on private investment to cover them, policy restrictions onthe business opportunities of information providers should be reduced.13  This is
the essence of the arguments advanced by telephone companies, although compa-
nies differ in their preferences for what restrictions are most critical to relax.14Foreshadowing if not encouraging recent legislative and rulemaking debates, the
NTIA had recommended relaxing restrictions on networks owning cable sys-
tems,15 common ownership of television stations and cable systems in the same
market,16 national multiple ownership,
17 and foreign ownership.  Its own interests
affected, the cable television industry contends that restrictions on cross-owner-
ship should be relaxed only if the Congress acts to repeal state laws barring cable
companies from providing telephone service.18Greater freedom for telephone companies may involve unbundling or pro-viding other service providers more direct access to basic network facilities and
service elements.  To that end, some have submitted proposals to the FCC and

state regulatory authorities for unbundling their networks.19  The theory behind
these proposals is that, by giving up their monopolies, regional telephone compa-
nies become deserving of entry into other markets, such as long-distance ser-
vices.  However, the technology of open data networking makes unbundling both

easier to achieve and economically more compelling than it has been, althoughKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEmost telephone companies may continue to resist ceding the control and revenuestreams historically associated with bundled service provision (CSTB, 1994b).
That is, the nature of the new technologies threatens to make traditional ap-
proaches to assessing infrastructure investments obsolete.Noted Noam, ÒPrivate carriers are now increasingly competing with com-mon carriers, and conversely, common carriers will increase and compete with
what private carriers do today.  Those [situations] require all kinds of new forms
of legal arrangements for dealing with traditional problems.Ó  Noam elaborated
on the underlying economics:. . . when [common and private contract carriers correctly] compete head tohead, one has to serve everybody indiscriminately in similar classes of custom-
ers at similar rates and the other one doesnÕt.  The one that has more flexibility
has an inherent advantage with all other things being equal.  You can price
people differently and, therefore, undercut for some customers, depending on
their price elasticity.  You can undercut the one that has to provide the same
price for everybody, particularly when you cannot prevent arbitrage.  Where
one cannot prevent arbitrage, but the other one can, you cannot, even if you
wanted to, have price discrimination because of the arbitrage issue.  Similarly,
if one has access rights to the other, but the other doesnÕt have access rights tothe first, then you have asymmetries of the kind that whenever a transmission
segment on the common carrier is cheaper, the private carrier will use it.  If it
Õsthe other way around, there is no access.  You add those two up plus three or
four other factors and again, all other things being equal, the common carrier
will have a problem.  So, either it goes out of business, which is unlikely, or the

common carrier obligation is being whittled away at the margin under the guiseof meeting competition and so on.  That is an effect that
Õs already been happen-ing in the long-distance field for large users where bargaining and negotiations
are taking place whatever the formal regulatory arrangement is.  So the alterna-
tives are to make private carriers common carriers, which is not realistic:  it
really means making every corporate, private network, every value-added ser-
vice provider into a common carrier.  You can also have some kind of a hybrid
arrangement of which you can think in terms of at least 8 or 10 different hy-brids.  That is likely to work for a while, but eventually, the same dynamics take

place.  The private is going to push out the common carrier here, too, so a
hybrid arrangement is not going to be a stable solution.  If that is the case, then
maybe common carriage as an institution in the long term is on its way out.In speculating on the need to change common carriage arrangements, Noamposited that most of Òthe policy goals behind common carriage, which are freeflow of information, limited liability, reduction of transaction costs, and a whole
bunch of other things . . .  will be taken care of in a competitive system of private

carriers. . . .  The ones that are not necessarily going to be taken care of involve

the free flow of information aspect.  That would then suggest not so much making

everybody a common carrier, but rather making sure that no carrier can discrimi-Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
81nate based on certain content criteria or some other long-term policy.  This would
be better than hanging on to the notion of common carriage per se.ÓClearly, the debates over advancing the national information infrastructureunderscore that development of nationwide networks will be very expensive; by
one estimate, the physical facilities alone could consume $422 billion over 20
years.20  In addition, the nation
Õs reliance on the private sector for infrastructureinvestments demands that both public and private facilities be addressed in na-
tional policies (Egan and Wildman, 1992).  Although volatile cost estimates

reflect political considerations and business maneuvers, and although concerns
have been raised about various risks, proponents argue that much of the invest-
ment would be made anyway,21 and that the payback to investors (let alone to
society generally) will be worth it.22Apart from its controversial price-capping strategyÑa relatively new ap-proach to the regulation of information industriesÑthe Cable Television Con-sumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 demonstrates to members of the
colloquium steering committee that Congress is often more amenable to retro-
spective ÒpoliceÓ work than to forward-looking action on communications issues
of the future.  The chilling effect on cable-related investments and alliances

ascribed to recent rate rollbacks is a cause for concern.  And yet, even the Cable

Act contained within it provisions that may have forward-looking impacts.  For

example, provisions relating to compatibility between cable service delivery and
consumer electronics (TVs, VCRs) could serve to promote greater interoperabil-
ity, notwithstanding industry concerns about specific mechanisms for doing so.Noam elaborated on several points.  The traditional telephone rate-subsidy
system23 will have to be restructured, he said, through some form of neutral
surcharge and a voucher mechanism as a replacement for the present myriad
pools, funds, and transfers.  Through a principle of Òthird-party-neutral intercon-nection,Ó a carrier could pick and choose its own customers, but it could not pick
its customerÕs customers.  This change will be brought on by increasing compe-
tition; providers will tend to compete for users who pay, and lower-revenue user
groups will be left with fewer options and, as a result, with increasing prices.
ÒThese transitions will be painful.  You
Õll hear from the losers, and [the transi-tion] would require, therefore, leaders,Ó Noam said.  Competition will increase
efficiency and hence reduce the magnitude of any subsidy, but it is not likely to
decline to zero.  Hence, we must reform the way it is being paid for, and reconcile

it with competition.  One idea, for example, is for every company providing

telephone service to contribute in proportion to its customer base.24Gilder, on the other hand, argued that the need for subsidies will disappearaltogether, because digital wireless technology will reduce cost disparities be-
tween rural and urban services.  This view is not universally accepted, given the

bandwidth limitations of wireless technology.  But Gilder
Õs optimism about avail-able bandwidth leads him to anticipate the obsolescence of the entire regulatory
and legislative structure that controls information services (Kelly, 1993).  In its
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEauctions of spectrum for personal communications services (PCS), the FCC de-signed the auction so that even rural regions will have at least five major cellular
and PCS providers.  This approach should speed investment and lower prices.
The issue of how to assure universal service in a competitive marketplacealso requires attention.  As the information infrastructure evolves, people have

begun to ask whether it will close or widen the gap between the rich and the poor.
The Clinton administration has said it is Òcommitted to developing a broad,modern concept of universal serviceÑone that would emphasize giving all Ameri-cans who desire it easy, affordable access to advanced communications and
information services, regardless of income, disability, or locationÓ (IITF, 1993, p.
8).  The progress during 1993-1994 of various new service trials, administration

policy statements and explorations through the Information Infrastructure Task
Force and the National Information Infrastructure Advisory Committee,25 and
legislative debates point to the difficulty of defining what it is that should be
universally available.  Mused Robert Johnson when interviewed,
Clearly there should be a level at which everybody should have access to theservice.  Now, access is different from ability to use.  Everybody can have

access to cable television, but should it be pay-per-view cable television, shouldit be 50 channels, or 100 channels, or should it be all the other things that goalong with it?  Should everyone have the shopping channel?  Should everyone

get a remote for each room?  You know, all of these things come into play when
you start talking about an entitlement.  I think the government should decide
that there should be an entitlement for a certain level of access, but beyond that
I think you get into trouble in deciding how much.It is difficult, for example, to identify what kinds of information may relate todifferent kinds of gaps in socioeconomic status; it is difficult to build a case for
mandating simultaneous access to a broad range of new services when experi-
mentation and exploration of what kinds of services will be most popular and
how costs can be optimized are still at early stages.26Borrus, more optimistic than Noam about the future of common carriage,suggested that different types of carriers be assigned different responsibilities:Maybe what weÕre talking about is different levels of obligation, different lev-els of performance requirements, privacy requirements and other things includ-
ing access to intellectual property based on the kind of network and service thatyouÕre providingÑproviders of physical networks being held to one standard,providers of virtual networks over physical networks to another standard.  At

the margins that runs into all the problems Eli talks about, but there are com-pensations for owning versus not owning, for managing and controlling a virtu-al [infrastructure] versus actually owning physical infrastructure.  This debate

has just begun.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
83 OTHER USEFUL ROLES FOR GOVERNMENT
Regardless of how policymakers seek to guide or control information indus-tries, the federal government can play a valuable role in promoting technological
progress in other ways.  In particular, colloquium participants stressed the effec-

tiveness of procurement policies in improving government efficiency and diffus-
ing new technologies throughout the economy.Noting that the federal government is a major force in technology develop-ment,27 Gilder suggested that government
Õs role in the digital convergence shouldbe that of an Òaggressive, forward-looking consumer,Ó purchasing the best pos-
sible technologies for interconnecting its supercomputer centers and other facili-
ties.  Such connections would maximize efficiency, according to Gilder, who has

contended that the government typically Òdiscovers a technology after its mo-ment is passingÓ (Kelly, 1993).  Gilder
Õs comments echo other discussions abouthow the effectiveness of the federal investment in the Internet, whose backbone
initially connected a variety of research and education facilities, contrasts with
other federal efforts to promote specific technologies for government use, such as
the Open Systems Interconnection protocol suite through the GOSIP federal
information processing standard.Borrus also has pointed to the influence of procurement policies.  In assess-
ing federal research and development (R&D) sponsorship in general, Borrus has
contended that direct federal support historically has been less important to the
success of commercial technology than have federal procurement and indirect
support, because the latter approaches have tended to diffuse new technologies
into widespread use.28  On the other hand, the administration
Õs National Perfor-mance Review (Clinton and Gore, 1993) and perennial efforts by adminstrations
and the Congress to improve procurement policy and practice attest to the fact
that procurement can be at best a blunt instrument.  Also, the blossoming of the

U.S. computer and communications enterprise provides evidence of the long-
term fruits of federal R&D support overall (CSTB, 1995).To further foster growth of the information infrastructure, Borrus suggestedthat policymakers consider how to stimulate experiments involving new tech-
nologies, configurations, and services, so that new applications and demand can
emerge to support further evolution of the network portfolio.  Similarly, Noam

suggested that the government provide seed money for demonstration projects, as
the National Science Foundation (NSF), the Advanced Research Projects Agency
(ARPA), and other agencies have done.  For example, NSF and ARPA contrib-

uted $15.8 million to the Gigabit Testbed program, which involved researchers
from universities, national laboratories, supercomputer centers, and telephone
and computer companies (CNRI, 1992).  More generally, several colloquium

participants identified the Internet as a working model for the type of experiment
the federal government could support.29  Experiments and demonstrations can
help overcome a basic obstacle to network development:  until a network is
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEestablished, its usefulness is difficult to prove, but a sponsor must pay for theproject first.  ÒSo you run into the catch-22 where you canÕt develop demand untilyouÕre willing to pay for the network, but no one is willing to pay for the networkuntil youÕve got some demand developed,Ó Borrus explained.
At the same time, Borrus noted, oversight is needed to Òpermit a kind of alogical infrastructure to emerge which would emphasize standards for access
interoperability between these various pieces of the network portfolioÑlevels ofprivacy, reliability, performance standards, and the likeÑbut which wouldnÕtdetermine the actual implementation of any of the networks themselves.Ó  The
National Cable Television Association (NCTA) has provided specific sugges-
tions along those lines, arguing that local telephone companies should be re-
quired to Òinterconnect their facilities with those of more specialized providers onreasonable and nondiscriminatory termsÓ (NCTA, 1993a).  NCTA also supports
a federal role in standards setting for networks and customer equipment, to en-
sure, for example, that computers and telephones can send and receive cable
signals and programming, as well as tax incentives to stimulate investment

(NCTA, 1993a).  The current fiscal climate makes it relative unlikely that tax

incentives will be initiated.  Moreover, whether and what kind of oversight is

possible to achieve logical connectivity and so on is a challenge at the heart of
public policy for advancing the information infrastructure:  it is a challenge that

many recognize but few can resolve to the satisfaction of the majority.Commercial activities in the Internet arena have built on contributions to thetechnology base through federal research programs (such as the High Perfor-
mance Computing and Communications Initiative) as well as development by
private enterprise.  However, competition, deregulation, and industry consolida-

tion appear to have reduced telecommunications industry R&D from what it was
in the heyday of AT&TÕs Bell Laboratories and in the early years of Bellcore.Thus Wildman has noted that U.S. telephone companies lag their foreign counter-
parts in R&D spending and patent activity (Egan and Wildman, 1992).30  The
combined forces of deficit-reduction pressures and a policy shift toward applica-
tions may constrain federally funded research in related technologies.  Any slow-

down in research would be particularly troubling now, because integrating di-
verse systems to evolve the nationÕs information infrastructure poses newtechnical challenges, some associated with lowering the costs of providing more
general and flexible technology as compared to more specialized technology that
is optimized for the delivery of a single service (CSTB, 1994b).As noted in earlier chapters, a valuable part of the infrastructure is the con-tentÑthe software and the programming.  Thus, it is important for the govern-
ment to support experiments focusing not only on networking hardware, but also
on applications.  Part of the appeal of the Internet, it should be noted, is that users

develop their own ÒprogrammingÓ and other information resources, from articles
to databases, resources that can be located and interconnected increasingly easilyKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
85through the search and navigation tools (e.g., gopher, World Wide Web) that arethemselves being developed by users (Berners-Lee et al., 1994).NOTES1.The administration envisions national high-speed networks capable of transmit-
ting billions of bits (gigabits) of informationÑsuch as the entire textual portion of theEncyclopedia BritannicaÑin one second. These networks would link computers, databanks, fax machines, telephones, and video displays.    In its national information infrastructure (NII) policy statements, the administra-
tion has articulated a high-level vision for a Ònetwork of networksÓ funded primarily by
the private sector.  The statements outline numerous broad goals but provide few details;
the Information Infrastructure Task Force is laying the groundwork to develop proposalsin a number of areas, and proposed legislation is proceeding through the Congress as this
report is written.  The organization of several budget elements under the NII umbrella in
the FY 1995 budget request added to the emphasis on this area, as do the new emphasison information infrastructure technology and applications within the High Performance
Computing and Communications Initiative and the expansion of the new Telecommuni-cations and Information Infrastructure Assistance Program for developing access byschools, libraries, hospitals, and clinics.2.Common carriers provide neutral, nondiscriminatory service.  They are subject
to public utility regulations described by Kahn (1970, p. 3) as Òcontrol of entry, pricefixing, prescription of quality and conditions of service, and the imposition of an obliga-
tion to serve all applicants under reasonable conditions.Ó3.Lobbying activity is so intense that it itself has become a news item.  See, for
example, Andrews (1995).4.Section 310(b) of the Communications Act limits foreign investment in U.S.
broadcasting companies to 25 percent.5.For example, several measures show that Japan lags the United States in use of
communications and information technology, even accounting for population difference:
PCs used in business per 100 workers (U.S. 41.7, Japan 9.9); domestic commercial data-bases (U.S. 3,900, Japan 900); Internet nodes (U.S. 1.18 million, Japan 39,000); LANconnections per 100 PCs used in business (U.S. 55.7, Japan 13.4); cellular phones per 100
people (U.S. 4.4, Japan 1.4); and cable (non-basic service) subscribers as percent ofhouseholds with TV (U.S. 60 percent, Japan 2.7 percent).    Regulation-supported high prices and market structure factors lie behind some of
these conditions (Pollack, 1993).6.Principles quoted from 
ÒThe G7 Theme Paper,Ó a document found on the World
Wide Web at http://www.ispo.cec.be (EC Information Society Project Office Webserver)
under G7 Information Society Conference category and 
Key Documents subcategory.
7.Foreign investors have taken advantage of the opportunity to invest in U.S.
companies, notably in the entertainment industry.  For example, News Corp. of Australia

owns (20th Century) Fox Inc., Sony Corp. owns Sony Pictures Entertainment (formerlyColumbia Pictures), and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. owns MCA Inc. (parent com-pany of Universal Pictures).  See Turner (1994a).
8.An extensive analysis of the 
keiretsu system may be found in Gerlach (1992).
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVE9.Virtually every major nation has signed the convention, which is administered
by the World Intellectual Property Organization.10.Further analysis of these national differences may be found in Cowhey (1993).

11.See CSTB (1992) for a discussion of the business of systems integration.
12.Colloquium steering committee member Janice Obuchowski noted that, at the
time of the consent decree, AT&T indicated no objection to the Bell companies entering
the information content business, and the court concluded they would not abuse anyresidual bottleneck power in information services.  In addition, the court observed that the
FCC had established safeguards that would help protect against such abuse.13.If these types of incentives prove inadequate, then policymakers could consider
other measures, such as a value-added tax (VAT) on public network services, with theproceeds to be invested in the public infrastructure, Wildman suggested.  An advantage of

the VAT approach, he noted, is that the major beneficiariesÑend users and suppliersÑwould pay (Egan and Wildman, 1992).14.The regional Bell holding companies have promised, if the restrictions on cable
programming and long-distance service are relaxed, to invest an additional $100 billion inadvanced technology in the next decadeÑprecisely the sort of private investment neededto advance a national information infrastructure.15.In 1992, the FCC modified its 1970 rule that prevented networks from owning
cable systems (47 CFR 76.501[a][1991]) to allow cross-ownership so long as the numberof cable homes affected was limited.  Networks have been barred by the Cable Act of

1984 (47 USC Section 533) from owning cable systems in their own markets where theyown and operate stations (NTIA, 1993).  Progress through judicial and regulatory hurdlestoward video dial-tone service is reflected in Bell AtlanticÕs moves toward offering cable-like programming in its service areas (Landler, 1995; Carnevale, 1994).16.In 1970, the FCC adopted a rule barring common ownership of a television
broadcast station and a cable system in the same market (47 CFR Section 76.501[a][2]).Congress codified that rule in the Cable Act of 1984 (NTIA, 1993).17.The FCC adopted a 12-station limit for all broadcast services in 1984.
18.David Nicoll, National Cable Television Association, personal communication,
December 13, 1993.19.Ameritech, for example, proposed a new regulatory model (the Customers First
Plan) under which the corporation would guarantee its competitors physical access to thetelephone network and fair pricing; all that a competitor would have to do is buy a switch
(costing several million dollars new).  Ameritech also pledged to upgrade its network to
support digital switching and fiber optics.  In return, Ameritech asked for Òthe freedom tofully compete, including the ability to de-average all access rates, to respond to competi-
tive proposals, and to enter into contracts with customersÓ (Ameritech, 1993c).  Local
telephone service would remain affordable, the company said, due to increased usage oftelecommunications services.20.Carol Weinhaus, project director for the Center for Telecommunications Man-
agement at the University of Southern California, cited in Andrews (1994a).21.Local telephone and cable companies already spend about $25 billion a year on
new equipment and modernization (Federal Communications Commission estimates, citedin Andrews (1994a)).  A number of telephone companies announced ambitious infrastruc-
ture improvement plans in 1993.22.The Clinton administration, in its national information infrastructure (NII) policy
statement, noted that an estimated two-thirds of U.S. workers hold information-relatedKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROMOTING COMPETITIVENESS:  POLICY ISSUES AND OBSTACLES
87jobs, while the rest work in industries that rely heavily on information.  According to the
administration, the NII Òwill help create high-wage jobs, stimulate economic growth,enable new products and services, and strengthen AmericaÕs technological leadership.Whole new industries will be created, and the infrastructure will be used in ways we canonly begin to imagineÓ (IITF, 1993, p. 13).  A number of statistics were cited to bolster
this contention.  For example, the Computer Systems Policy Project estimates that the NII

will produce as much as $300 billion annually in new sales across multiple industries.And the personal communications services industry, a new family of wireless services, isexpected to create as many as 300,000 jobs in the next 10 to 15 years.23.According to the United States Telephone Association (USTA), regulatory
policy promoting universal service has resulted in up to $20 billion in internal subsidiesthat benefit rural and residential customers.  USTA (1993) has claimed that, as competi-

tion in the marketplace increases, the price of local telephone service would move to costand could double.24.David Nicoll, National Cable Television Association, personal communication,
December 13, 1993.25.Several public meetings (e.g., the 20/20 Vision and Public Interest conferences)
were held and documents issued for public discussion and comment in 1994.26.For example, NTIA estimates that the biggest problems in regard to universal
service pertain to the urban poor, even though infrastructure is cheap and ubiquitous, notrural areas.27.The federal government finances some $70 billion in research and development
annually and creates early markets for high-risk technologies such as computer hardwareand semiconductors (Clinton and Gore, 1993).28.In this paper (Borrus, 1992), echoing a decade-old recommendation made by
the economist Richard Nelson and his colleagues (Nelson, 1982), Borrus suggested thatthe government associate research and development (R&D) support with procurement orother well-defined public objectives; define and fund arenas of nonproprietary research
and allow the scientific community to guide R&D allocation; and develop mechanismswhereby potential users guide the allocation of applied R&D funds.  Borrus made severaladditional points, specifying conditions that should exist for applied research and the
importance of pursuing widespread diffusion of new technologies within the domesticeconomy.  He also stressed the importance of ensuring that the development process
produces technology that meets commercial market requirements.29.Over the years, the government
Õs role in running the Internet has been reduced.The initial goal was to link military users and contractors with remote computer centersso they could share software and hardware; today, more than half the hosts are commer-
cial, while many others are in education and nonmilitary research.  The National Science
Foundation has provided the fixed-cost network Òbackbone,Ó but by early 1994 the direct
federal subsidy had shrunk to an estimated 3 percent of total Internet costs, and even that
small share is to be eliminated.  Meanwhile, standards for transmission, user interfaces,
management, and other aspects of Internet use are set through a Ògrass-rootsÓ process led
by the Internet Engineering Task Force, whose meetings are open to anyone with a dem-
onstrated working protocol.  Howard Funk, the Internet Society, personal communica-
tion, November 10, 1993.30.Egan and Wildman (1992) citing NTIA (1991).  The seven nations evaluated
included the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy, Japan, andCanada.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVE88Bibliography
Ameritech.  1992.  
SuperSchools:  Education in the Information Age and Beyond.
  Ameritech,
Chicago, Ill.Ameritech.  1993a.  
Evaluation of ThinkLink:  January through June, 1993.
  July 28.  Evaluators
June Cline, Richard Omanson, and Project Manager Nancy Sisung.  Ameritech, Chicago, Ill.
Ameritech.  1993b.  ÒNationÕs Public Phone Network Can Be the Right Medicine to Trim U.S.
Health Care Costs and Improve Delivery.Ó  News release dated August 5.
Ameritech.  1993c.  ÒPetition for Declaratory Ruling and Related Waivers to Establish a New Regu-
latory Model for the Ameritech Region,Ó petition before the Federal Communications Commis-sion, March 1.Ameritech.  1993d.  
Project ThinkLink:  Educational Applications for FITL.
  Ameritech, Chicago,
Ill., November.Ameritech.  1993e.  
Quality of Life in the Information Age and Beyond. Ameritech, Chicago, Ill.,
March.Ameritech.  1993f.  ÒSuperSchoolÑAmericaÕs Link to a Better EducationÑComes to Washington,
D.C., March 24-31.Ó  News release dated March 11.
Andrews, Edmund L.  1993.  ÒWhen We Build It, Will They Come?,Ó 
New York Times, October 17,
p. F5.Andrews, Edmund L.  1994a.  ÒBig Risk and Cost Seen in Creating Data Superhighway,Ó 
New YorkTimes, January 3, p. C17.
Andrews, Edmund L.  1994b.  ÒWith MergerÕs Failure, an Industry Seeks a Leader,Ó 
New YorkTimes, February 26, p. A39.
Andrews, Edmund L.  1995.  ÒPhone-Bill Lobbyists Wear out Welcome,Ó 
New York Times, March
20, pp. D1 and D6.Associated Press.  1994.  ÒPackard Bell to Offer PC Cum TV/Phone/Radio,Ó 
New York Times, June
14, p. D5.Bangemann, Martin (Chair), and the High-Level Group on the Information Society.  1994.  
Europeand the Global Information Society:  Recommendations to the European Council.
 European
Council, Brussels, May 26.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY89Barron, James.  1994.  
ÒA New Species of Couch Potato Takes Root,Ó New York Times, November 6,
pp. H1 and H28.Bermant, Charles.  1994.  
ÒWhen Listener and Artist Can Make Music Together,Ó New York Times,May 8, p. F9.Bermant, Charles.  1995.  
ÒLetting Moviegoers Play Auteur, with a Clicker,Ó New York Times,February 12, p. F10.Berners-Lee, Tim, Robert Cailliau, Ari Luotonen, Henrik Frystyk Nielsen, and Arthur Secret.  1994.
ÒThe World-Wide Web,Ó Communications of the ACM 37(8):76-82.
Booker, Ellis.  1994.  
ÒThrowing Users an Mbone,Ó Computerworld, November 7, pp. 63 and 68.
Borrus, Michael.  1992.  
ÒInvesting on the Frontier:  How the U.S. Can Reclaim High-Tech Leader-
ship,Ó American Prospect, Fall issue, pp. 79-87.
Borrus, Michael  1993.  
ÒThe Regional Architecture of Global Electronics:  Trajectories, Linkages
and Access to Technology,Ó pp. 41-80 in 
New Challenges to International Cooperation:  Ad-
justment of Firms, Policies, and Organizations to Global Competition, Peter Gourevitch and
Paolo Guerrieri, eds.  International Relations and Pacific Studies, University of California, San

Diego.Bowles, Scott.  1994.  
ÒCyberspace Rescue Prevents a Suicide,Ó Washington Post, October 24, pp.
D1 and D5.Bulkeley, William M.  1995.  
ÒUntested Treatments, Cures Find Stronghold on On-Line Services,ÓWall Street Journal, February 27, pp. A1 and A9.
Bulkeley, William M., and John R. Wilke.  1993.  
ÒCan the Exalted Vision Become Reality?:  Early
Attempts Show Buyers May Be Leery,Ó Wall Street Journal, October 14, pp. B1 and B12.
Burgess, John.  1994.  
ÒComputers Get a Blockbuster Role,Ó Washington Post, January 19, pp. F1
and F4.Carlton, Jim.  1994a.  
ÒAs Electronics Lag, Computers Step into Breach,Ó Wall Street Journal,January 5, p. B1.Carlton, Jim.  1994b.  
ÒCD-ROMs:  Buggy, Boring, Slow, Frustrating,
Ó Wall Street Journal, July 6,
pp. B1 and B4.Carlton, Jim.  1994c.  
ÒElectronic Arts Shifts Focus to CD-ROM Video Games,Ó Wall Street Jour-nal, September 7, p. B4.
Carlton, Jim.  1994d.  
Ò3DO Faces Revolt by Game Developers over Fee to Cut ManufacturersÕLosses,Ó Wall Street Journal, October 24, p. B3.
Carlton, Jim, and Thomas R. King.  1994.  
ÒSega-MGM Pact Will Prompt Question:  Which Came
First, Movie or Video Game?,Ó Wall Street Journal, April 27, p. B8.
Carnevale, Mary Lu.  1994.  
ÒBell Atlantic Becomes First Phone Firm Allowed to Compete withCable TV,Ó Wall Street Journal, July 7, pp. A3 and A5.
Cauley, Leslie.  1993.  
ÒGoal:  No Missing Link,
Ó  USA TODAY, June 9, p. 2B.
Chartrand, Sabra.  1994.  
ÒPatents:  The Promise of a Multimedia Revolution Is Creating a Giant
Copyright Headache for Some Companies,Ó New York Times, March 28, p. D2.
Chiddix, James A.  1991.  
ÒThe Evolution of Cable TVÑA Personal Perspective,Ó lecture at Penn-
sylvania State University, October 29.Churbuck, David C.  1994.  
ÒDial-a-catalog,Ó Forbes 154(8):126-130.
Clinton, William J., and Albert Gore, Jr.  1993.  
Technology for AmericaÕs Strength:  A New Direc-
tion to Build Economic Strength.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1992.  
Keep-ing the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive:  Systems Integration.
  National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1994a.
Information Technology in the Service Society:  A Twenty-first Century Lever.
  National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEComputer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1994b.
Realizing the Information Future:  The Internet and Beyond.
  National Academy Press, Wash-
ington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1994c.
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked Communities.  National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1995.
Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support theNationÕs Information Infrastructure.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Corcoran, Cate.  1993.  
ÒSpectrum Envoy Card Gives PC-Phone Link for Faxes, Voice Mail,ÓInfoworld, November 8, p. 34.
Corcoran, Elizabeth.  1994.  
ÒA ÔBattle of the BoxÕ Is Brewing,
Ó Washington Post, October 15, pp.
D1-D2.Corporation for National Research Initiatives (CNRI).  1992.  
ÒA Brief Description of the CNRIGigabit Testbed Initiative.Ó Corporation for National Research Initiatives, Reston, Va., Janu-
ary.Council on Competitiveness (COC).  1993.  
Roadmap for Results:  Trade Policy, Technology, and
American Competitiveness.  Council on Competitiveness, Washington, D.C., July.
Cowhey, Peter F.  1990.  
ÒThe International Telecommunications Regime:  The Political Roots of
Regimes for High Technology,Ó International Organization 44(2):169-199.
Cowhey, Peter F.  1993.  
ÒTelecommunications:  Market Access Regimes in Services and Equip-
ment,Ó pp. 133-170 in 
New Challenges to International Cooperation:  Adjustment of Firms,
Policies, and Organizations to Global Competition, Peter Gourevitch and Paolo Guerrieri, eds.
International Relations and Pacific Studies, University of California, San Diego.Cowhey, Peter F., and Jonathan D. Aronson.  1993.  
Managing the World Economy:  The Conse-
quences of Corporate Alliances.  Council on Foreign Relations Press, New York.
David, Fred.  1993.  
ÒI Want My Desktop MTV,Ó Wired 3(1):84.
Dreier, Thomas.  1993.  
ÒCopyright Digitized:  Philosophical Impacts and Practical Implications for
Information Exchange in Digital Networks,Ó paper presented at 
ÒWorld Intellectual PropertyOrganization Symposium on the Impact of Digital Technology on Copyright and NeighboringRights,Ó Harvard University, March 31-April 2.
Dukes, S.D.  n.d.  
Next Generation Cable Network Architecture.  Cable Television Laboratories Inc.,
Boulder, Colo. (unpublished).Dutton, William H., Jay G. Blumler, and Kenneth L. Kraemer.  1987.  
Wired Cities:  Shaping the
Future of Communications.  G.K. Hall, Boston.
The Economist.  1993a.  
ÒA Survey of Telecommunications,Ó 329(7834):a special supplement fol-
lowing p. 68.The Economist.  1993b.  
ÒWhat 3DO Might Do:  Home Entertainment, Tripping,
Ó 327(7815):80.
Egan, Bruce L., and Steven S. Wildman.  1992.  
ÒInvesting in the Telecommunications Infrastruc-ture:  Economics and Policy Considerations,
Ó pp. 19-54 in 
A National Information Network:Changing Our Lives in the 21st Century.  Annual Review of the Institute for Information
Studies (Northern Telecom Inc. and the Aspen Institute), Queenstown, Md.Elmer-DeWitt, Philip.  1993.  
ÒTake a Trip into the Future on the Electronic Superhighway,Ó Time141(15):50-55.Eriksson, Hans.  1994.  ÒMBone:  The Multicast Backbone,Ó Communications of the ACM 37(8):54-60.Fabrikant, Geraldine.  1993.  
ÒBell AtlanticÕs Acquisition Presented as a Quantum Leap,Ó New YorkTimes, October 14, p. D11.
Fantel, Hans.  1994.  
ÒCinema Sound Gets a Digital Lift,Ó New York Times, June 12, p. F9.
Farhi, Paul.  1994.  
ÒA Waiting Game for Rating Games,Ó Washington Post, December 24, p. D1.
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY91Farhi, Paul, and Sandra Sugawara.  1994.  
ÒHurdles Slow Information ÔSuperhypeway,ÕÓ Washing-ton Post, April 7, pp. A1 and A15.
Farley, Christopher John.  1994.  
ÒPatriot Games,Ó TIME Magazine, December 19, p. 48.
Fisher, Lawrence M.  1994.  
ÒDisney Licenses Characters for Multimedia,Ó New York Times, June
24, p. D6.Fitzgerald, Michael.  1994.  
ÒMultimedia Is Growing by Leaps and Bounds,Ó Computerworld, Febru-
ary 21, p. 42.Flaherty, Joseph A.  1993.  ÒHDTV:  How, Why, and When,Ó The Schoenberg Lecture presented forthe Royal Television Society at the Royal Institution, London, England, November 4.Flaherty, Joseph A.  1994.  
ÒATV:  How to Do It, Whatever It Is,
Ó  paper presented at the Advanced
Television seminar ÒBit by Bit into the Future,Ó Hilton Head, South Carolina, September 27.
Fleischmann, Mark.  1995.  
ÒSecond Sight,Ó Premiere 8(5):90.
Flynn, Laurie.  1994.  
ÒCD-ROMÕs:  They
Õre Not Just for Entertainment,Ó New York Times, April 24,
p. F10.Foderaro, Lisa W.  1995.  
ÒSelf-Help Today:  I
Õm OK. YouÕre OK. WeÕre On Line,Ó New YorkTimes, March 22, pp. B1 and B6.
Garreau, Joel.  1993.  ÒBawdy Bytes:  The Growing World of Cybersex,Ó Washington Post, Novem-ber 29, p. A1.Gerlach, Michael L.  1992.  
Alliance Capitalism:  The Social Organization of Japanese Business.
University of California Press, Berkeley, Calif.Goldberg, Michael.  1993.  
ÒAttack of the Cyber-Rockers:  New Computer Rocker Jocks Get Their
Modems Working,Ó Rolling Stone, November 25, No. 670, p. 27.
Harmon, Amy.  1993.  
ÒThe ÔSeedyÕ Side of CD-ROMs,
Ó Los Angeles Times, November 29, pp. A1
and A26-A28.Herschman, N.  1993.  
ÒCD Sound Gets Better,Ó Pulse, August, No. 117, p. 20.
Hill, G. Christian, and Ken Yamada.  1993.  
ÒFive Electronics Giants Hope General Magic Will Turnthe Trick,Ó Wall Street Journal, February 8, p. A1.
Hodge, Winston William.  1995.  
Interactive Television:  A Comprehensive Guide for Multimedia
Technologists.  McGraw-Hill Inc., New York.
Hudson, Richard L.  1994.  
ÒEurope Begins Liberalizing Phone Sector,Ó Wall Street Journal, De-
cember 5, p. A9A.Hudson, Richard L.  1995.  
ÒLicense Needed to Do Art Deals in Digital Age,Ó Wall Street Journal,January 23, pp. B1-B2.Hudson, Richard L., and James Pressley.  1995.  
ÒG-7 Nations Make Gains in Facilitating Access toInformation Superhighway,Ó Wall Street Journal, February 27, p. A7A.
Huizinga, Johan.  1950.  
Homo Ludens:  A Study of the Play Element in Culture.
  Beacon Press,
Boston.Information & Interactive Services Report (IISR).  1995.  
ÒWorldwide Internet Creates Potential forLegal Problems,Ó BRP Publications Inc., Washington, D.C., March 24, p. 18.
Information Infrastructure Task Force (IITF).  1993.  
The National Information Infrastructure:Agenda for Action.  Information Infrastructure Task Force, Washington, D.C., September 15.
Institute for Information Studies.  1995.  
Crossroads on the Information Highway:  Convergence and
Diversity in Communications Technologies.  Annual Review of the Institute for Information
Studies (Northern Telecom Inc. and the Aspen Institute), Queenstown, Md.Jensen, Elizabeth.  1994.  
ÒNetworks Pick UCLA to Study Violence, Hoping to Pre-empt Govern-ment Action,Ó Wall Street Journal, June 30, p. B9.
Johnson, Bradley.  1993.  
ÒMultimedia PC Biz Picking up Speed,Ó Advertising Age 64(23):6.
Kahn, Alfred E.  1970.  
The Economics of Regulation:  Principles and Institutions, Volume 1.
  John
Wiley & Sons Inc., New York.Kapor, Mitchell.  1993.  
ÒWhere Is the Digital Highway Really Heading?,Ó Wired 1(3):53.
Karlgaard, Rich.  1994.  ÒMore (Moore) Fights to Come,Ó Forbes, February 28 (Supplemental), p. 9.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEKatz, Michael L., and Carl Shapiro.  1994.  
ÒSystems Competition and Network Effects,Ó Journal ofEconomic Perspectives 8(2):93-115.
Keller, John J.  1994.  
ÒAT&T Scraps Plan to Sell Gear for Video Game,Ó Wall Street Journal,September 1, p. B8.Kelly, Kevin.  1993.  
ÒWhen Bandwidth Is Free:  The Dark Fiber Interview with George Gilder,
ÓWired 1(4):38-41.
Kelly, Kevin, and Rheingold, Howard.  1993.  
ÒThe Dragon Ate My Homework,Ó Wired 1(3):69.
Kim, James, and Chris Wloszczyna.  1993.  
ÒHitting the Information Highway,Ó USA TODAY,August 26, p. 4B.King, Jr., Ralph T.  1994.  
Ò3DO Faces Struggle to Keep Video-Game Player Alive,Ó Wall StreetJournal, May 19, p. B4.
Klein, Stanley, and Robert Aston.  1993.  
ÒMultimedia Defined:  Market Sectors, Dimensions, and
Directions,Ó pp. 7-35 in 
Multimedia 2000:  Market Developments, Media Business Impacts,
and Future Trends, M.L. De Sonne, ed.  National Association of Broadcasters, Washington,
D.C.Kolbert, Elizabeth.  1994.  
ÒTelevision Gets Closer Look As a Factor in Real Violence,Ó New YorkTimes, December 14, pp. A1 and D20.
Kristol, Irving.  1994.  
ÒSex, Violence and Videotape,Ó Wall Street Journal, May 31, p. A16.
Kruger, Pamela.  1994.  
ÒThe Multimedia Job Mirage,Ó New York Times, January 9, p. F9.
Laderman, Jeffrey M., Mark Landler, and Ronald Grover.  1993.  
ÒMedia Mania,Ó Business Week,July 12, No. 3327, pp. 110-119.Landis, David.  1993.  
ÒNew Wave of Interactive Entertainment,Ó USA Today, May 27, p. 1D.
Landler, Mark.  1995.  
ÒPhone Companies Clear TV Hurdle,Ó New York Times, March 18, pp. 1 and
41.Lanham, Richard A.  1993.  
The Electronic Word:  Democracy, Technology, and the Arts.
  Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill.Lashinsky, Adam.  1993.  
ÒAmanda and Ameritech:  10-year-olds Serve as the Ultimate Focus
Group,Ó CrainÕs Detroit Business, September 6, p. 13.
Lavin, Douglas.  1995.  
ÒSurvey Sees Cost of Telephone Calls for Business Dropping in MostNations,Ó Wall Street Journal, March 3, p. A5C.
Lewis, Peter H.  1993a.  
ÒMultimedia (Especially the X-Rated) Stars at Comdex,Ó New York Times,November 23, p. F12.Lewis, Peter H.  1993b.  
ÒThe New Patent That Is Infuriating the Multimedia Industry:  The Battle
over a Popular Way of Searching Data Bases,Ó New York Times, November 28, p. F10.
Lewis, Peter H.  1994a.  
ÒA Boom for On-Line Services,Ó New York Times, July 12, pp. D1 and D14.
Lewis, Peter H.  1994b.  ÒProdigy Cuts Work Force As Part of Broad Revamping,Ó New York Times,December 6, p. D5.Lippman, John.  1993.  
ÒGamblingÑLiterallyÑon the Media Superhighway,Ó Los Angeles Times,December 24, pp. D1 and D4.Lippman, John, and Amy Harmon.  1994.  
ÒGore Presides at L.A. Summit on Info Age,Ó Los AngelesTimes, January 12, pp. A1 and A19.
Lohr, Steve.  1994.  ÒThe Silver Disk May Soon Eclipse the Silver Screen,Ó New York Times, March1, pp. A1 and D6.Lubove, Seth, and Neil Weinberg.  1993.  
ÒCreating a Seamless Company,Ó Forbes 152(14):152-
157.Maney, Kevin.  1993.  
ÒRuling Opens Door to Union of Telephone, Cable, Video:  Consumers
Likely to See More Choices,Ó USA TODAY, August 25, p. 1B.
Markoff, John.  1993.  
ÒCable Concerns in Venture to Rival Phone Companies,Ó New York Times,December 2, p. D1.Markoff, John.  1994.  
ÒFor 3DO, a Make-or-Break Season,Ó New York Times, December 11, pp. F1
and F6.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY93Markoff, John.  1995a.  
ÒAnother Format War Looms in Video Recording Industry,Ó New YorkTimes, February 23, pp. D1 and D17.
Markoff, John.  1995b.  
ÒWill Video Game Machines Turn into PC Killers?,Ó New York Times,January 8, p. F7.Marsh, Barbara.  1994.  
ÒMusicians Adopt Technology to Market Their Skills,Ó Wall Street Journal,October 14, p. B2.McCartney, Scott.  1995.  
ÒHollywood, Silicon Valley Team upÑand Clash,Ó Wall Street Journal,March 14, pp. B1-B2.McCoy, Charles.  1994.  ÒHewlett, CBS to Unveil Pact for Digital TV,Ó Wall Street Journal, August30, p. B10.McMurray, Scott.  1994.  ÒTelevision Shopping Is Stepping up in Class,Ó New York Times, March 6,p. F5.Memmott, Mark, and Kevin Maney.  1993.  
ÒUSA Poised to Be Multimedia Superpower,Ó USATODAY, October 15, p. B1.
Millison, Doug, and Craig LaGrow.  1993.  
ÒMultimedia ÔBlack Boxes:Õ Advent of the Digital Media
Home,Ó pp. 103-120 in 
Multimedia 2000:  Market Developments, Media Business Impacts, and
Future Trends, M.L. De Sonne, ed.  National Association of Broadcasters, Washington, D.C.
Mohan, Suruchi.  1994.  
ÒMultimedia to Run on Chip,Ó Computerworld, October 3, p. 12.
Mohan, Suruchi, and Jean S. Bozman.  1994.  
ÒRace for Multimedia Crown Speeding up:  Compa-
nies Team to Get Jump on Interactive Services,Ó Computerworld, June 27, p. 12.
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).  1993a.  
Cable Television and AmericaÕs Telecom-munications Infrastructure. National Cable Television Association, Washington, D.C.
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).  1993b.  
Interactive Surgery Demonstration; Link-ing:  An Idea Exchange for Cable Professionals.
  National Cable Television Association,
Washington, D.C., July.National Cable Television Association (NCTA).  1993c.  
Twenty First Century Television:  Cable
Television in the Information Age.  National Cable Television Association, Washington, D.C.
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA).  1991.  
The NTIA Infrastruc-ture Report:  Telecommunications in the Age of Information.
  U.S. Department of Commerce,
Washington, D.C., October.National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), U.S. Department of Com-merce.  1993.  
Globalization of the Mass Media.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washing-
ton, D.C.Nelson, Richard R.  1982.  
Government and Technical Progress:  A Cross-industry Analysis.
Pergamon Press, New York.Newman, Melinda.  1994.  
ÒCDs Push Music Sales Past $10 Bil Mark,Ó Billboard, March 5, p. 6.
New York Times.  1994.  
ÒSony and Phillips Design CDs for Movies,Ó December 17, p. 41.
Noam, Eli.  1995.  
ÒBeyond Telecommunications Liberalization:  Past Performance, Present Hype,
and Future Direction,Ó The New Information Infrastructure:  Strategies for U.S. Policy,
 Will-
iam J. Drake, ed. Twentieth Century Fund Press, New York, forthcoming.Oettinger, Anthony G.  1993.  
ÒInformation Age Choices:  The Ecstasy and the Agony,
Ó paper
presented at the 1993 Asia-Pacific Conference on Communications, ÒIntegrated Communica-tions for Information Society,Ó Taejon, Korea, August 25.
OÕNeill, Molly.  1995.  
ÒThe Lure and Addiction of Life on Line,Ó New York Times, March 8, pp. C1
and C6.Parkes, Walter.  1994.  
ÒRandom Access, Remote Control:  The Evolution of Storytelling,
Ó Omni16(4):48-54.Pereira, Joseph.  1994.  ÒPC Games Could Capture Sega, Nintendo Customers,Ó Wall Street Journal,April 27, pp. B1 and B8.Perelman, Lewis J.  1993.  
ÒHow Hypermation Leaps the Learning Curve,Ó Forbes, October 25
(Supplemental), pp. 76-90.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94KEEPING THE U.S. COMPUTER AND COMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY COMPETITIVEPitta, Julie.  1993.  
ÒHyperinteractive,Ó Forbes 152(6):228-230.
Pollack, Andrew.  1993.  ÒNow ItÕs JapanÕs Turn to Play Catch-up,Ó New York Times, November 21,p. F1.Radcliffe, Mark F.  1993.  
ÒIntellectual Property and Multimedia:  Legal Issues in the New Media
World,Ó pp. 121-148 in 
Multimedia 2000:  Market Developments, Media Business Impacts, and
Future Trends, M.L. De Sonne, ed.  National Association of Broadcasters, Washington, D.C.
Radiological Society of North America (RSNA).  1994.  
ÒNational Library of Medicine Unveils ÔTheVisible ManÕ:  Computerized Cadaver Released onto the Internet.
Ó  Press release dated Novem-
ber 28.Ramirez, Anthony.  1993.  
Ò2 Groups Plan Projects on Computer Standards,Ó New York Times,December 14, p. D5.Reilly, Patrick M.  1994.  
ÒHome Shoppers to Be Given Yet Another Service,Ó Wall Street Journal,January 14, p. B1.Rheingold, Howard.  1993.  
The Virtual Community:  Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier.
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, New York.Rickard, Jack.  1993.  
ÒHome-grown BBS,Ó Wired 1(4):42-45.
Rifkin, Glenn.  1993.  
ÒAt Age 9, On-Line Service Reboots,Ó New York Times, November 8, p. D1.
Robichaux, Mark, and Don Clark.  1994.  
ÒTime Warner Delays Launch of TV Service:  Trial
Interactive Network in Orlando Is Set Back by Problems at 2 Firms,Ó Wall Street Journal,March 2, pp. A3-4.Rosen, David.  1993.  
ÒMultimedia and Future Media:  2000 and Beyond,
Ó pp. 207-228 in 
Multime-dia 2000:  Market Developments, Media Business Impacts, and Future Trends,
 M.L. De Sonne,
ed.  National Association of Broadcasters, Washington, D.C.
Rothstein, Edward.  1994.  
ÒA New Art Form May Arise from the ÔMyst,ÕÓ New York Times,December 4, pp. H1 and H24-25.Samuels, Gary.  1994a.  
ÒCD-ROMÕs First Big Victim,Ó Forbes 153(5):42-44.
Samuels, Gary.  1994b.  
ÒPartner or Die,Ó Forbes 154(6):128-130.
Samuels, Gary.  1994c.  
ÒWhat Profits?,Ó Forbes 154(10):74-78.
Schwartz, John.  1993.  
ÒCaution:  Children at Play on Information Highway,
Ó Washington Post,November 28, p. A1.Schwartz, John.  1994.  
ÒA Terminal Obsession:  Nathaniel Davenport Lost Himself in Computer
Games.  And Then He Lost His Life.  A Modern Cyberdrama,
Ó Washington Post, March 27,
pp. F1 and F4.Schwarz, Joyce.  1993.  ÒReinventing Hollywood:  Creative Approaches to New Media Production,Ópp. 37-64 in Multimedia 2000:  Market Developments, Media Business Impacts, and Future
Trends, M.L. De Sonne, ed.  National Association of Broadcasters, Washington, D.C.
Seigel, Jessica.  1994.  
ÒComputer Games?  That
Õs Hollywood!,Ó Washington Business, July 25, pp.
15 and 19.Shapiro, Eben.  1994.  
ÒTime WarnerÕs Orlando Test to StartÑFinally,Ó Wall Street Journal, De-
cember 7, pp. B1 and B4.Shrage, Michael.  1994.  
ÒEast Is East, and West Is West, But Neither May Rule over New Media,ÓWashington Post, June 26, p. F3.
Sims, Calvin.  1993.  
ÒPacTel Is Granted Approval to Spin off Its Wireless Unit,Ó New York Times,November 3, p. D1.Sims, Calvin.  1994.  
ÒFor Consumers, Multimedia Shines,Ó New York Times, January 10, p. D1.
Solomon, Jolie.  1993.  
ÒA Risky Revolution,Ó Newsweek 121(17):44-45.
Sugawara, Sandra, and Paul Farhi.  1993.  
ÒMerger to Create a Media Giant,Ó Washington Post,October 14, p. A1.Tetzeli, Rick.  1993.  
ÒVideogames:  Serious Fun,
Ó Fortune 128(16):110-116.
Turner, Richard.  1993a.  
ÒHollywood Is Seeing the Future, and It Is Interactive Show Biz,Ó WallStreet Journal, May 19, p. A1.
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY95Turner, Richard.  1993b.  
ÒVideo-Game Innovator Lures Corporate Giants to ÔInteractiveÕ Media,
ÓWall Street Journal, February 7, p. A1.
Turner, Richard.  1994a.  
ÒHollywired,Ó Wall Street Journal, March 21, pp. R1 and R6.
Turner, Richard.  1994b.  
ÒWalt Disney Will Announce Its Plans to Produce and Market VideoGames,Ó Wall Street Journal, December 5, p. B4B.
Turner, Richard, and Thomas R. King.  1993.  
ÒDisney Stands Aside as Rivals Stampede to DigitalAlliances,Ó Wall Street Journal, September 24, p. A1.
United States Telephone Association (USTA).  1993.  
ÒUSTA Calls for Responsible Transition toCompetition in Local Telephone Markets.Ó  Press release dated July 28.
U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC).  1993.  
U.S. Industrial Outlook 1993.  U.S. Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.Washington Post.  1993.  
ÓPacific Bell Revamping Network:  Big Multimedia System Planned,
ÒNovember 12, pp. G1 and G3.Washington Post.  1995.  
ÒAmerica Online Reports a Loss,Ó February 9, p. D11.
Weber, Thomas E.  1994.  
ÒGEÕs GEnie Hopes Ads Can Work Magic to Boost Membership of On-
Line Service,Ó Wall Street Journal, February 14, p. B4.
Wildman, Steven S., and Stephen E. Siwek.  1988.  
International Trade in Films and TelevisionPrograms.  Ballinger, Cambridge, Mass.
WomenÕs-Wear-Daily (WWD).  1994.  
ÒBear Bullish on TV Shopping,Ó May 10, p. 19.
Woo, Junda.  1993.  
ÒPublisher Sues CompuServe over a Song,Ó Wall Street Journal, December 16,
pp. B1 and B16.Yadon, Robert E.  1993.  
ÒBroadcasting and Multimedia:  Operations, Applications, Opportunities,
Ópp. 149-171 in Multimedia 2000:  Market Developments, Media Business Impacts, and Future
Trends, M.L. De Sonne, ed.  National Association of Broadcasters, Washington, D.C.
Zachary, G. Pascal.  1994.  
ÒMicrosoft Sets Stock Purchase of Softimage,Ó Wall Street Journal,February 15, p. B5.Ziegler, Bart.  1994a.  
ÒFive Technology Concerns to Cooperate on Interactive-Video System Stan-dards,Ó Wall Street Journal, April 21, p. B8.
Ziegler, Bart.  1994b.  
ÒLayoffs and Overhaul at Unprodigious Prodigy,Ó Wall Street Journal, De-
cember 6, pp. B1 and B4.Ziegler, Bart.  1994c.  
ÒMutual Attraction of Phone and Cable Giants Fades Fast,Ó Wall StreetJournal, April 7, pp. B1 and B8.
Ziegler, Bart, and Mark Robichaux.  1994.  
ÒMutual Attraction of Phone and Cable Giants FadesFast,Ó Wall Street Journal, April 7, pp. B1 and B8.
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.99AColloquium Participants
NOTE:  Affiliations listed are those current at the time of the colloquium in June 1993.
John BlairRaytheon Research DivisionMichael BorrusBerkeley Roundtable on theInternational EconomyCharles N. BrownsteinNational Science FoundationDaniel F. BurtonCouncil on CompetitivenessLinda CashdanVoice of AmericaBill CaswellApple Computer Inc.John S. CavalliniU.S. Department of EnergyRandall ColemanFederal Communications CommissionAlden F. AbbottNational Telecommunications andInformation AdministrationU.S. Department of CommerceJohn AdamIEEE SpectrumAlfred V. AhoBell Communications ResearchJonathan D. AronsonUniversity of Southern CaliforniaJordan BaruchJordan Baruch ConsultingAudrey BashkinGovernment Operations Committee
U.S. House of RepresentativesGwen BellAssociation of Computing MachineryKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100APPENDIX APeter F. CowheyUniversity of California at San DiegoRoger DannenbergCarnegie Mellon UniversityJohn G. DardisU.S. Department of StatePaul DavidStanford UniversityGary DemosDemoGraFXMarvin DenicoffThinking Machines CorporationDiane DeSimoneInstitute for Information Studies
Northern TelecomMarcia De SonneNational Association of BroadcastersRick DuceyNational Association of BroadcastersYona EttingerEmbassy of IsraelDavid J. FarberUniversity of PennsylvaniaCharles FergusonMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyCharles FirestoneThe Aspen InstituteFrancis Dummer FisherUniversity of Texas at AustinMichael T.N. FitchU.S. Department of StateThomas ForbordOffice of the Honorable John J.Rockefeller IVU.S. SenateLaura FordUS West Inc.Samuel H. FullerDigital Equipment CorporationHenry GellerWashington Center for Public PolicyResearchGeorge GilderDiscovery InstituteSamuel GinnPacific Telesis GroupStephen GouldCongressional Research ServiceWilliam GriffinGTE LaboratoriesEdward HeresniakMcGraw-HillAnita K. JonesU.S. Department of DefenseAnne JonesSutherland, Asbill, & BrennanBrian KahinInteractive Multimedia AssociationKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A101Sidney KarinSan Diego Supercomputer CenterKen KayComputer Systems Policy ProjectStephen T. KentBBN CommunicationsDavid A. KettlerBellSouth CorporationSusan KollinsInternational Trade CommissionRichard A. LanhamUniversity of California at Los Angeles and Rhetorica Inc.
Alfred M. LeeNational Telecommunications andInformation AdministrationU.S. Department of CommerceBruce A. LehmanU.S. Patent and Trademark OfficeLois Levine-ElmanBiotechnology Law ReportTalbot S. LindstromFederal Trade CommissionAndrew LippmanMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyRobert W. LuckyBell Communications ResearchWilliam MaherNational Telecommunications andInformation AdministrationU.S. Department of CommerceNancy MasonUS West Inc.Sylvia McDonoughInternational Trade CommissionBernadette McGuireAssociation of Public TV StationsJohn E. McPheeU.S. Department of CommerceSteven J. MetalitzInformation Industry AssociationBrady MethenyWashington FAXDavid C. NagelAppleSoft Inc.David B. NelsonU.S. Department of EnergyMichael R. NelsonOffice of Science and TechnologyPolicyExecutive Office of the PresidentEli M. NoamColumbia UniversityToshiyuki NoguchiNomura ResearchDonald A. NormanApple Computer Inc.Richard C. NotebaertAmeritechJanice ObuchowskiFreedom Technologies Inc.Keeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102APPENDIX AEric PamerCommerce Clearing HouseRuth S. RaubitschekU.S. Department of JusticeHoward RauschCapital GainsJohn J. ReaganWalt Disney Pictures and TelevisionMargaret RyanElectronic Engineering TimesGabi SchindlerApple Computer Inc.Mary ShawCarnegie Mellon UniversityJohn F. ShochAsset Management CompanyWendy SilbermanOffice of the U.S. TradeRepresentativeAlexander SingerFilm DirectorJames K. SmithAmeritechPhilip M. SmithNational Research CouncilRobert SpinradXerox CorporationRobert SteinVoyager CompanyScott StevensCarnegie Mellon UniversityGlenn StraitThe World and ISteve TanseyAmerican Chemical SocietyMinna TaylorFox Broadcasting CompanyMichael TelsonBudget Committee
U.S. House of RepresentativesSherry TurkleMassachusetts Institute of TechnologyAndrew J. ViterbiQualcomm Inc.David WaldenBBN CommunicationsBill WarlickInternational Trade CommissionSteven S. WildmanNorthwestern UniversityDale WilliamsSprint CommunicationsRobert WinterUniversity of California at LosAngelesWilliam WulfUniversity of VirginiaKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.103BColloquium AgendaJune 8, 1993 7:30 -  8:30 a.m.
Registration and Continental Breakfast(Lecture Room) 8:30 -  8:45
Welcome and Colloquium Introduction¥William Wulf, 
CSTB Chair¥David Nagel, 
Colloquium Chair 8:45 - 11:00
Convergence Vision:  Beyond
EntertainmentÑand Getting There
Robert Lucky, Panel Chair
¥John Sculley, Apple Computer

¥Samuel Ginn, Pacific Telesis

¥Robert Stein, Voyager

¥Richard Notebaert, Ameritech

¥Alexander Singer, Film Director

¥Paul David, Stanford University
11:00 - 11:45Convergence Realized:  A Musical Illustration
¥Robert Winter, University of California at
Los AngelesKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104APPENDIX B11:45 - 12:30 p.m.Lunch (Refectory)12:30 -  2:15
Economics and Policy:  Supply, Demand,
and Intervention Issues
Peter Cowhey, Panel Chair
¥Michael Borrus, Berkeley Roundtable onthe International Economy¥Peter Cowhey, University of California atSan Diego¥Eli Noam, Columbia University¥Steven Wildman, Northwestern University 2:15 -  2:30
Break 2:30 -  4:00
Techno-pork, Techno-porn, andTechno-pop:  Legal and Social Issues

Janice Obuchowski, Panel Chair
¥George Gilder¥Richard Lanham, University of Californiaat Los Angeles¥Donald Norman, Apple Computer¥Sherry Turkle, Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology 4:00 -  4:30
Summary and Concluding RemarksColloquium Steering Committee 4:30
AdjournKeeping the U.S. Computer and Communications Industry Competitive: Convergence of Computing, and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.105Stephen M. CaseAmerica OnlinePeter F. CowheyFederal Communications CommissionEsther DysonEDventure Holdings Inc.Samuel H. FullerDigital Equipment CorporationRobert L. JohnsonBlack Entertainment TelevisionRobert W. LuckyBell Communications ResearchDavid C. NagelAppleSoft Inc.CFollow-up Interviews
Richard C. NotebaertAmeritechJanice ObuchowskiFreedom Technologies Inc.Alexander SingerFilm DirectorRobert SteinVoyager CompanyNancy StoverYourChoice TV/Discovery NetworksInc.Steven S. WildmanNorthwestern University