DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/4814Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in NetworkedCommunities172 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-05090-6 | DOI 10.17226/4814Dorothy E. Denning and Herbert S. Lin, Editors; Steering Committee on Rights andResponsibilities of Participants in Networked Communities, National ResearchCouncilRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Rights andResponsibilities ofParticipants in
NetworkedCommunitiesDorothy E. Denning and Herbert S. Lin, 
EditorsSteering Committee on Rights and Responsibilities
of Participants in Networked Communities
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications
National Research Council
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C. 1994
iRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of

the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard

for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-

ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
Support for this project was provided by core funds of the Computer Science and Telecommu-
nications Board. Core support for the CSTB is provided by its public and private sponsors: the Air

Force Office of Scientific Research, Apple Computer, the Advanced Research Projects Agency, Dig-

ital Equipment Corporation, the Department of Energy, IBM Corporation, Intel Corporation, the

National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the National Science Foundation, and the Office of

Naval Research.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 94-66575
International Standard Book Number 0-309-05090-1
Additional copies of this report are available from:

National Academy Press

2101 Constitution Avenue, NW

Box 285 Washington, DC 20055

800-624-6242

202-334-3313 (in the Washington Metropolitan Area)
B-456Copyright 1994 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
iiRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STEERING COMMITTEE ON RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARTICIPANTS IN NETWORKED
COMMUNITIESDOROTHY E. DENNING, Georgetown University, 
ChairANNE WELLS BRANSCOMB, Harvard University

MITCHELL D. KAPOR, Electronic Frontier Foundation
STEPHEN T. KENT, Bolt, Beranek, and Newman Inc.
GEORGE M. PERRY, Prodigy Services Company

MARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Director

HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer

LAURA OST, Consultant
LESLIE WADE, Project Assistant

GLORIA BEMAH, Administrative Assistant
iiiRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
BOARDWILLIAM A. WULF, University of Virginia, 
ChairFRANCES E. ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

JEFF DOZIER, University of California at Santa Barbara

DAVID J. FARBER, University of Pennsylvania

HENRY FUCHS, University of North Carolina

CHARLES GESCHKE, Adobe Systems Inc.

JAMES GRAY, San Francisco, California

BARBARA GROSZ, Harvard University
DEBORAH A. JOSEPH, University of Wisconsin

RICHARD M. KARP, University of California at Berkeley

BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Digital Equipment Corporation

BARBARA H. LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

JOHN MAJOR, Motorola
ROBERT L. MARTIN, AT&T Network Systems
DAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, University of California at Berkeley

WILLIAM PRESS, Harvard University

CHARLES L. SEITZ, Myricom Inc.

EDWARD SHORTLIFFE, Stanford University School of Medicine

CASMIR S. SKRZYPCZAK, NYNEX Corporation

LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel Corporation

MARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Director

LOUISE ARNHEIM, Senior Staff Officer

HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer

JAMES MALLORY, Staff Officer

RENEE A. HAWKINS, Staff Associate
GLORIA BEMAH, Administrative Assistant
KIMBERLY STRIKER, Project Assistant

LESLIE WADE, Project Assistant
ivRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,
MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONS
RICHARD N. ZARE, Stanford University, 
ChairRICHARD S. NICHOLSON, American Association for the Advancement of
Science, Vice ChairSTEPHEN L. ADLER, Institute for Advanced Study

JOHN A. ARMSTRONG, IBM Corporation (retired)

SYLVIA T. CEYER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

AVNER FRIEDMAN, University of Minnesota

SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley

ROBERT J. HERMANN, United Technologies Corporation

HANS MARK, University of Texas at Austin

CLAIRE E. MAX, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

CHRISTOPHER F. McKEE, University of California at Berkeley

JAMES W. MITCHELL, AT&T Bell Laboratories

JEROME SACKS, National Institute of Statistical Sciences

A. RICHARD SEEBASS III, University of Colorado

LEON T. SILVER, California Institute of Technology
CHARLES P. SLICHTER, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
ALVIN W. TRIVELPIECE, Oak Ridge National Laboratory

NORMAN METZGER, Executive Director
vRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viThe National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering 

research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their 
use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by 

the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise 

the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Bruce M. 

Alberts is president of the National Academy of Sciences. 

The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the 
charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of 

outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the 
selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the 

responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of 

Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national 
needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior 
achievements of engineers. Dr. Wm. A. Wulf is president of the National 

Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy   
of Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate 
professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of 

the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National 

Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the 
federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical 

care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the 

Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and 
technology with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and 

advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general 

policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal 

operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National 

Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, 

and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered 
ointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. 
Alberts and Dr. Wm. A. Wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the 

National Research Council. 
www.national-academies.org
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceIn 1990, the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB)
decided to conduct a strategic forum on the rights and responsibilities of
participants in networked communities. The board was motivated by the
observation that participation in electronically networked communities was, even

then, growing by leaps and bounds, in environments including the Internet,

commercial network service providers, local bulletin boards, and company- and/

or office-based networks.
In November 1992, a small invitation-only workshop was held in
Washington, D.C., for prominent researchers and policy analysts to explore some
of the issues that have arisen in this area; much of the background information in

this report is drawn from that workshop. Participants in the workshop examined

user, provider, and other perspectives on different types of networked

communities, including those on the Internet, on commercial information services

such as PRODIGY and America OnLine, and on grass-roots networks (e.g., those

based on home electronic bulletin boards). Addressed were such questions as:
  What policies, laws, regulations, or ethical standards apply to the use of
these services; who sets them; how are they developed; and how are they
enforced?PREFACEviiRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  What are users' expectations regarding privacy and protection of other
proprietary interests?
  What are the rights, responsibilities, and liabilities of providers or
operators of these services?
  What are the rights, responsibilities, and liabilities of users of these
services?  What problems arise from connecting systems offering these services to
systems that operate under different policies?
The forum, held in February 1993, had a somewhat different structure and
aim. Although many of these same issues were addressed, the forum was

organized around a set of hypothetical scenarios designed to illuminate how

issues related to and associated with free speech, electronic vandalism, the

protection of intellectual property interests, and privacy might emerge. The intent

was to focus primarily on the concerns that policymakers in government and the
private sector might have. As a result, much of the forum discussion involved
questions of law and how the current legal regime helps to define the boundaries

of what is or is not acceptable conduct on electronic networks.
The themes of the forum were heralded in a keynote speech by Congressman
Edward Markey, chairman of the House Subcommittee on Telecommunications

and Finance of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. He noted the

technological convergence of computer, communications, and entertainment

technologies and pointed out that historical approaches based on differentiating

these technologies may create problems for policymakers in the future. He
underscored the importance of fundamental human values even in the new
electronic medium of networks, and he argued strongly that policymakers have to

address the negative as well as the positive aspects of the new medium.
This report is based on material drawn from the November 1992 workshop,
the February 1993 forum, deliberations of the steering committee, and other

material and events that have appeared in the interim. The workshop of the

American Association for the Advancement of Science and the American Bar

Association, "Legal, Ethical, and Technological Aspects of Computer and

Network Use and Abuse," held on December 17-19, 1993, was particularly
germane. The 1993 forum provided some background material on technology,
legal underpinnings, and the then-current policy environment, much of which is

incorporated into Chapters 
1 through 
3. Chapters 
4 through 
7 are devoted
primarily to discussions of the scenarios. 
Chapter 8
 focuses on the deliberations
of the steering committee, although comments from other speakers and

participants are liberally included. The five
PREFACEviiiRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.appendixes provide information about network technology (
Appendix A
), the
agendas for the workshop and forum (Appendixes 
B and 
C), Mr. Markey's
keynote speech (
Appendix D
), and biographies of the steering committee
(Appendix E
).As the report of a workshop/forum event, this report does not attempt to draw
conclusions, find definitive answers, or make specific recommendations; rather,

its purpose is to illuminate, to question, and to articulate thorny and problematic

issues that arise in this domain, thus helping to lay a foundation for more

informed public debate and discussion. Where possible, CSTB has checked with
individuals quoted in this report to ensure that their quotes are used in context.
The steering committee and editors are responsible for the synthesis and analysis

contained in this report. In addition, 
Chapter 1
 and 
Appendix A
 are based in part
on remarks made by Mitchell Kapor at the February forum, while 
Chapter 3
draws heavily on Anne Branscomb's presentation to the forum and her

subsequent work. Finally, Laura Ost, an independent writer, developed the initial

drafts of Chapters 
4 through 
7, and James Mallory of the CSTB staff contributed
to Appendix A
. The comments and criticisms of reviewers of early drafts of this
report and of its anonymous reviewers are gratefully acknowledged.
The CSTB will be glad to receive comments on this report as well as any
suggestions for further work in this area. Please send them via e-mail to

CSTB@NAS.EDU, or via regular mail to CSTB, National Research Council,
2101 Constitution Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20418.
PREFACEixRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 11 THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS
 62 NETWORKS AND SOCIETY
 173 LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS
 314 FREE SPEECH 555 ELECTRONIC VANDALISM 696 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS
 857 PRIVACY 998 COMMON THEMES
 113  APPENDIXES  A Network Technology
 123B Workshop Schedule and Session Descriptions
 137C Forum Statement of Purpose and Agenda
 142D Keynote Speech: Networked Communities and the Laws of
Cyberspace, byEdward Markey 146E Biographical Sketches
 158CONTENTS  
xiRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS  
xiiRights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive SummaryElectronic networks are a new communication medium that allows people to
interact, coordinate action, and access and exchange information, all from their
desktop computers. The networks have spawned a growing set of services that
now include electronic mail, electronic publications and bulletin boards,

conferencing, on-line information services and digital libraries, electronic

transactions, and computer playgrounds.
Computer and communications technology can, with a high degree of
assurance, be assumed to be increasingly capable for a long time to come. But
such technology is an enabler for a variety of social phenomena that are more
difficult to predict or understand, and the true intellectual challenges are much

more likely to arise from people's use of networks for communication and

information exchange than from the development of the technology to move large

amounts of electronic information rapidly from one place to another. At a

workshop held in November 1992 and a public forum in February 1993,

technologists, service providers, policy analysts, lawyers, and social scientists

from academia, industry, and government met to discuss some of the social issues

raised by the emergence of electronic communities. This report is based on the

discussions of the workshop and forum, as well as deliberations of the steering

committee and material that has appeared in the interim. Its purpose is not to draw

conclusions, find definitive answers, or make specific recommendations;
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.rather, its purpose is to illuminate, to question, and to articulate thorny and
problematic issues that arise in this domain, thus helping to lay a foundation for

more informed public debate and discussion.
The communication and information-interchange aspects of electronic
networks that provide benefits to our communities give rise to questions related to

the rights and responsibilities of participants in those communities: Who is liable

when someone posts a defamatory message, child pornography, or copyrighted

material on a public bulletin board? What are the legal and ethical obligations of a

service provider to screen public postings? What is the provider's obligation to
protect the privacy of users of its services? Does responsibility flow from
whether the provider has the technical ability to exercise control or from whether

the provider chooses to exercise control? What is the role of regulation and the

law versus that of ethics, informal community behavior, and the marketplace?

What constitutes fair use of copyrighted information? What is the nature of

informed consent relative to providing information?
The workshop provided a variety of background perspectives on issues such
as free speech and privacy. The forum itself began with presentations on the

nature of electronic networks and on the relevant legal perspectives. Within the

current legal regime, creators of information are provided legal protection (and

restraints) through copyright and patent laws. Publishers are protected primarily

under the First Amendment, although they, too, must abide by relevant
intellectual property law. Distributors govern their relationships with their
sources through contract and with their customers through both contract and more

informal business practices and codes of conduct. Carriers are subject to an

elaborate regulatory system established by law and administered by the Federal

Communications Commission and state regulatory agencies. Users are governed

by social customs (commonly called ''netiquette"), by contract with the providers

of the services they use, by federal and state statutes, and by common law if they

want to litigate about some harm that has occurred.
To explore the concepts of rights and responsibilities more fully, panels of
experts at the February forum considered four areas: free speech, electronic

vandalism, intellectual property interests, and privacy. For each area, two

scenarios were presented and the panelists were asked to address relevant issues

in the context of the scenarios; audience reaction to each of these panel

discussions was also sought. After all four panels had finished, the steering

committee attempted to identify and synthesize key themes. Certain important
points emerged from discussions in these areas, as described below.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Free speech.
 Providers of information services, such as commercial
networks, have some leeway in defining the services they provide and

thus their legal obligations, although their latitude may not be entirely

unlimited. (For example, under certain circumstances, it is conceivable

that even a private information service would have responsibilities for

access that are more traditionally associated with public forums.)
Providers that assert the right to control the content of public traffic may
be subject to a more stringent liability (e.g., for defamation) for that

traffic than those that do not assert such a right. At the same time,

economic considerations may influence commercial networks to assert a

higher degree of control. Information services supported by public

funds, operated by government, or otherwise deemed public cannot

discriminate among users on the basis of their electronic

communications for First Amendment reasons; common carriers cannot

refuse to carry traffic arbitrarily. Service providers of all types are well

advised to establish the rules under which they provide their services,

preferably in advance and perhaps in consultation with their users.
   Electronic vandalism.
 Current federal computer crime statutes are
limited in that they focus on a class of acts whose elements can be

difficult to define (e.g., what should be the definition of an

"unauthorized" user in a world of highly interconnected computers?) and

leave unaddressed a range of other acts that society may well wish to

criminalize or limit (e.g., harmful acts not now criminalized that are

deliberately committed by insiders who have legal access). Ancillary
issues such as determining the level of damage may also be problematic
in any given case. The relative newness of electronic networks as a

medium for human communication and behavior means that we as a

society collectively lack a great deal of shared experience about what is

and is not (or should not be considered) a crime. Legal precedents and

ethical standards applied to this new medium are ultimately the basis for

criminalizing behavior.
   Intellectual property.
 Although intellectual property is traditionally the
domain of copyright, patents, and trade secrets, most of the discussion of

intellectual property matters in a networked environment is related to

copyright, and discussions at the February 1993 forum reflected this

weighting. Copyrighted electronic materials are covered by fair-use

provisions in copyright law, although the nature of the electronic

medium with respect to the reproduction and/or alteration of information

amplifies concerns that have been addressed in other venues (e.g., in the
domain of photocopiers). The use of intellectual property can also be
controlled through licenses that have essentially unlimited freedom to

specify contractually the conditions
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of use. Nevertheless, many people see electronic networks as a threat
that will dilute the value of their intellectual work.
   Privacy. Privacy rights are never absolute but rather are rights that
society balances with the need or desirability for disclosure under

various circumstances. In many cases, individuals can make their own

decisions and choices regarding their privacy (e.g., by using electronic

mail (e-mail) systems that conceal the identity of the mail sender or by

encrypting their communications); however, that privacy may be

illusory. For example, a network that transmits e-mail may require its
users to acknowledge that all traffic is public, but its regular users may
become habituated to those warnings and may not internalize them.

Thus, what counts as a "reasonable expectation of privacy" on electronic

networks may not be clear in any given instance, even if policies are

made explicit in advance.
Why are these areas contentious? Analysis reveals substantive
disagreements rooted in value judgments. For example, forum participants

disagreed on the extent to which continuity with past precedents is desirable.

Lawyers and policymakers (mostly but not entirely) tended to argue that rights

and responsibilities in a new domain are inherently rooted in existing rules. The

laws, norms, policies, and practices governing any technology or behavior are
formed from precedents, often in response to conflicts that arise from customer or
market demands, criminal charges, and civil lawsuits. This is particularly obvious

with common law, since the resolution of court cases depends heavily on legal

precedents. But the same is true of other types of rules. In addition, rules tend to

originate in informal sources and then, over time, become codified, first through

common law litigation and later by legislation. For electronic networks, other

media including print, telephones, radio, and television have provided a rich set

of precedents to draw on. At the same time, precedents do not always provide

easy answers, in part because they are never identical to the case at hand and in

part because multiple precedents, with conflicting rules, may apply in a given

case.By contrast, many technologists who have extensive experience in using
electronic networks assert that with a new medium and a new form of human

expression should also come new rules of social intercourse specially adapted to

that new medium. For example, many providers of network services have

established policies and rules for the use of their services, and a body of case law

and legislative statutes is emerging specifically for electronic services. Thus, for

these people, questions about rights and responsibilities are not just philosophical
or even open to being weighed according to the rules
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY4
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.developed for other media, but rather must be addressed in rules specifically
formulated for electronic networks.
Other topics on which workshop and forum participants expressed differing
value judgments included the following:
   The extent to which the government should regulate behavior on
electronic networks,
   The role of the marketplace in influencing behavior,
   The value of sharing information freely versus keeping information
proprietary or private,
   The need for law that specifically relates to behavior on electronic
networks,   The nature of informed consent relevant to providing information, and
   The disposition of individuals who express no preference or inclination
regarding their putative rights on electronic networks.
These disagreements, and others not mentioned above, are heightened as the
concerns they raise (and have raised in the past) are magnified through the use of

networking technology. In the past, any apparent resolution of such concerns has

come about not because the concerns have disappeared or various stakeholders

have changed their minds, but because political compromises and the need to
move forward have driven decision making. Thus, resolution very much depends
on the circumstances of the moment, and solutions or approaches to these

disagreements will inevitably be a blend of past traditions, present realities, and

possible future directions. Networking technology reopens traditional debates

largely because it threatens the relevant status quo; with new circumstances, new

compromises become necessary, and thus the same fundamental questions need to

be reexamined.
If this is true, the debate over social norms on electronic networks will not
differ substantively from the debate over any other controversial social issue,

although the sophistication of the technological understanding required may well

make the debate a less informed one. This is not to say that the debates should

not be taking place, but only that our hopes about what such debates can
accomplish should be moderated. These debates will not resolve fundamental
issues or even result in consensus, but they can serve an educational role,

illuminating and illustrating issues and providing alternative visions of the future

for the concerned public.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1The Nature of Electronic Networks
A NEW MEDIUM FOR COMMUNICATION
Electronic networks, which are webs of electronically connected computers,
are a new medium for communication (see 
Appendix A
 for a description of
network technology). Consider:
   They offer new tools for interacting, coordinating action, and conducting
transactions.   They enable new ways of accessing, distributing, and sharing and
exchanging information.
   They provide new ways of learning, working, and playing.
   They give rise to new communities of people with shared interests and
concerns, and they generate new interest areas and new concerns.
Although electronic networks share many of the properties of other
communications media (e.g., postal mail, telephones, radio, and television), they

provide individuals and organizations with communication tools that are faster

and more efficient than postal mail, less
NOTE: In this chapter, all quoted material that is not otherwise identified originated
with the individual noted, speaking at the November 1992 workshop.
THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS6
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.controlled than radio and television, and more capable than the telephone or
stand-alone fax machine of supporting large distributions. At the same time,

networking (especially with networks tied to other networks) quite often involves

multiple entities that may have different operating policies and procedures; in this

regard, networking is unlike using more traditional media that tend to operate

under more uniform and centrally formulated policy guidelines.
Using electronic networks, people share experiences and activities that bind
them together (
Box 1.1). Although long-distance transportation systems,
telephones, and broadcast media have led to the formation of many

geographically dispersed communities that are defined more by shared interests

than geographical location (e.g., professional societies and nationwide clubs),

networks provide a medium that transcends distance and further enriches the
possibilitiesBOX 1.1 SOME OF WHAT PEOPLE CAN DO WITH NETWORKS
Ł   Write an electronic message and send it through an electronic mail
system.  Receive and reply to an electronic message, forward copies to other
people who are connected to the network, and clip out parts of the
message for inclusion in a report.
  Browse the catalogue of a digital library and scan the contents of
abstracts or full documents, and transmit selected documents to one's
computer for later reading or for incorporating into other documents.
  Locate, download, install, and run software in network-accessible
software libraries.
Compose an article or newsletter and send it out to thousands of people
on an electronic distribution list.
  Join on-line discussion groups that bring together people with shared
interests, composing and reading messages that form a continuing
conversation among potentially tens of thousands of "fellow travelers."
  "Telecommute" to work from a personal computer and engage in
business with fellow co-workers, customers, and suppliers.
  Enroll in a program of study at a remote school, and then receive
assignments, submit work, and interact with faculty through the network.
 and order goods and services.

  Connect to on-line entertainment centers and join other people in an
electronic fantasy game.
THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS7
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for global communities. The total number of network users in the world is
impossible to determine, but it would not be unreasonable to expect that tens of

millions of people have some direct contact with networked connections.
The concept of a community whose existence is enabled by electronic
networks is a useful departure point for the main topic of discussion of this

report: the rights and responsibilities of the members of networked communities.

Such matters inhere in how various communities of people use network

technologies, and not in the particular technologies themselves, a point that is all

too often lost in such discussions. The purpose of this report is to identify and
address important questions related to free speech, privacy, intellectual property,
and electronic vandalism as they arise in the context of networked communities;

these four areas are not the only dimensions of the rights and responsibilities of

network users, but they are important ones. This chapter and the next attempt to

identify the characteristics of the new communications medium and of the

communities that have formed around it.
THE NETWORK SCENEThe phenomenal increase in the number of network users in the past few
years has been driven by two technologies: personal computers (introduced in the

early 1980s) and networking technology (e.g., local area network technology

introduced in the mid-1980s and further development of wide area network

technology, including that deployed on the Internet and on various private and

public data networks). In particular, Internet use has increased exponentially
since 1983. By early 1994, estimates of the number of Internet users ranged from 2
million to 20 million (the upper end refers to electronic mail (e-mail) users), and

by mid-1994 at least 3 million host computers were linked by the Internet.
1 The
Internet is of particular interest because of its openness, the diversity of its users,

and its characteristic use as a vehicle for experimentation with new information

and communications services.Two fundamental aspects of the Internet are decentralized: its technology
and its governance. The Internet is based on packet-switching technology that

transmits a message between two points by breaking the message into packets

that travel independently and
1 Press release of the Internet Society, August 4, 1994. The Internet Society is the
international organization for the Internet, its technologies, and applications.
THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS8
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.often through different routes between sender and receiver. As with telephone
traffic, the path taken by data sent through the Internet is often not known in

advance.The governance of the Internet is also decentralized. That is, each site on the
Internet operates under its own locally formulated code of behavior or conduct,

though each site communicates with other sites. This is especially relevant given

that the Internet accommodates host sites of different types (academic,

commercial, government) and host sites located in different regions of the country

or in different countries. Since message traffic from point A to point B may
traverse sites with codes of behavior or conduct that are very different from those
that govern point A or point B, the retransmission of certain types of message

traffic along intermediate sites may be regarded as a violation of the code of those

intermediate sites. As David J. Farber, a University of Pennsylvania professor of

computer and information science, put it, "I don't know what they are doing with

my traffic. I don't know what laws I'm violating. 
– [W]e don't seem to have
either international agreements or case law [that are known to the general

community] that apply to the electronic communications area, and that is going to

be more and more a serious problem." International implications may also differ

depending on whether the network(s) in use is public or private.
Future developments may make today's Internet pale by comparison.
Present expansion of the Internet community has been fueled by an increasing

number of computer-literate individuals. A much larger pool of potential

networkers is represented by the canonical person on the street, who will resist

the use of computers until they are as easy to operate as telephones or televisions.
This is a market that telephone companies and cable television companies hope to
tap. Start-up companies, with backing from major consumer electronics

companies, are trying to bring messaging and information services to the general

public, as are a number of larger, more-established companies such as the Prodigy

Services Company and CompuServe. The promise is sophisticated, easy-to-use,

user-friendly information services, not for 10 million people but for hundreds of

millions of people.
2An important political development is the Clinton administration's
2 The issue of access to electronic resources by those in low-income, rural, and innercity
areas is an important question that many commentators and analysts are addressing under
the question of what "universal access" means in a networked environment. For reasons of
time and resources, the steering committee chose not to address this point in detail.
THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS9
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.support of a comprehensive network complex referred to as the National
Information Infrastructure (NII). The administration's view of the NII is sweeping

and grand and promises significant benefits for all in U.S. society.
3 But if the NII
is indeed to contribute to the betterment of society, it behooves the nation to

address issues related to the behavior of users and providers, as well as questions

of the NII's extent and reach, capability, quality, timing of service availability,
and cost.The broadening base of users of information services, the contemplation of
new uses in inherently personal arenas (e.g., the delivery of social services), and

the growth of information services for businesses and consumers have been

bringing the issues of rights and responsibilities to the attention of policymakers

at state and federal levels. Typically, the motivation for policy discussion is some
kind of a problem: a security breach in a private or public network, the
harassment of an individual via electronic mail, the controversy over whether

material available over a given service is pornographic and whether access to

such material can or should be controlled. Enough perceived problems and

controversy have been generated that private guidelines (codes of conduct) are

being developed, tried, and revised, and public guidelines (including regulations,

advisories from the Office of Management and Budget, or laws) are being

discussed.3 The following quotes are taken from the administration document 
The National
Information Infrastructure: Agenda for Action:
All Americans have a stake in the construction of an advanced National Information
Infrastructure (NII), a seamless web of communications networks, computers, databases,
and consumer electronics that will put vast amounts of information at users' fingertips.
Development of the NII can help unleash an information revolution that will change
forever the way people live, work, and interact with each other:
 People could live almost anywhere they wanted, without foregoing opportunities for
useful and fulfilling employment, by "telecommuting" to their offices through an
electronic highway.
 The best schools, teachers, and courses would be available to all students, without
regard to geography, distance, resources, or disability.
 Services that improve the U.S. health care system and respond to other important
social needs could be available on-line, without waiting in line, when and where they are
needed.See Information Infrastructure Task Force, 
The National Information Infrastructure:
Agenda for Action
, Washington, D.C., 1993.
THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS10
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In the Clinton administration the focal point for policy consideration in this
area has been the Information Infrastructure Task Force (IITF), a cross-cutting

interagency group whose role is to explore areas where policy may need to be

formulated or changed and to gather inputs from within and outside the

government. A major component of that task force is the Information Policy

Committee, which is examining policy issues in the area of privacy, security, and
intellectual property protection. Activities of that committee through mid-1994
included outreach, input gathering, deliberation (resulting in a draft of a set of

privacy principles that was circulated for public comment in May 1994), the

planning of a public forum to obtain input on security issues (held in July 1994),

the release in July 1994 of a report on how copyright law should be updated in

the age of ubiquitous electronic networks, and the planning of a conference to

address how fair-use provisions of copyright law may be applied to the electronic

realm. Although some of the administration activities are intended to drive

proposals for legislation, the Congress itself has addressed related issues (e.g.,

Senator Paul Simon introduced S. 1735, the Privacy Protection Act of 1994, a

bill that would establish a U.S. data protection commission to advise the U.S.

government on, among other things, matters related to protecting data stored in
electronic form), and telecommunications reform legislation may eventually
address relevant issues. Meanwhile, these issues are also being addressed
Šthrough reports, polemics, meetings, and exploratory committees
Šby an
assortment of private entities, including trade, professional, and advocacy

groups, such as the Telecommunications Policy Roundtable, the Coalition for

Networked Information, EDUCOM, the Electronic Frontier Foundation,

Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, the Internet Society, the

Computer Ethics Institute, the Information Industries Association, and so on, as

well as direct representation from the entertainment, cable, telephone and

telecommunications, and information-providing and publishing industries.
4This large and growing set of actors on the policy stage suggests that the
future may be only dimly visible today. What is clear is that the nation is on the

threshold of an era in which the networking
4 Several groups have issued reports in the past year with the intention of influencing
public policy and attitudes regarding the NII. See, for example, Computer Professionals
for Social Responsibility (CPSR), 
Serving the Community: A Public Interest Vision of the
National Information Infrastructure
, CPSR, Palo Alto, Calif., 1994; and Council on
Competitiveness, 
Competition Policy: Unlocking the National Information Infrastructure,
Washington, D.C., December 1993.
THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS11
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.environment will be highly open and commercial, very heterogeneous, and with
rules that may look quite different from those to which ''old hands" at networking

are accustomed. The ultimate social impact of electronic networks may be about

as well understood today as that of the telephone in 1876. Many of those who

first supported the deployment of the telephone argued that it would enable music

to be brought from the performance hall to the home; many fewer imagined that
it would become the center of personal and business communications.
NETWORK METAPHORSElectronic networks offer new communication tools for interacting and for
coordinating action. Three metaphors have emerged for characterizing the new

medium and the functions it enables: cyberspace, the information superhighway,

and the electronic marketplace. Each of these metaphors emphasizes a particular

use of electronic networks and, in so doing, facilitates our understanding of the
new medium by illuminating its salient features and the social and legal issues
they raise. As with most metaphors, however, the interpretations that emerge are

limiting and can be misleading
Ša point often overlooked by their users. Thus,
this report does not systematically favor the use of one metaphor over another.
CyberspaceThe term "cyberspace" originated with the science fiction writer William
Gibson, who characterized it as a "consensual hallucination of visually realized

data achieved through plugging in to a global computer network."
5 It could be
experienced by making a direct, physical link between an individual's brain and

the semiotic data available on a global computer network. The use of the word
"space" within the term suggests that cyberspace has some similarities to
physical space.Current usage focuses on this notion of electronic networks constituting a
virtual place that transcends physical space and national boundaries.
6 People go to
cyberspace, travel on its electronic roads
5 William Gibson, 
Neuromancer
, Ace Science Fiction, Berkeley Publishing Group, New
York, 1984. Note that cyberspace need not be limited to visually realized data; simulated

sounds and touch are also included.
6 Although the idea of nonphysical space may sound metaphysical, John Perry Barlow
has observed that most individuals have already had some experience with cyberspace
THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS12
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and highways, and settle into virtual communities
Šall from their office or
home. They visit "electronic pubs" and "town squares" by participating in

discussion groups on bulletin boards and "newsgroups." They join virtual

communities that form around shared interests. They socialize with people all

over the world.The metaphor is used to suggest a new frontier
Ša place that is not yet
settled, where anarchy often prevails. Issues related to rights and responsibilities

are often framed in the context of how to civilize or establish law and order in the

new frontier. Inhabitants believe they should be free to create their own rules and

laws. The metaphor also draws attention to issues relating to freedom, particularly

free speech and free press, and raises issues of privacy and of search and seizure

within the virtual space.
A potential limitation of the cyberspace metaphor is that it may
overemphasize a new virtual space at the expense of the broader and historical

context in which networking technology is embedded. Other communications

technologies (e.g., mail, telephones, television) enable people to transcend the

limitations of space and time as well, and considerable human effort has been

expended to establish rules and practices for using these technologies. The focus
on a new frontier overlooks the societies that developed and deployed the new
technologies and the laws, practices, and traditions these societies have already

established governing behavior performed by someone within their jurisdiction.

The metaphor suggests that we are engaging in some wholly new set of actions

when in fact we are merely using new tools to engage in very basic human acts of

communication and coordination of action.
The Information Superhighway
The "information superhighway" metaphor emphasizes the use of electronic
networks to access and distribute information. It suggests that the primary

purpose of the networks is to carry information and that that information travels

over the information highway much as cars and trucks travel over physical

highways. The information highway links information providers (e.g., digital

libraries) to users. On/off ramps connect a high-bandwidth superhighway to
as a practical reality: cyberspace is the location of the conversation when two or more
people talk on the telephone. Any money that you do not currently have in your wallet or
purse or bank vault, if it exists anywhere, exists in the cyberspace of the modern electronic
banking system.
THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS13
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.lesser highways, and lesser highways to organizations and individuals. The
metaphor is embodied in the administration's plans for the NII.
The focus on information leads to the issue of who has access and whether
the new technology will lead to a widening gap between information "haves" and

"have nots." The metaphor also raises issues relating to intellectual property and

to privacy and security (information protection). Publication and distribution of

information raise issues of free speech and free press, and the possession of

information raises issues related to search and seizure.
A particularly controversial implication of the metaphor is that it suggests a
key role for government in promoting its development: just as the government

was a major force behind the construction of the federal highway system, so also

will the government be a major force driving the deployment of the information

superhighway. The controversy has several important aspects. The first is that it

suggests a major government role in funding deployment, in spite of the fact that

the administration has made it clear that its vision for the NII depends on the
private sector making most of the investments for the physical infrastructure and
for the services and information to be provided over that infrastructure. In the

administration's view, the role of government will be to provide leadership and

guidance for the NII. A second important aspect is that many proponents of the

information superhighway argue for a bottom-up, grass-roots character to its

development and deployment, while the construction of the interstate highway

system was undertaken top-down with intimate government direction. A third

aspect is that major government involvement suggests the possibility that federal,

state, and local governments will be working together to provide the network of

connecting streets, on-ramps, off-ramps, and the like to every community on the

main "superhighway." Whether such partnerships will in fact be feasible remains

to be seen, and the nature of appropriate government involvement in the National
Information Infrastructure remains the subject of considerable argument and
debate.Finally, a potential limitation of the metaphor is that it may overemphasize
information at the expense of the use of the technology to coordinate action, to

conduct transactions, and to communicate informally. For example, many of the

examples offered by proponents of the information superhighway involve the

transmittal of large volumes of information, information that is traditionally

understood as something related to knowledge and data or something that can be

learned from a book or a lecture. Many fewer examples deal with the use of the
information infrastructure for coordination and the like,
THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS14
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.despite the models offered by many service and manufacturing enterprises in
using private networks (perhaps operating over leased public lines) for these

purposes.7The Electronic MarketplaceFor many people, the "electronic marketplace" metaphor emphasizes the
growing use of electronic networks to engage in transactions, both formally and

informally, to acquire goods (often information) and services such as education.

It resembles the physical marketplace and is a part of the global marketplace.
Because information is an important good in the electronic marketplace, the
marketplace metaphor raises the same issues as the information superhighway

metaphor. However, it does so more powerfully by showing that the issues arise

in the context of transactions. For example, the information superhighway

metaphor suggests that it is sufficient to give everyone access to the electronic
highway in order to close the gap between the information "haves" and "have
nots." The marketplace metaphor shows that simple access may not make much

difference if the information available through the technology must be

purchased. The marketplace metaphor also shows that information privacy relates

to the use of information in transactions (e.g., selling mailing lists) and not just to

the information independent of its use. In addition, the marketplace metaphor

raises new questions about concerns such as accountability and fraud,

racketeering, and other criminal acts associated with transactions. Finally, it calls

attention to the idea that while individuals may have the right to market

information goods and services, the costs of selling their wares on networks may

be prohibitive.
The marketplace metaphor is sometimes referred to as the "electronic agora"
in analogy with the public square in ancient Greece that served as the marketplace

and center of civic life. This usage brings to life the community aspects of the

cyberspace metaphor, but does so more powerfully by including the transactions
that take place within those communities.
The use of the marketplace metaphor is likely to increase as more
7 See, for example, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National
Research Council, 
Information Technology in the Service Society: A Twenty-First Century
Lever, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1994; Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 
Information Technology and
Manufacturing: An Agenda for Research
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.,
forthcoming.THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS15
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.goods and services become available over networks and methods of making and
receiving electronic payments securely are implemented. This metaphor

emphasizes the actions that people take using the new communications medium,

and not just the inert information that flows through the networks or the

communities that form around common interests. Rights and responsibilities

relate to actions and define which actions are encouraged, allowed, discouraged,
or forbidden.
However, despite its strengths, the metaphor also has potential limitations.
One is that it is easily interpreted to emphasize commercial transactions at the

expense of noncommercial interactions. Thus, not-for-profit ventures and

activities (e.g., education, government) may feel less than comfortable with it. A

second is that with its economic connotations, it suggests that a kind of laissez-
faire philosophy governs operations in the electronic marketplace, when the
extent and nature of government regulation are policy issues that have not yet

been settled (and are unlikely to be settled for a long time to come). A third is

that some commentators use "electronic marketplace" with closer attention to its

political origins and in the same sense that the term "marketplace of ideas" is

usedŠas a description of an arena in which ideas and/or information are freely
circulated to all without regard to size or political power, are exposed to public

scrutiny or use, and survive or disappear according to their quality and value.
THE NATURE OF ELECTRONIC NETWORKS16
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Networks and Society
The glamour of network technologies is impressive, but it should not blind
us to the social and intellectual challenges posed by new media. The real
challenges are much more likely to arise from the people using networks for
communication and information exchange than from the development of the

technology to move large amounts of electronic information very rapidly from

one place to another, though technology itself may enable new ways of meeting

these challenges. It is the communication and information interchange aspects of

the networks that provide benefits to our communities and also give rise to the

need to examine how networks relate to culture and society.
NETWORKS AND CULTURE
Networks and culture can be examined from two perspectives: the nature of
network culture (culture "in the small") and the impact of networks on culture at
large.1NOTE: In this chapter, all quoted material that is not otherwise identified originated
with the individual noted, speaking at the November 1992 workshop.
1 The literature on the social dynamics in networked environments is extensive. Good
discussions include: Lee Sproull and Sara Kiesler, 
Connections: New Ways of Working in
the Networked Organization,
 MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1991; National Research
Council, People and Technology in the Workplace,
 National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C., 1991; and Tora K. Bikson and J.D. Eveland, 
Technology Transfer as a Framework
for Understanding Social Impacts of Computerization,
 The Rand Corporation, Santa
Monica, Calif., 1990.
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY17
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.It is clear that members of networked communities engage in social
behavior. For example, these individuals have been known to "meet" each other

in these on-line communities. At these meetings, they discuss personal and

professional matters, find jobs, advertise their services, engage in "stalking"

behavior, and become visibly angry.
On-line social interactions provide the behavioral basis on which much
network culture is generated and reproduced; such interactions are also the

subject of the behavior that is regulated by culture at large. As a general rule,

culture can be regarded as a collection of three elements: (1) values, or general

statements about the "desirable"; (2) behavioral norms, including etiquette and

convention, that provide the basis for judging, in individual situations, whether a

value is being observed, thus regulating behavior in the interest of implementing

or reinforcing values; and (3) beliefs that provide history, mythology, and world

view. All of these apply to networked communities in various forms. For

example:1. Many networked communities believe strongly in the desirability of
unfettered communication. At the same time, many (especially those

that reside on the Internet) believe strongly that commercial

advertising traffic is highly undesirable.
2. People observe forms of etiquette and social convention in networked
communities. For example, behavior that is regarded by community

members as antisocial is censured through peer pressure and

comments (but generally not censored). Even behavior as subtle as

typing in capital letters has significance, in that TYPING IN

CAPITAL LETTERS IS WIDELY REGARDED AS THE

ELECTRONIC EQUIVALENT OF SHOUTING.
3. Networked communities have their own myths, their own equivalents
of urban folklore stories such as alligators in the sewers. One

persistently recurring myth is the report that some government

agency is about to impose a modem tax that will make it

prohibitively expensive for private users to use telephone lines to

transmit data. The story may have some origin in truth,
2 but it
surfaces so2 This story apparently has its roots in two distinct events. In the early
1980s, a proposal was circulated to impose a charge on the leased lines used

by on-line information services providers. The providers would have paid

this charge, but in all likelihood it would have been passed to the ultimate

consumers. In addition, in the early 1970s, a proposal surfaced in the Mid-

west to impose a small additional surcharge on telephone lines that were

self-declared to be supporting data communications traffic. Both these

proposals died very quickly, but their effects linger on.
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY18
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.often as a "new" story that it can be regarded as the network
equivalent of an urban folktale.
In short, network cultures exist because networked communities exist, and
they are as diverse as any collection of human beings can be. Networked

communities exist because networks enable individuals with shared interests or

affinities to affiliate electronically.
As with physical communities, network cultures are not homogeneous, and
the participants in networked communities often have conflicting values. A

recurrent issue in university communities, for example, is whether pornographic

images or "hate speech" should be banned. Although some universities have

banned entire electronic "newsgroups" that were judged pornographic, most have
stayed away from such censoring.
3 Several years ago, Stanford University banned
an electronic newsgroup on humor because of complaints about an ethnic joke.

The newsgroup was subsequently restored after campus protests about free

speech.Electronic networks have also had an impact on culture at large. For
example, commercial on-line services have become the virtual equivalent of

"singles" bars for many individuals. Using the real-time conferencing services

provided by these services, many people seek on-line conversation with potential

romantic partners. They flirt through their keyboards, developing romances and
carrying on "illicit" or clandestine affairs. In some instances, individuals who
have interacted on-line meet face to face and develop relationships in person;

marriages have been known to result from such interactions.
A second example is that computer networks have become a grassroots
vehicle for lobbying against government and commercial actions. For instance, a

large software company once attempted to market a product that contained a large

database of information about consumers. An electronic protest was organized

against it on the grounds that it had many privacy implications. These protests

flooded the electronic mailbox of the company's chief executive officer. As a
result, the product was withdrawn.
Finally, computer networks have served as important political tools. For
example, the Relcom, the Soviet network on the Internet, played a significant role

in the dissemination of information during the Soviet coup attempt in 1991.

Relcom was used both for communication among the coup resisters and for

communication with the
3 A newsgroup is one form of electronic conference. See 
Appendix A
 for more details.
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY19
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.outside. Some considered it to be one of the best sources of information.
By themselves, the examples given above and many others like them are not
individually significant; that is, they do not necessarily demonstrate how

networks will be used in the future. But taken together they do illustrate a general

and fundamental point
Šthat networks may change conduct and behavior in
significant and multiple ways across life and society.
CONFLICTING VALUES IN NETWORKED COMMUNITIES
As noted above, networked communities are not monolithic. With their
proliferation (and the interconnection of many across geographic or political

boundaries), electronic networks have been described variously as models of

"anarchy," "extreme decentralization," and "accelerating decentralization." Most

networked communities have little hierarchical administrative structure and few

central administrative procedures or systematic methods of policy enforcement,
although some communities (e.g., those resident in universities or private
companies) operate under the aegis of a single administrative entity and are

subject to the rules promulgated by that entity
Šand yet each of these
communities may manifest its own "culture'' within those rules. Under these

circumstances, it is perhaps understandable that different networked communities

might have different values.
Many universities govern their electronic networks through campus policies
that are substantially the same as the policies governing other pieces of university

infrastructure. Freedom of speech (discussed more extensively in 
Chapter 4
)tends to be an overriding value on these networks, based on the principles of

academic freedom.
4 But incidents challenging this freedom arise frequently.
Jeffrey I. Schiller, network manager at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, for example, notes that at least once a month someone asserts
harassment as the result of someone else's electronic free speech. The values that

govern behavior may be blurred further by campus
4 For instance, the "Joint Statement on Rights and Freedoms of Students" issued in 1967
by the American Association of University Professors, U.S. National Student Association,
Association of American Colleges, National Association of Student Personnel
Administrators, and National Association of Women Deans and Counselors holds that
"academic institutions exist for the transmission of knowledge, the pursuit of truth, the
development of students, and the general well-being of society. Free inquiry and free

expression are indispensable to the attainment of these goals."
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY20
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.connections through the Internet to other institutions or organizations that may
have different values. "And the only thing that has made the situation tenable has

been the fact that most of the policies have significant amounts of overlap and

nobody is enforcing them," Schiller said. "Only the most outrageous behavior

will ever raise an eyebrow. 
–"A different balance of values is found in the world of commercial network
service providers. Commercial providers are highly motivated to provide a range

of network services that appeal to large audiences and generally try to suppress

message traffic found offensive by significant segments of these audiences. For

example, a commercial provider will often explicitly prohibit overtly sexual

real-time chats on its network.
A third example illustrates the problem of even defining the boundaries of an
electronic community. In July 1994, a California couple was convicted by a

Tennessee jury of transmitting obscene images through interstate telephone lines

through their bulletin board system,
5 thus raising the question of whether it is the
community standards of California or Tennessee that are relevant to the Supreme

Court's position that community standards should define what does or does not

constitute "obscenity."In short, people who use electronic networks subscribe to a range of values
that is highly diverse. Although they still represent an elite group in the context

of the global population, users vary widely in terms of age, cultural background,

and interests. For example, William Dutton, a professor at the Annenberg School

for Communication at the University of Southern California (USC), polled all

users of a USC bulletin board system and a random sample of 50 users from the
Public Electronic Network (PEN) system
6 in Santa Monica, California, from
among all those who had logged onto the system more than 10 times during a

particular month. He found that users "vary dramatically in the values and norms

they bring to how rights and responsibilities should be negotiated."
7 Based on this
work, Dutton developed a typology of user values that includes five categories:
5 "Couple Convicted of Pornography Sold Over Computer Network," 
New York Times,
July 31, 1994, Section 1, p. 15.
6 The PEN had more than 4,000 registered users as of November 1992, and it provides
two-way information, e-mail, and conference services for citizens, free of charge.
7 Dutton suggested several reasons for these differences, including characteristics of the
network system used (particularly its ownership), individual differences among users, and

characteristics of the social context within which the discussion takes place.
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY21
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1. Civil libertarians, who value free speech above all;
2. Regulators, who "call for censorship and actually are more concerned
about the privacy invasion and intrusive aspects of the system than

they are about First Amendment issues";
3. Formalists, who rely on previously written documents and are
satisfied with the status quo;
4. Property rights advocates, who believe individual users have no
rights and are given the privilege of using the system by USC, which

has the right to make the rules; and
5. Balancers, who weigh the conflicting values of free speech and
privacy.To many experienced network users, this typology does not seem at all
unfamiliar (though the various sizes of the groups differ depending on the

electronic community in question). The fragmentation is heightened by the fact

that user viewpoints are not immutable, especially as a given individual may be a

member of many different communities operating on many different networks.

Sara Kiesler, a professor of social sciences and social psychology at Carnegie
Mellon University, noted that a user's attitudes may change because "this same
person in a different situation has a very different view of the rights that he has."
ENFORCEMENT OF BEHAVIORAL NORMS IN NETWORKED
COMMUNITIESThe means for enforcing behavioral norms in networked communities are as
diverse as user values. For example, commercial providers have contractual

agreements with users. Several million individuals use these services.
8 Users tend
to view the contracts through which their use arrangements are governed less as

disciplinary mechanisms than as "guarantees of quality of service," according to

Eberhard Wunderlich, division manager of low-speed services product

management at AT&T Data Communications Services. Nevertheless, these

agreements prohibit certain types of conduct, such as the distribution of obscene

or threatening material, and network providers are under pressure to enforce such
rules to avoid offending clients.
8 The three largest services are CompuServe (2.3 million users), PRODIGY (2 million),
and America OnLine (1 million). Figures provided September 1994 by the public relations
office of each organization.
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY22
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Still other networked communities are governed by informal social
pressures. For example, on the PEN, self-appointed "thread police" keep users

from straying off the topic in conferences. "Anything goes, and, therefore, they

push a great deal of responsibility on self-policing," explained Dutton. "And the

thread police have been one of the creatures of the self-policing. 
– The thread
police will either talk to people on-line or try to talk them into getting into
another conference." On the Internet, miscreant behavior is often addressed by
members of the community sending many electronic messages protesting the

behavior to the person responsible.
Social pressures also may be applied on corporate networks. For years now,
the IBM Corporation has had a "sensitive forum" where users may discuss

problems concerning each other's messages; almost immediately after the forum

was established, users began making rules, according to Davis A. Foulger,

advisory programmer at IBM's T.J. Watson Research Center. "The rules were

never written down formally as a code, but in fact they are enforced rigorously by
e-mail, and nobody wants 10,000 IBMers to put mail in their mailbox all at
once," Foulger said. "Dozens of these kinds of rules 
– have emerged through
discussion in our media."
Yet another sort of etiquette is common on many electronic bulletin boards
and computer conferences. Conferences normally are moderated by an individual

who lacks formal powers but regulates activity by severing electronic links with

troublesome users. As Jack Rickard, editor of 
Boardwatch (a magazine that
serves bulletin board operators), said, "There is very limited control of the

content of these message areas. 
– The bulletin board right now is essentially
untaxed, unregulated, and censored by rumor more than anything else."
HOW CULTURAL NORMS EVOLVE: AN HISTORICAL
PERSPECTIVECultural norms may derive from many different sources. As described by
Professor Henry Perritt of Villanova University School of Law, these sources

include legislatures, administrative agencies, negotiated contracts, tort law,

common law, informal associations, common practice, and academia. Rules tend

to originate in informal sources, and then, over time, are codified, first through

common law litigation and later by legislatures, Perritt said. Network enforcers

basically have three options: disconnect rule breakers, employ peer or social
pressures, or apply the law. Although making rules for electronic networks is
challenging, enforcing the rules may be even more problematic, he noted,

because of technological and economic
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY23
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.barriers to enforcement. Attorney Lance Rose gave the example that "the ease of
spread of information on networks can, on a practical level, defeat various kinds

of intellectual property enforcement. 
– If you put something on the network, it's
gone before you blink an eye."
Alan F. Westin, a professor of law and public government at Columbia
University, described a predictable pattern to the development of rules and norms

for new forms of communication. At first, the activity is sheltered and informal,

involving only a small number of individuals. As more users engage in the new

form of communication, government agencies begin to seek related records for
tax and criminal investigations. Then users begin to file civil lawsuits against
various parties for assorted wrongs. Tax issues also arise; the government must

determine, for instance, whether and how tax-exempt organizations may use the

emerging form of communication. Then freedom-of-information issues come to

the fore; some records will be public, especially if taxpayer money has been

used, but someone must identify the exceptions that should be kept private.
Thus, the law becomes important because it settles conflicts and, in so
doing, forms a context for resolving issues in the future. As attorney Allan R.

Adler said, "What the law is supposed to do is prevent and resolve conflicts,

typically over values and property 
– [and] any communications medium, by
definition, is going to raise the prospect of conflicts over values and property."

Electronic forms of communication are evolving in an established legal context
and at the same time are reshaping the law, Adler noted.
Because the law is the forum of final appeal, the development of legal
precedents or models that can be used in networked communities is of significant

interest. This is no small undertaking. Information services once fell into three

more or less distinct categories
Šnewspapers, broadcasts, and telephone
networksŠeach with different rules of access, liability, and freedom of speech.
"Well, the problem is that these neat compartments are breaking down 
–,"Perritt noted. "Not only that
Šwe have some new kinds of roles emerging. It's no
longer only the provider of the information and the customer; we [also] have new

kinds of intermediaries that are very important."
Anne Wells Branscomb, a communications lawyer with the Center for
Information Policy Research at Harvard University, said electronic networks "are

a new environment with which we have not had enough legal experience to know

exactly what rules apply. So I think we have a whole new legal world to worry

about."The emergence of cultural norms is often crystallized by some kind of
dramatic event or crisis that underscores the need for new
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY24
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.norms or the ambiguity in existing norms. For example, certain crime legislation
in California passed in 1994 mandating life sentences without parole for those

with three convictions for certain types of felonies was the fairly direct outcome

of a social campaign initiated after a dramatic case of kidnapping and murder.

More generally, the development of civil liberties law has been chronicled in

large part by decisions precipitated by specific acts of injustice perpetrated by
kings and political leaders in the context of uncertainty or ambiguity about their
privileges or rights to commit those acts.
As of this writing, a similar pattern can be seen in the response of networked
communities to the "Clipper" proposal. This proposal from the Clinton

administration calls for a standard of secure communication that would

nevertheless enable law enforcement authorities to decipher these

communications upon issuance of an appropriate judicial warrant.
9 Although the
Clipper proposal is limited to telephone communications, the overwhelming

sentiment in various communities and public forums on the Internet is negative.
10Congressional hearings have been called on this subject, and the status of

legislation affecting this proposal is unclear.
ETHICS, LAW, AND THE PROMOTION OF SOCIALLY
ACCEPTABLE BEHAVIORWhat is the role of law in the promotion of socially acceptable behavior?
Law is arguably a norm that applies across the entire jurisdiction of a political

state. Moreover, the phrase "socially acceptable behavior" in this context implies a

consensus on what constitutes behavior that is acceptable across that jurisdiction.

For a variety of reasons, some deny that a consensus exists, or even that a

consensus can exist, and they do not recognize the value in consulting existing

legal regimes for guidance. For example, David Hughes, of Old Colorado City

Communications, claimed at the February 1993 forum that human behavior on

electronic networks exists outside of
9 Office of the White House Press Secretary, "The Clipper Chip," August 16, 1993;
Office of the White House Press Secretary, document describing implementation of
recommendations of the interagency review of encryption policy, February 4, 1994. Both

documents can be found in David Banisar, 
1994 Cryptography and Privacy Sourcebook
,Electronic Privacy Information Center, Washington D.C. (Diane Publishing, Upland, Pa.),
1994.10 Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, "Computer Users Call on
Administration to Drop Encoding Plan," press release of April 29, 1994. This document
can be found in David Banisar, 
1994 Cryptography and Privacy Sourcebook,
 1994.
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY25
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.present social norms and laws. He drew an analogy to space exploration, noting
that "there was no space law until you could reach there. Space was not legally

regulated."11To be sure, law
Šand the coercive power of the state to enforce law
Štendsto be the mechanism invoked by society to shape behavior only after all other

avenues have been exhausted and found not to be effective. These other avenues

include friendly persuasion, parental admonition, social pressure, contracts,

licenses, or informal agreements. How such costs and benefits are weighed by

those involved is an important factor in determining what avenue is more
appropriate for the given problem to be solved. Through these other avenues,
codes and standards of acceptable behavior and etiquette are established and

enforced. Indeed, this is one key purpose of education: to socialize people into

internalizing the rules of behavior that the community has come to accept as

reasonable.On electronic networks, all of these nonlegal mechanisms are used. For
example, a popular book called 
Zen and the Art of the Internet
12 describes a set of
"netiquette" rules
Šrules that Internet users are inclined to accept and expected to
follow. Newcomers who behave in a manner inconsistent with these rules are

subject to reprimand from the group.
With most commercial network service providers, a condition of use to
which all users must agree is that users will abide by a certain set of rules about

acceptable behavior; violators can be punished by the provider's discontinuing

their access to the system. Contractual
11 On the other hand, a legal regime does exist for space today, as does one for the sea.
Both are aspects of international law. International dimensions of network connectivity
will increase as more nations connect to a global network, but the extent to which

international law will be relevant remains open. The reason is that in the absence of a
supra-national mechanism to enforce international laws, such laws are enforceable only
with the acquiescence of a violating party. For example, a treaty to which the United
States and the former Soviet Union are parties forbids the placement of nuclear weapons
on the moon or on the terrestrial seabed. The parties refrain from taking such actions

because they do not regard the taking of such actions as being in their long-term self-
interest. However, an intentional and continuing violation of this treaty by one party could
result only in unilateral actions taken by the other party, since there is no supra-national

mechanism to force compliance with the treaty. In general, what keeps parties in
compliance with treaty obligations is that the parties have more to gain in the long run than
they have to lose, rather than the fact of any external enforcement of such compliance. But
as parties that do not play by such rules connect to the global network, increasing
pressures for more effective enforcement mechanisms may result.
12 Brendan P. Kehoe, 
Zen and the Art of the Internet: A Beginner's Guide
, 2nd Ed., PTR
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1993.
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY26
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.relationships between users and providers can be tailored according to the needs
of the parties involved, and they often reduce the delays of legislation and the

costs of litigation. Others question this strategy, arguing that the contractual

relationship is not an even playing field because the user is most often a single

person rather than a corporation, and the provider is usually a corporate entity

with financial resources far superior to those of most individuals.
Bulletin board operators often operate in a similar fashion: they write their
own rules and set them forth the first time a new user logs in. Enforcement

provisions are similar to those used by commercial providers. The playing field is

arguably more even because most bulletin board operators are relatively small in

scale, and thus potential individual users have relatively more clout and greater

freedom of choice.
13Many universities have codes of acceptable network behavior as well. For
example, EDUCOM has promulgated a bill of rights and responsibilities for users

in the academic community that it urges its members to respect. When adopted,

such codes are a part of the rules and regulations governing the academic

community, and all relevant academic mechanisms for enforcing rules and

regulations are available to university policymakers for dealing with miscreant
electronic behavior.
Kiesler suggested that human behavior, both good and bad, is more extreme
on electronic networks than in other arenas, thus underscoring the need for

effective ways to regulate behavior. "I don't mean that people turn into terrible

beasts on networks, but on average there is more misbehavior, there is more

gossip, there is more 'flaming,'
14 there are more extreme opinions, and there is
more harassment on networks than there is in other areas," she said. Moreover,
the consequences may be worse on networks than in other situations, in that more

people are affected and false rumors can spread beyond a local population,

Kiesler suggested. She added, "The issue is not how we crack down on people,

but how we promote more prosocial behavior. 
– What do we do to promote
more responsibility taking [and] ethical and moral behavior in network

communities?"13 The importance of a user's ability to choose among various service providers is
underscored by the administration's position regarding user responsibilities: users rather
than government or providers should be the ones to protect user sensibilities.
14 "Flaming" refers to the making of insulting and ad hominem attacks against another
person, generally without much reflection or thought but with a great deal of (presumed)
emotion.NETWORKS AND SOCIETY27
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.How this will evolve in the future is an open question, and speculation on
whether civility and decorum and respect for others will increase (as more users

demand standards for reasonable behavior) or decrease (as the presence of more

users leads to greater fragmentation on the network) is just that
ŠspeculationŠatthis time.
John Perry Barlow, a co-founder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation,
framed the issue as part of the challenge of community development. Cyberspace

is the community of the future, but it is still emerging, Barlow said; it is "the

latest thing in suburbs" as opposed to an updated model of the cohesive small

town. Cyberspace still lacks a sense of community experience, which provides a

seasoned benchmark for evaluating information, and a sense of responsibility,

which derives from development of individual identity, he said. Barlow argued
that it was necessary for society to trust a messy process of sorting out
community ethics, values, and conscience rather than turn to the law, which by its

nature cannot be expected to provide adequate guides to behavior in a rapidly

evolving environment. He further suggested that a sense of personal responsibility

has been difficult to develop or enforce on electronic networks because of

conflicting desires to both authenticate and conceal identities.
Governance of electronic network communities poses special challenges and
opportunities. Using a "many-to-many" communications mode, all members of an

electronic community can in principle be heard and their comments made part of

the official record (this is the root of the political electronic marketplace

metaphor described in 
Chapter 1
). This raises the interesting question of the role
of elected representatives and how they are to participate in the system. In
electronic communities, peer participation and consensus building through
iterative discussion are often the rule, but the active participants jealously guard

their rights to determine for themselves the rules under which they will operate.
15Some commentators have
15 A major complication to the very concept of consensus
Špresent in most
nonelectronic communities but particularly important in electronic ones
Šis that most
electronic groups include many individuals who do not make active contributions but
instead are content to remain "lurkers" who just listen. Indeed, in most groups, the number
of people encompassed by a mailing list (i.e., the number of people who receive messages
addressed to that mailing list) is much larger than the number of people who ever send
anything in. Thus, "consensus" can be achieved only among the people who are willing to

engage in a discussion.NETWORKS AND SOCIETY28
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.even suggested that electronic networks are fundamentally a medium conducive
to democracy.16Although many speakers at the workshop and forum argued that community
values and ethics should be given priority, other speakers emphasized that the

ethical foundation for behavior on electronic networks was shaky, due largely to a

lack of consensus about what constitutes "reasonable" behavior. For example,

Branscomb said that where electronic networks are concerned, ethics and the law

often conflict, due to shortcomings in the latter. She observed that "when the laws

don't make [sense] it erodes ethical values, and that is what is happening, to a
large extent. I know a lot of the computer scientists have said the laws really are a
pain, they don't make any sense. 
– I think a lot of that is happening with the
copyright law [for example]. It's easy to replicate things, and the copyright rules

don't make sense to a lot of us [the users], so we just ignore them. And therefore,

we really are in the process of developing the ethical values which we have to

impose upon the system before we can decide what laws we want to enact."
17Nonetheless, once laws are passed, all those within the applicable political
jurisdiction are subject to those laws, and so the existing legal regime does affect

networks; existing law does affect and constrain the behavior of all of us. Instead

of asking whether or not law affects behavior on networks, a more useful question

might be, How should laws be formulated so that they produce the desired effect?

Speaking of another medium, Westin attributed the success of certain laws to
their origins in the community that those laws would affect. He specifically cited
the privacy provisions in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (Public

Law 98-549), which were based on a code developed years before by Warner

Amex. He further suggested that laws regulating behavior on electronic networks

might well and fruitfully be based on the expectations of reasonable
16 David Hughes argued that the founding fathers would have used computer bulletin
boards to correspond. This may be true; Benjamin Franklin was the originator of the system

of surface transport of written information called the U.S. Postal Service, what we now
call "snail mail"
Šthe only technology readily available at the time for exchanging the
ideas upon which this nation's system of governance is built.
17 It is worth noting that ethical values are only part of the issue. Changing economic
balances also matter greatly
Šeasier replication also means more replication, and increases
in replication raise its potential economic significance. The economic point is discussed
further in Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council,
Realizing the Information Future: The Internet and Beyond
 (National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C., 1994), p. 162.
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY29
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.behavior developed by the community in question rather than imposed as
pronouncements from outside.A question argued repeatedly in both the forum and the workshop was the
extent to which special legislation is needed to govern the new networked

communities. According to this view, there is something new and unusual about

the new electronic environment that may need special legislation to protect its

unique qualities. Others argue that there is no particular need for network-specific

laws, as existing laws for the most part cover miscreant behavior that might occur

on networks. Moreover, to be effective new legislation requires a social
consensus both about what is new or unique about networks as compared to other
media and about what values that legislation will embody. Such a consensus does

not exist today.
NETWORKS AND SOCIETY30
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Legal Considerations for Electronic
NetworksMany users and providers of network services are wary of lawyers' influence
on networked communities. Jack Rickard believes that ''when the law appears, it's
death upon contact." His plea, shared by most of the bulletin board system
operators (known as "sysops") is: "Just leave us alone." At the same time,

advocates of this view do recognize the need for defining socially acceptable

behavior; their method of choice for promoting such behavior is education that

appropriately socializes participants in networked communities.
Nonetheless, existing law does have an impact. Law is important because
when something goes wrong, those harmed consult lawyers for help. To
determine what they can do to obtain redress for such harm as may have been

done, lawyers look to existing law for precedent. We are a very litigious society,

and so the courts have a vast amount of experience in sorting out our demands for

justice. Judges themselves turn to existing law to determine how to seek fair and

equitable solutions to our problems. Policy analysts use the existing precedents to

see what works and what does not. Finally, ordinary people rely on existing law

because users carry their expectations with them from one environment to

another.1NOTE: In this chapter, all quoted material that is not otherwise identified originated
with the individual noted, speaking at the November 1992 workshop.
1 Sara Kiesler points out that the officers charged in the Rodney King beating used their
electronic communications system as though it were a private telephone line, even though
they had been warned that all traffic over that system was recorded. These conversations

were later introduced in court as evidence against them.
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS31
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LEGAL DOMAINS
Existing legal domains (
Box 3.1) offer a rich heritage. The fundamental
rights contained in the U.S. Constitution and the Bill of Rights are a good

beginning. Included are the copyright and patent systems, prohibitions against

denial of human rights without due process, the right of free speech and

assembly, immunity from unreasonable search and seizure, and protection

against self-incrimination. A long history of Supreme Court decisions finds that
the Constitution contains an implied right of privacy, although the boundaries of
this right are subject to considerable debate. The Constitution is especially

important in protecting the rights of minorities against the majority rule.
Common law tends to develop slowly and deliberately, based on common
sense and logic and the customary expectations of the community. It is

conservative, stable, and, some fear, too rigid, but it does provide a workable

framework for analysis, even though the frame does not always fit exactly. Thus,

despite rapid technological change, electronic networks do not constitute a

lawless frontier in which individuals may do anything they please.
The long history of common law complements the basic constitutional
foundations by providing alternative strategies for protecting property interests

and obtaining redress for grievances for damage occasioned by negligence or

willful disregard of harmful consequences that might ensue. In other words, the

law expects human beings to behave in a somewhat rational and respectful

manner in their dealings with each other and with regard to their proprietary
interests. Case histories in property law, tort law, and equity provide ample
precedents to guide the behavior that might be expected to be reasonable in an

electronic environment.
There are also numerous explicit statutes covering computer use and misuse
(all but one state has enacted such a statute). Statutes also cover privacy but are

usually specific to certain kinds of information, such as credit histories and

medical data that are particularly sensitive. The Electronic Communications

Privacy Act of 1986 specifically forbids eavesdropping on data traffic. Lawyers

and their clients also must be aware of the laws concerning commercial
transactions, including antitrust provisions.
Several regulatory agencies have administrative jurisdiction over certain
types of network activity. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has

authority to license common carriers and is active in promulgating standards for

high-definition television transmission and telephone network architecture; it also

regulates cable television and certain uses of the electromagnetic spectrum. The
Federal TradeLEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS32
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 3.1 LEGAL DOMAINS
DomainExamples of DomainSources
ConstitutionFree speech; Copyright/
patents; Due process;
Equal rights; Freedom
from search and seizureCongress/President U.S.
Supreme CourtCommon lawTort; Equity; Property;
Intellectual property;ContractsCourtsStatuteElectronic privacy;
Computer crime;Contract; AntitrustCongress and state
legislatures, popular
initiatives and referenda;
Executive branch action to
implement legislation
RegulationCode of Federal
Regulations (e.g.,
approvals required by
Section 214); Open
networksAdministrative agencies
(Federal CommunicationsCommission, Federal TradeCommission, and others);
Judicial review; Legislative
oversightNOTE: In all instances, the enforcement mechanisms consist of monetary damages,
specific enforcement of contract provisions, incarceration, and/or fines.
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS33
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Commission has authority to regulate the content of advertising so that it
does not mislead consumers. The National Institute of Standards and Technology

plays a major role in the formulation of Federal Information Processing

Standards. State public utility commissions have overlapping jurisdiction over

intrastate network traffic, thereby confounding, confusing, and complicating the

legal environment within which network providers and their users operate.
Finally, judicial interpretation and oversight affect all legal frameworks and
regimes. Since it is often unclear how existing statutory and/or case law ought to

apply to any given instance involving electronic networks, the views of judges

and juries will often set new precedents in this arena. Moreover, since in practice

it is often expensive to litigate in defense of one's position, unfair or inappropriate

legal advantages may accrue to those who have the resources to defend a
potentially controversial interpretation of existing law. In the absence of legal
challenge, such interpretations may themselves become new precedents.
LEGAL MODELS EXISTING IN THE ELECTRONIC
ENVIRONMENTLegal models can provide useful analogies that help to sift out what is
different from what is similar. For the purpose of analysis, consider the different

legal models listed in 
Box 3.2 that exist within the network environment.
Perhaps the most important legal models for the network environment are
those of publisher and distributor, primarily because of the question of liability.

Publishers generally are held to a higher standard of liability for content than are

distributors, because publishers have the capability to (1) control access to the

medium by others seeking to disseminate their own information, (2) review and

gain knowledge of the content prior to publication, (3) alter or exclude content

prior to dissemination, and (4) require attribution or permit anonymity or

confidentiality for content.2 A firm that exerts
2 For some analysts, the distinction between capability and the actual exercise of those
capacities may be an important issue in defining a concept, and responsibility and liability
for content, in the electronic environment, since a duty to act does not depend on whether

action is ultimately taken but merely on whether it should have been taken. For example,
Allan Adler Asserted that "
– what I mean by capabilities is, if you have the ability,
technologically and physically in real time, [and] the authority and opportunity to do these
things, you may be legally considered a publisher rather than a distributor of information,
with the appropriate level of legal liability." (See the discussion of the 
Cubby decision in
Chapter 4.)LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS34
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.editorial control over the electronic traffic it carries (as does the Prodigy Services

Company over much of the information content it delivers on-line regarding

sports, news, features, and so on) may claim the legal status of a publisher, but in

so doing it also subjects itself to the liability thereby implied. A firm that does

not exercise direct editorial control over the traffic it carries (e.g., one that

subcontracts the management of editorial content to a third party) is arguably a

distributor, with a correspondingly lower level of liability.
BOX 3.2 LEGAL MODELS TO CHARACTERIZE A NETWORK
ENVIRONMENT
   PublisherŠProdigy Services Company (for many services)
   DistributorŠCompuServe   CooperativeŠEduNet, NEARnet
   Library (information provider)
ŠLEXIS, DIALOG, Medlars
   Private networks
   - CorporateŠIBM, Hewlett Packard, Citicorp, and others
   - PersonalŠBulletin board system operators ("sysops")
   Common carrier
ŠMCI, AT&T, Sprint, regional Bell holding companies
   Mixed or hybrid
Šcable television   TrusteeshipŠbroadcasters   MarketplaceŠinformation entrepreneurs marketing their wares
   Information utility
ŠSanta Monica Public Electronic Network and
Cleveland FreeNet
Next in importance as a legal model for the network environment is the
cooperativeŠan arrangement whereby independent entities of equal status come
together to achieve a common purpose and to share costs as well as profits.

EduNet is best classified as a cooperative because it is put together so as to have

some legal weight. Certain regional networks such as NEARnet and NYSERNet

also operate asLEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS35
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.cooperatives. The Internet as a more collaborative effort does not qualify legally
as a cooperative, although various networks interconnected through the Internet

have a cooperative arrangement that may be evolving toward a cooperative as

defined legally.Also important, if only because it is so often ignored, is the information
utility. (Here the term "utility" is used in the sense of a service that must be

provided to essentially anyone in the relevant community or service area. It is

analogous to the concept of "common carrier" as used in the world of telephony.)

Only a few publicly funded networks, such as the Santa Monica Public Electronic
Network (PEN) and the Cleveland FreeNet, are true information utilities. Many
commercial services look like information utilities in that they offer subscribers a

potpourri of information services. However, such services do not represent

themselves as information utilities, since doing so would require them to provide

access and some minimum level of service to all potential users. Government-

operated information networks that operate as public forums are a different

matter; under the First Amendment, government-operated networks do not have

the right to discriminate among users or to monitor or control messages and thus

must provide access to everyone in the community. Distinctions among

government-operated networks, government-sponsored or government-funded

network services, and public resources offered over privately operated networks

raise yet other questions for access that are as yet unsettled.
It is instructive to identify the various rights and responsibilities of different
types of participants in the network environment (
Box 3.3). As a general rule, it
seems to be the case that the more an entity undertakes to do or the more value-

added services it undertakes to provide, the higher the degree of liability for

which it is responsible. The creators of information are provided legal protection

(and restraints) through the copyright and patent laws. Publishers are protected
primarily under the First Amendment. Distributors govern their relationships with
their sources and their customers through contract; a customer dissatisfied with

the services provided has one primary option
Što take his or her business
elsewhere. Common carriers are subject to an elaborate regulatory system

established by law and administered by the FCC and state regulatory agencies and

commissions. At present users are governed largely by the "netiquette" they have

established by custom, contract, or common law if they want to litigate about

some harm that has occurred. Broadcasters (radio and television) carry the burden

of trusteeship; that is, they are licensed to act as trustees of a public property (the

public airwaves) and have a legal responsibility to act "in the public interest."
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS36
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 3.3 RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES DISTINGUISHED
BY FUNCTION
FunctionRightsResponsibilities
CreatorControl of content;
Compensation; Integrity
Originality; Liability for
damagePublisherControl of content;
Compensation; Integrity
Liability for damage
DistributorNo control of content;
CompensationNo liability for damage
CarrierLimited liability; for
transport; Compensation
Fidelity of carriage; Integrity;
Timely delivery; Provision of
equitable access
UserAccessibility; Equity; Due
processAvoidance of: negligence,
abuse, misuse, and
misappropriationTrusteeLicensee of public; propertyAction in the public interest
WHAT IS DIFFERENT ABOUT ELECTRONIC NETWORKS?
To the extent that electronic networks are a new medium for discourse and
communication, new laws or new interpretations of existing laws may be

necessary. Thus, it is necessary to identify how electronic networks might be

"new" from a legal perspective.
One obvious difference is that territorial jurisdictions are largely irrelevant to
the electronic environment,
3 except perhaps in the initial
3 This is true in the sense that once connected to a network, a user can often
electronically cross political boundaries with relative ease. However, territorial

jurisdictions may determine who has access to a given network (e.g., a city may grant
access to a public network only to its residents; a university may grant access only to
students on campus).
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS37
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.stages when spectrum must be allocated for the purpose where wireless
communications are employed and licensing authority must be obtained unless

regulatory authority is waived. For example, in the United States, information

providers that offer users services that go beyond "basic" services have been

permitted to flourish with minimal government interference.
4More confusing, perhaps, is the fact that many legal precedents have been
established in the context of a given technology
Še.g., broadcast or cable,
telephone, or mail. In considering the legal implications of a new medium,

analysts quite naturally look to those precedents for guidance. But it is never

certain how old precedents should apply to new media, and so neither analysts

nor users of a new medium are certain which precedents should guide their

analysis or govern their use.
As noted in 
Appendix A
, e-mail can be used to support a mode of
communications often known as bulletin boards in which a message posted to a

bulletin board by one user is distributed via e-mail to all of the other subscribers

to that bulletin board. Some electronic bulletin boards start as a mechanism to

deliver private communications among a small group of friends. To the extent

that the term "bulletin board" makes one think of a little bulletin board on one's
refrigerator, the traffic on the electronic bulletin board is clearly outside the reach
of the law. But electronic bulletin boards are also a way of communicating with

large numbers of people in many different geographic locations (perhaps with

differing laws regarding message traffic).
The very term "e-mail" makes one think of the electronic analog to a postal
letter; however, e-mail does not, as a matter of law, enjoy the same status as a

postal letter. Entirely different legal precedents and principles may in fact apply.

For example, some users of e-mail have the same expectations of privacy for e-

mail that they do for postal mail
Šan issue that has generated considerable legal
controversy.5 Users of private e-mail systems may expect their messages
4 At the same time, the definition of what counts as "basic services" is a matter subject
to considerable debate. For many years, "touch-tone" service provided by the local
telephone company was regarded as an "extra" not included in the basic service definition.

However, touch-tone service has increasingly become a prerequisite to navigating through
other services provided by telephone (e.g., voice mail), leading to pressures to treat it as
part of "basic" telephone service.
5 For example, in a 1993 decision, a California appellate court found in favor of an
employer that had terminated an employee after reviewing his e-mail messages and finding
among them personal messages of a sexual nature to other employees. Specifically,
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS38
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to be private, and indeed they are protected in that expectation to a certain extent
by federal statute (e.g., public officials may not tap those communications

without judicial authorization); but this expectation may not be appropriate in a

corporate e-mail environment where the corporation expects to manage the traffic

for business purposes and in its corporate interests.
6 The privacy principles
drafted by the Information Policy Committee of the Clinton administration's
Information Infrastructure Task Force may ultimately affect these expectations.
A further complication is that it is not only electronic networks that are
assuming new functions: established media are also doing so, and there is a lack

of consensus on which models and precedents are appropriate for what purposes.

The regional Bell holding companies
7 (RBHCs) want to be information service
providers as well as carriers. Electronic bulletin boards are becoming networks
that allow messages to pass through them unread; a good example is Fidonet.
Newspapers are distributors as well as publishers, as the advertising supplements

supplied by advertisers indicate. Broadcasters are offering conferencing facilities

in electronic town meetings, and both radio and television (using telephonic call-

ins) have turned into very interactive media on the talk shows. Cable television

systems, traditionally delivering entertainment programming to the home, are

geared up to provide data services to businesses and to experiment with home-

based information services. Complications are exacerbated by the fact that

different providers may have been regulated under different assumptions (as is

the case for the RBHCs, long-distance telephone service providers, and cable

companies).the court held that the employee had no reasonable expectation of privacy since he had
signed a form acknowledging a company policy that restricted employees' use of
computers to company business. In a second court case, still under litigation in January
1994, a company sued a former employee on the basis of messages retrieved from the
former employee's electronic mailbox (which was not maintained or provided by the
company). A key issue will be whether the company has the right to access the electronic

messages of its employees. (See Michael Traynor, "Computer E-Mail Privacy Issues
Unresolved," 
The National Law Journal, January 31, 1994, S-2.)
6 Many corporations do take the position that e-mail messages are subject to review in
the same way that hard-copy letters and memoranda are subject to review, and they do

post notices periodically (e.g., every time the user logs into the host system) to this effect.
However, as Sara Kiesler pointed out at the forum, people habituate to such warnings very
rapidly, and the net effect is that they respond as though those warnings were never given
at all.7 The regional Bell holding companies are Nynex, Bell Atlantic, US West, Bell South,
Ameritech, Southwestern Bell, and Pacific Telesis.
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS39
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The most important difference, and one very troubling for existing law, is
the easy ability to replicate, alter, and manipulate images and text. This ability

changes established legal concepts
Še.g., the notion of when something is
published. Indeed, by accessing previously developed information, anyone with a

computer can become a creator of an information product or the producer of a

library or database that distributes or acquires information assets with financial
value. An example is the provider of a value-added service that searches public
records or documents and makes them accessible, for a fee, to users in a much

more convenient form; proprietary rights have been asserted for such products,

even when the underlying information is public and freely available. Today's

legal regime provides mixed signals and expectations concerning what is public-

do-main information and what is proprietary information entered into the

electronic environment. There is a need for more clarity concerning the nature of

the traffic and its legal status. In presenting this capability to manipulate and

disseminate information, electronic networks provide the underpinning of an

electronic marketplace in which some information is shared, some is sold, and

some is merely transmitted.
The challenge today is to devise a legal regime appropriate for the
capabilities enabled by the technology now available. This regime necessarily

includes certain aspects of existing law (and precedents and interpretations

applicable to network technology) and may include new laws specifically needed

for this technology.
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS THAT AFFECT THE USE OF
INFORMATIONA number of legal considerations pertain to protection of the rights of
network users.   Secrecy is designed to prevent deliberate disclosures of information to
individuals not authorized to receive that information. The information

being kept secret may refer to the contents of a message (a consideration

among lawyers known as security) or to the identity of a message's

author (a consideration known as anonymity). The inverse of anonymity

is known as authentication, or the assurance that the putative originator

of a message is in fact the real originator. Closely related is the notion of

nonrepudiation, the property that the putative originator of a properly

signed message cannot plausibly deny his or her originating that

message.   Privacy is intended to prevent intrusions into information about
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS40
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.individuals by persons not authorized to have access to that information.
Privacy law today is ambiguous; it is used to cover many different

concerns about misuse of information. To some, privacy should be more

strictly construed to mean the right to prevent unwelcome and

unauthorized intrusions such as obnoxious telephone calls, junk mail,

and overeager journalistic inquiry
Šin other words, any entry into the
personal space that should be private. Such a view is reinforced by an
oft-forgotten Supreme Court decision that confirms that one's home is

one's castle.Both privacy and secrecy are mechanisms that have been invoked to reduce
the accountability of individuals under the law.
   Confidentiality is the right to release information with restrictions on its
redistribution. There are a few common-law precedents that recognize

personal confidentiality: the right of a spouse to not testify against a

mate, the sanctity of the confession to one's religious mentor, and the

attorney-client privilege are the most obvious. However, most of the
areas that have come to be considered confidential have developed by
explicit statute achieved through the efforts of concerned citizens. Today

there is a considerable effort to achieve a more uniform way of treating

confidentiality of medical records, in order to assure individuals a

measure of personal privacy and to not inhibit too strictly the transfer of

medical information that would benefit both the patient and the public's

interest in a healthier society.
   A 
publicity right is one that gives each individual the right to disclose
information freely in the public domain or to demand compensation for

public release. The abandon with which many participants on radio and

television talk shows disclose very personal information about their own

behavior and inner thoughts confirms that this is a right alive and well
today. There is also no dearth of material generated by public relations
firms for all manner of public figures who seek media coverage.

However, what is missing is a clearly delineated point that defines when

something is intended to become public-domain information, when it is

intended to remain confidential between the communicants on electronic

networks, and when it is released with the expectation of remuneration

for redistribution.   Commonality remains the right of the body politic to determine what
areas shall remain off limits to proprietary appropriation. Laws of nature

and languages are among the few areas clearly beyond proprietary

appropriation. The controversial area at the moment is in the area of

''facts," which are usually assumed not to be
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS41
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.subject to copyright protection because they are not original expression.
However, we have not yet clarified what nature of "facts" might

appropriately belong within the protected area of personal privacy and

which are more likely to be required to be disclosed because of a higher

public interest.
   Liability is the domain of tort law where acts of negligence, abuse,
neglect, and misuse cause damage that can be redressed through

litigation in the civil courts. (
Civil liability
 is often synonymous.)
   Criminality is the domain of the penal statutes, which impose more
stringent sanctions involving fines as well as incarceration, or terms of

probation during which behavior is carefully monitored. (Criminal

liability is a related concept pertaining to the individual who may violate

a penal statute.)
   Accessibility involves a right to participate and to reply. As a rule, the
First Amendment gives information providers the right to determine the

content of their own publications. However, this right is not unlimited,

and under certain circumstances, information providers may be

compelled to provide content that they might prefer not to carry.

Examples include the fairness doctrine of the FCC, under which

broadcasters (e.g., radio and television stations) are required to provide

air time for those representing views that oppose those expressed by
those stations; laws that carve out specific exceptions to First
Amendment rights (e.g., laws banning cigarette advertising in certain

media); and regulatory policies intended to guarantee free and open

political debate. As a consequence, access is a right more often sought

than exercised in practice.
   Accuracy is a right to correct information inaccurately recorded. With
the advent of computerized records that can contain a vast number of

similar names, opportunities continue to increase for inaccuracies to

proliferate and cause embarrassment or harm, whereas the law governing

rights to obtain access to records and to justify corrections is not well

developed.   Integrity is the right to protect an original work according to the desires
and wishes of the creator, a right that has not been protected in the

United States so much as in Europe, where "moral rights" of authors and

artists have been recognized. The recent effort of some in the motion

picture industry to protect the integrity of black-and-white film classics

is a good example of an effort to ensure the integrity of information.

What the proponents of "integrity" achieved was the National Historic
Film Preservation Board, which could designate films as "classic" with
the proviso that they be so labeled in their original form. However, the

Register of Copyrights nonetheless authorized colorized movies of these

classics to be marketed under a
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS42
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.separate copyright issued to protect the colorization as a new expression
of the work. In an electronic bit stream, where even a few pixels can be

plucked out of a work, it is going to be difficult to determine what rights

of integrity can be protected in the original work.
   Equity is an important legal theory in common law that no wrong must
go unrighted. If harm occurs, then society must find a way to redress it.

When lawyers can find no statute, precedent, or commonly accepted

custom, they fall back on general principles of equity.
Finally, interoperability is a property of computer systems that facilitates the
use of hardware and software of different models and vendors in a compatible

manner. Although interoperability does not qualify as a legal consideration per se

(if it did, the problem of incompatibility would be a phenomenon of the past), a

variety of court decisions (some discussed below) have marked relevance to it; in

addition, as the National Information Infrastructure moves from concept to
reality, evolving and assuming increasing prominence, a number of legislative
and regulatory factors may begin to influence interoperability.
8COURT CASES LAWYERS RELY ON FOR ARGUMENT
Lawyers and their clients look to existing case law for guidance in arguing
their cases before the courts. They can choose from hundreds of court cases in

which the established communications media have litigated their differences and

grievances. Box 3.4 summarizes several of the most important cases.
The 
Cubby case (
Box 3.5) is the first case to be decided with respect to
commercial network providers. In essence, the finding in 
Cubby v. CompuServe
was that a party acting as a distributor only
Šand that thus cannot monitor the
traffic and consequently cannot know or have reason to know of the content
Šhasno liability for offending remarks in the content. It is not clear that the judges

understood that the technicians could actually monitor the traffic, but the decision
does offer some protection.
However, 
Cubby may be a more dangerous than helpful case because it
could lead many providers of network services to assume
8 For more discussion of this point, see Computer Science and Telecommunications
Board, National Research Council, 
Realizing the Information Future: The Internet and
Beyond, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1994.
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS43
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that they can rely on an assumption that they are distributors of information only,
with no responsibility for the content of their offerings. Such service providers

may assume that they reside in the same legal niche as the bookstore or the

newspaper stand, which may not be the right niche or the ultimate niche into

which the law will assign these new electronic services. One danger could come

from trying to apply the publisher model to electronic bulletin boards. Surely
there is some area in the electronic environment that should rightly be considered a
private space. This would be comparable to a private home or club where friends

and peers may share private and confidential communications. Is posting to a

controlled-access bulletin board "publication"? And how do we characterize

public conferences to which users contribute their comments, often with no

centralized editorial control or managing supervisor?
BOX 3.4 SOME RELEVANT LEGAL PRECEDENTS
CaseResult
Cubby Inc. v. CompuServe
No obligation to monitor
Feist Publications Inc. v. Rural
Telephone Co. Inc.
Facts not copyrightableSega Enterprises v. Accolade Inc.
Reverse engineering for
interoperability is permissible
Armstrong v. Executive Offices of
the PresidentElectronic files are public records
Playboy Enterprises Inc. v. George
Frena et al.
Intent to infringe on copyright is not
required for a finding of infringement
Ford Motor Credit Co. v. Swarens
"Trust in the infallibility of a computer
is hardly a defense. 
–"The application of a general law across the entire electronic community may
well result in curtailing some activities that really ought to be permitted to

continue. Legal precedents such as 
CubbyŠor,LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS44
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.more accurately, the implications of their distinctions
Šmay come to be applied
too broadly.
BOX 3.5 
CUBBY V. COMPUSERVE
, 1991
CompuServe is an on-line information service that grants access to a
variety of information sources in exchange for a fee. These information
sources are provided for CompuServe contractually; that is, CompuServe
contracts with vendors to provide information, but then makes this
information available to users through a mechanism called forums. The
provider of one information source, Cameron Communications Inc., agreed
in its contract with CompuServe to "manage, review, create, delete, edit,

and otherwise control the contents" of its forum.
Defamatory statements about a firm known as Cubby Inc. appeared in
the forum operated by Cameron Communications. Cubby Inc. sued
CompuServe for libel, based on the defamatory statements. CompuServe
moved for summary dismissal on the grounds that it acted as a distributor,

not a publisher, of those statements and thus was not liable for the
statements.In 1991, the U.S. District Court in the Southern District of New York
granted CompuServe's motion for summary dismissal on the grounds that

CompuServe was indeed acting as a distributor and indeed had little or no
editorial control over the contents of a contracted information source. The
court further reasoned that CompuServe had no reasonable opportunity to
review for defamatory material every information source it made available.
SOURCE: 
Cubby Inc. v. CompuServe
, 776 F. Supp. 135 (S.D.N.Y.
1991):The 
Feist case (
Box 3.6) clarified the outer boundaries of the copyright law,
holding explicitly that facts are not copyrightable. The extent of labor expended

Šthe "sweat of the brow"
Šis not to be considered in granting protection. This
case will likely create turmoil in the law because it is facts, now, that people are

most concerned about
Še.g., telephone numbers, names and addresses, and
transaction-generated information (data about what one purchases or how one

travels). The current legal regime does not recognize a right to what might be

called personal autonomy over information about oneself, and without copyright

protections on compilations of these facts, such compilations may be
disseminated and reproduced quite widely.
The 
Sega case (
Box 3.7
) involves a controversial area with respect
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS45
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to fair use of computer software, an area of the law that has not yet been reviewed
by the Supreme Court. It concerns the question of what amount of reverse

engineering of software is permissible in order to understand the underlying

concepts, which are not protected by copyright law, and knowledge of which,

according to an amicus brief prepared by a group of intellectual property

academics, is essential to achieve interoperability of software.
9 Incompatibility of
software (lack of interoperability) is a major deterrent to the rapid development
of networks and an area of the law demanding of public attention.
BOX 3.6 
FEIST V. RURAL TELEPHONE
, 1991Pursuant to state regulation, the Rural Telephone Company Inc.
publishes a "white pages" telephone directory that lists telephone
subscribers alphabetically and their corresponding telephone numbers for a
certain geographical area of service. In order to produce a similar "white
pages" directory for a much larger geographical area that included the
service area in question, the Feist Publication Company extracted the
names and numbers it needed from the Rural Telephone Company's white

pages without Rural's consent. Although Feist altered many of the listings it
obtained, several were identical to those listed in Rural's white pages.
Rural sued Feist for copyright infringement.
In 1991, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that Rural's white pages were
not entitled to copyright, and thus that Feist was not liable for infringement.
The basis for this ruling was that the selection, coordination, and
arrangement of Rural's white pages did not satisfy the minimum
constitutional standards for copyright protection, since Rural had only to

obtain data from its subscribers and list them alphabetically, resulting in a
"garden-variety" white pages directory devoid of even the slightest trace of
creativity (which copyright law is intended to protect).
SOURCE: 
Feist Publications Inc. v. Rural Telephone Co. Inc.
, 111 S.
Ct. 1282 (1991).
What the academics seem to be saying is that there is a limit to what the
copyright law can cover
Šthat copyright law offers very
9 Some additional discussion of these issues is provided in Computer Science and
Telecommunications Board, National Research Council, 
Intellectual Property Issues in
Software, National Academy Press, Washington D.C., 1991.
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS46
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.thin protection for computer software interfaces, in fact protecting only the
expression that is different from all others and proprietary to the creator. It may

be that this case marks a turning point that indicates the limits of the judicial

system in carving out new protections for computer software. Users and

providers alike may now turn to Congress to sort out what is optimum for the

software industry and network users nationwide. In the European Community the
policy with respect to reverse engineering and fair use of proprietary interfaces
has been hammered out in an open and public discussion, not in the courts.
BOX 3.7 
SEGA V. ACCOLADE, 1992In order to develop video-game cartridges that were compatible with
Sega Enterprises' "Genesis" entertainment system, Accolade Inc.
disassembled the computer programs contained in Sega's video-game
components to learn the requirements for compatibility. Accolade then
produced a manual that described the functional requirements of
compatibility with Sega products without including any of Sega's original
computer programs. Based only on the manual, Accolade then wrote its

own programs that were compatible with the Sega interface. Sega sued
Accolade, charging copyright infringement.
In 1992, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals overturned a lower court
ruling that Accolade had infringed on Sega's copyright of its computer

programs. In particular, the Court of Appeals held that Accolade's use of the
"disassembled" programs was protected under the fair-use provisions of the
Copyright Act if disassembly is the only way to gain access to the ideas and
functional elements embodied in a copyrighted computer program.
SOURCE: 
Sega Enterprises v. Accolade Inc.
, U.S. Court of Appeals,
Ninth Circuit, No. 92-15655; D.C. No. CV-91-3871BAC, October 20, 1992.
The 
Armstrong case (
Box 3.8
) held that electronic communication can be a
public record and be subject to the Freedom of Information Act, the Federal

Records Act, and the Presidential Records Act. A case with similar elements was
raised in May 1994 that involves the refusal of a state university to disclose e-
mail messages sent to university administrators.
10 The individual wishing to see
those messages10 See Thomas DeLoughry, "University of Michigan Refuses to Release E-Mail of
Administrators," 
Chronicle of Higher Education
, Vol. 21, p. A-28, January 26, 1994.
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS47
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.contends that they are analogous to written letters and thus subject to disclosure
under that state's freedom-of-information law. The university contends that e-

mail messages are analogous to telephone calls, which are not subject to such

disclosure, and in addition that they are protected under the federal Electronic

Communications Privacy Act.
BOX 3.8 
ARMSTRONG V. EXECUTIVE OFFICES OF THE
PRESIDENT, 1993The U.S. Court of Appeals upheld a lower-court ruling that the
Executive Offices of the President must preserve electronic documents as

"federal records" under the Federal Records Act, affirming that hard-copy
printouts were insufficient because they might omit "fundamental pieces of
information which are an integral part of the original electronic records, such
as the identity of the sender and/or recipient and the time of the receipt."
SOURCE: 
Armstrong v. Executive Offices of the President
, 1 F.3d1274, 1993, U.S. App. LEXIS 20527 (D.C.Cir. 1993).
Both cases raise the issue of whether electronic communications in the form
of e-mail constitute "records" that are subject to the intent of the various

freedom-of-information acts. Such cases also raise the issue of what types of
electronic communication should be kept. For example, should all e-mail used by
federal agencies be kept as public records? In the days when the federal

government operated by telephone calls and written documents, it was clear that

telephone calls did not constitute public records, though written notes about those

calls might. Since many people use e-mail instead of a telephone for reasons of

convenience (e.g., avoiding telephone tag), some argue that at least some e-mail

should be treated as a telephone call would be. On the other hand, requiring the

sender of an e-mail message to distinguish between a noteworthy and non-

noteworthy note presents problems as well, especially if that determination must

be made at the time of transmittal.
The 
Playboy Enterprises
 case (
Box 3.9
) was decided recently. In this case,
the court placed on bulletin board operators that charge fees for access a
substantial burden to review files accessible on their systems for possible
copyright violations, though the extent of this burden was not definitively

established by this case.
Finally, an early but important computer case is 
Ford Motor Credit
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS48
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Company v. Swarens
 (Box 3.10). An old maxim proclaims that ignorance of the
law is no excuse. This case held, in a similar vein, that one cannot rely on faith

that the computer will be accurate as a legal defense. Put differently, the

computer does not enjoy special status as an infallible agent, especially when it

can be shown not to be infallible.
BOX 3.9 
PLAYBOY ENTERPRISES V. GEORGE FRENA
, 1993The 
Playboy Enterprises v. George Frena
 case involved a large
number of images identified as pictures taken from 
Playboy magazine and
protected by copyright that were found in the form of graphics files on a
bulletin board system owned and operated by George Frena; these files
were not posted by Frena, but rather by users of his bulletin board service.
The bulletin board charged fees for users to access these (and other) files.
The court held that this use was clearly commercial and that the bulletin

board operator, George Frena, was guilty of copyright infringement. Though
Frena argued that he had no knowledge of the source of the images, the
court held that intent to infringe was not essential to a finding of
infringement.SOURCE: 
Playboy Enterprises Inc. v. George Frena et al.
, 839 F.
Supp. 1552, U.S. Dist. Ct., M.D. Fla. Dec. 9, 1993.
SPECIAL PROBLEMS AND POLICY CONCERNS
Makers of public policy must grapple with a number of concerns that arise in
the electronic environment. One concern has already been discussed in a previous

section, namely the confusion over the legal models that apply to organizations

engaging in electronic communication. In that domain, policymakers will have to

sort out what will happen in the collision of legal regimes associated with

different models and the boundaries (if any) at which public and private activity

interact (as they might, for example, at the interface of private and public

networks).But other issues arise as well. For example, the question of responsibility for
content goes beyond the different models (e.g., publisher, distributor) used by

commercial information service providers for handling such responsibility.

Questions in this area include the following: What content is acceptable and who

decides what is acceptable? If penal statutes are violated, is criminal liability the

burdenLEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS49
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of the perpetrator or of the provider of the network service used to violate the
statutes? What civil or tort liability applies to defamation or negligence? How do

issues of pornography, indecency, and obscenity play out in the networked

environment?BOX 3.10 
FORD V. SWARENS
, 1969A computer error caused the Ford Motor Credit Company to believe
that Mr. Swarens was delinquent in payments on his new car. On two
occasions, the company's representatives visited Mr. Swarens and left after
he showed canceled checks proving that he was not in fact delinquent. On
the third visit, he threatened company representatives with a shotgun, after

which his car was repossessed. In court, Mr. Swarens was awarded both
compensatory and punitive damages, and the Court of Appeals said, "Ford
explains that this whole incident occurred because of a mistake by a
computer. Men feed data to a computer and men interpret the answer the
computer spews forth. In this computerized age, the law must require that
men in the use of computerized data regard those with whom they are
dealing as more important than a perforation on a card. Trust in the

infallibility of a computer is hardly a defense, when the opportunity to avoid
the error is apparent and repeated."
SOURCE: 
Ford Motor Credit Co. v. Swarens
, Court of Appeals of
Kentucky, 447 S.W.2d 53, October 17, 1969.
Anonymity and confidentiality pose other important concerns. On electronic
networks, especially those associated with commercial information services,

many people assume a different electronic "persona" that is not associated with a

real person. Anonymity conveys both benefits and drawbacks. For example,

history illustrates the use of anonymous communications to protect dissidents
from the scrutiny or retaliation of autocratic governments. Even in recent years,
the identification of a specific individual as a dissident (e.g., in the People's

Republic of China) could mean imprisonment or even death; as a result, such

societies often have forums (perhaps illegal but nonetheless public) in which

anonymous protests against the existing regime can be posted. On a smaller

scale, Murray Turoff, a professor of computer and information sciences and

management at the New Jersey Institute of Technology, said his students (and

executives) feel free to discuss on-line their problems at work only because they

can do so anonymously.LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS50
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The other side of anonymity was pointed out by Allan Adler, who argued
that if users are granted true anonymity, ''then there can be no justice system that

will right the wrongs they commit, and there can be no 'rights' that people will be

able to vindicate." In short, the justice system or law requires the identity of the

person who caused the harm. Adler, along with Kiesler and Turoff, suggested

that system operators keep users' identities confidential instead of anonymous and
reserve the right to disclose the identity of a user who engages in injurious
conduct. Today, the legal status of an anonymous message sent on an electronic

network is not clear. Do network users have a right to refuse to disclose their

identity? To prevent disclosure of their identity to a third party (i.e., one not

associated with the network service provider)? To escape accountability and the

law? Do users have to accept responsibility for their behavior?
A fourth concern is accessibility. Who can get into the system, and who can
interconnect through which gateways? Policy questions include the following:

Who can demand a right to interconnect or become a subscriber or participant?

On what basis may service be denied to an end user or to an electronic

connection? Is it necessary to mandate interconnection capability between

various network services (perhaps in a manner analogous to the mandating of
interconnection standards for telephone networks 50 years ago)?
A fifth area of concern is electronic commerce. Internet "netiquette" looks
down on advertising messages that are publicly broadcast.
11 Yet it is easy to find
Internet messages that look very much like
11 For example, a commercial advertisement posted throughout Usenet, a network
consisting primarily of bulletin boards devoted to various topics, has been widely

condemned in the affected community. The Usenet community's response to unsolicited
commercial advertising was largely to flood the advertiser's electronic mailbox with
messages protesting the advertiser's action; other informal actions have been taken as
well. See Peter Lewis, "Sneering at a Virtual Lynch Mob," 
New York Times,
 May 11,
1994, p. D-7.
More generally, this sentiment against commercial "advertising" seems to be rooted in
at least two strains of thought. The first is the sentiment that advertising is an annoying
pollutant, in the same generic class as junk mail. The second is that receiving e-mail
consumes resources for which users must eventually pay and that it is inappropriate to

make recipients of advertising incur those expenses if they have not affirmatively chosen
to do so. The latter is in many ways analogous to many people's feelings about the
unsought receipt of advertisements via fax, in which the recipient must pay for the paper
consumed by the recipient's fax machine and the incoming telephone line is made
unavailable for use by "legitimate" inbound fax transmissions. How these sentiments will

evolve as the Internet is used more for commercial transactions remains to be seen.
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS51
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.classified advertising. Since the newspapers have spent a number of years in the
courts and in Congress litigating and lobbying to prevent telecommunications

firms from providing electronic advertising, these pseudo-advertising Internet

messages constitute a very permissive interpretation of rules governing what is

considered "appropriate use" of a publicly funded electronic space. As the

Internet is opened to more commercial firms, battles over the extent and nature of
"appropriate" commercial content can be expected. Questions that policymakers
will have to address include: What are legitimate expectations of compensation

for posters or authors of messages that may be valuable to others? What facts and

circumstances define a copyright infringement on a network? How will potential

users identify what information is proprietary? How will individuals monitor and

enforce their rights and responsibilities with respect to billing, collection, and

payment? What advertising messages will be permitted under what

circumstances?The definition of public domain in the area of commonality remains a
problem. On a network, it is difficult to determine when something is in a private

space and when something is in the public domain. Some observers warn that

anything posted to a public mailing list on the Internet, or to a discussion forum

or bulletin board on America OnLine or CompuServe, is a public statement that

may be freely redistributed by other users. On the other hand, current copyright

law does not require that the creator of a work explicitly insert a copyright notice
in order to claim a copyright interest. So, upon viewing a statement on the
Internet (for example) that does not contain a copyright notice, users are

understandably uncertain about what rights they may be violating if they report

the statement. It is arguably safer to assume that the writer is asserting a claim of

copyright, and some "netiquette" rules direct the potential re-user to seek

permission to report the message, but the legal murkiness remains.
Related is the question of what is subject to the Freedom of Information Act
and the various sunshine laws. This is particularly important for advisory groups

that may be using electronic mail or real-time conferences to transact their

business. When can users expect to be operating in a confidential electronic

environment? When must they invite the journalist or the public in? When does

the electronic bit stream become a public record? When is a real-time electronic
conference a "public meeting"?
The concern over "public" access and rights gives rise to an important
definitional issue: the distinction between "public" and ''private" enterprises or

activities. In practice, there are at least four ways in which the "public versus

private" distinction is used to distinguish
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS52
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.networking activities: (1) the funding sources of the activity (public versus
private funding); (2) the content carried by the networking activity (public

information versus information not in the public domain); (3) whether the

network activity is open (public) or closed (private); and (4) the ownership of the

network activity (public versus private control).
Governance is particularly thorny. Society recognizes groups within it that
are entitled to varying degrees of self-governance (e.g., condominium

associations, corporations), although they are, of course, subject to a certain

degree of external regulation as well. Today, electronic communities are making

their own rules, applying them, and living by them. Under what circumstances

can authorities of the government step in? (An important related question is what

entity at what geographic level is best able to make and enforce what rules.) It is
clear that government authorities can and do step in when actions taken within
that community have harmful repercussions outside it or when members of the

community request outside intervention, but the desirability of such intervention

is subject to much argument. Questions over territorial jurisdiction are even more

complex with global networks, because there are all sorts of complicated rules

applicable to jurisdiction and extradition. Jurisdictional autonomy is a very rich

area for lawyers and policymakers to sort out.
12Finally, what sanctions should apply when miscreant behavior occurs?
Various states have been experimenting with different types of sanctions other

than fines, jail, community service, and liability for damages. For example, as

part of sentencing, judges have considerable latitude to impose restrictions on

behavior, and so judges have proposed sentences (or conditions or parole or

probation) that include the confiscation of the felon's computer equipment,

prohibitions on the felon's use of computer equipment, and so on.
Informal sanctions have also been used outside the judicial system.
Complaints directed to an offending user by others in the community are a

particularly effective sanction against offenders, especially when the offender

receives hundreds of complaints. By shunning offenders, members of the

community apply a form of excommunication, an exercise of the traditional way

communities have protected
12 As one example, Ivan Orton, a prosecutor in Seattle, has taken 3 years to file suit
against Richard Brandow, a Canadian who released what is called the peace virus into the
"Mac world"
Š3 years just to get the case together. It is doubtful whether he will be able to
win the case
Šand this case only involves Canada, a near neighbor with a not-too-
dissimilar legal system. Imagine the complications when the parties involved are from

nations with very dissimilar legal traditions!
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS53
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.their cultural and legal integrity. When a near-infinite number of venues can be
established, it is possible to organize a group in a way that moves the entire group

to another venue, leaving the offender without other communicants. How to

determine the appropriate, acceptable, and effective sanctions to control

miscreant behavior is an area that still needs careful analysis and development.
SUMMARYThe current legal system has evolved out of many decades of experience and
precedent in dealing with various media for human expression and behavior.

Electronic networks are a relatively new medium, but their novelty should not

blind us to the simple fact that they do exist within the current legal context and

thus that the current legal regime will have an effect on them. At the same time,

their novelty does introduce complications and difficulties into this legal regime.
As electronic networks become more pervasive, a new legal regime will
inevitably evolve, involving new law as well as new interpretations of current

law. The first steps are being taken today in debates and arguments among users

and providers
Šindeed, all participants in networked communities
Šas they try to
sort out what values we share and what behavior they find acceptable. The

ethical values that emerge from that process will be the foundation of a legal

regime relevant to electronic networks that is designed to curb harmful behavior
while preserving what is unique and distinctive about these new electronic
communities.LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC NETWORKS54
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Free Speech
The right of free speech enjoyed by Americans is rooted in the First
Amendment, which states that "Congress shall make no law 
– abridging the
freedom of speech. 
–" Nevertheless, the right to free speech is not entirely
unfettered, and one's ability to speak whatever one likes can be legally limited

under certain circumstances that depend on the nature of the speech and the

communications medium in which that speech is expressed. The electronic

environment, which gives every user access to a large audience and a virtually

unlimited supply of information, poses particular challenges concerning free

speech. This chapter summarizes a discussion of two free speech scenarios that

were examined by a panel at CSTB's February 1993 forum.
NOTE: This chapter, and the three chapters following it, are based on the discussions
held at the February 1993 forum described in the preface. As noted in the preface, the
forum was intended to raise issues related to and associated with the rights and
responsibilities of participants in networked communities as they arose in discussions of
various hypothetical scenarios. Thus, Chapter 
4 through 
7 collectively have a more
descriptive than analytical quality.
FREE SPEECH
55Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCENARIO 1: EXPLICIT PHOTOS ON A UNIVERSITY
NETWORKA large state university serves as a network "hub" for the state's high
schools. The university itself is networked with every faculty member, staff

member, and student having a network computer on his or her desk. The

university also is connected to the Internet. A student electronically scans

pictures of men and women in various sexual poses.
Issue: The Law as the Ultimate Authority
The university needs to consider how its policies are consistent with the
law, because a state university exists in a jurisdiction that probably has indecency

and obscenity laws, according to Allan Adler, a lawyer with Cohn and Marks.

"We do not voluntarily submit ourselves to the law. It is the reality in which we

live," he said.
Adler acknowledged, however, the common practical desire to reach
consensus about behavior or conduct through negotiated policies and agreements.

This is a typical approach in situations involving a communications medium, he

said, where legal resolutions tend to be expensive and most parties get more than

they bargained for in terms of restrictions on future conduct. Clearly, he said,

there must be a set of social norms, whether defined by policy, contract, or law,

and there must be some authority that enforces those norms; the ultimate

authority is the law.
Assuming that the university in Scenario 1 communicated the network
ground rules to users, their usage of the network would imply assent, Alder said.

Assent is required in both contract and criminal law, by individuals in the former

case and by society as a whole in the latter. That is, individuals must be notified

of regulations that affect their conduct so that they have a fair opportunity to

comply; if they do not assent to compliance, then they cannot fairly be held

responsible for complying, he explained.
Responding to a suggestion that users could enforce rules themselves by
employing screening devices, Adler argued that defamatory or fraudulent

information would be difficult to informally identify and filter out, and the law

would need to step in. For example, an individual about whom a defamatory story

had been written might wish to prevent others from seeing the story, and thus

would have to
FREE SPEECH
56Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.persuade an unknown universe of individuals to screen stories about him
Šclearlyan imposing if not impossible task. "If the user is a participant in a system where

either the user or some third party is defamed or has sustained damage to their

reputation that affects them outside of the immediate electronic network on which

they are operating, they are going to want some remedy for that," Adler said.
1As to whether the student, if disconnected, has any First Amendment rights,
Larry Lessig, an assistant professor of constitutional law and contracts at the

University of Chicago, noted that such rights would apply at a state university

(though not necessarily at private universities). However, Lessig also contended

that all universities habitually regulate speech. "If a student comes into my

classroom and wants to talk about pornography when I want to talk about

contracts, I tell the student, 'I'm going to fail you.' Now that is speech regulation,"
he asserted. Michael Godwin, staff counsel for the Electronic Frontier
Foundation, concurred that the classroom is highly regulated and such regulation

is appropriate based on the purpose of the classroom, but he raised the question

of whether the university's electronic forum was more like a conversation on the

block (in which freedom of speech guarantees do obtain) than like a lecture in a

classroom.Lessig warned that the legal community has few tools to make sense of
behavior on electronic networks, in part because judges, lawyers, and legislators

have little or no experience with that world. "I think the point is that we have very

little understanding of how these principles that seem fundamental to us, like free

speech, can apply in these various different worlds," he said.
Issue: The Need to Establish Rules and Educate Users
If the university is only now responding to the problems posed by Scenario
1, then it is already too late, according to Reid W. Crawford, legal advisor and

interim vice president for external affairs at Iowa State University. He noted that

networking issues should be considered within the university community before

such problems arise, and any concerns should be shared with the connected high

schools. He also said that discussions should begin very early in the process
1 An alternative to legal intervention might be to require that any message about a
person leave behind an electronic trail detailing where it was sent from, so that the person
defamed can seekŠand the remorseful author can send
Ša retraction or apology.FREE SPEECH
57Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.with university trustees, regents, legislators, the faculty senate, women's groups,
civil liberties groups, and other concerned parties.
According to Crawford, this scenario would be an important public relations
concern, because the university supports the network with public funds. Thus, he

said, the matter should be handled preemptively through a quiet and nonpublic

political and regulatory process managed by the university, involving consultation

with the various constituencies in the university community. Crawford

continued, "That is not the only step, but it's the first step that has to be taken so

that you can deal with issues in a rational setting. Because if you think of it
strictly as a legal issue, you can make all the arguments you want to about
pornography, Playboy, Playgirl
, or getting into the harder-core and illegal
pornography. But if you cannot recognize the public relations issues, I don't think

you will ever get to the substantive legal issues."
Since he made these remarks at the forum in 1993, Crawford's point has
been underscored by scores of articles in the public press about "sex and the

information superhighway."
2Lessig suggested that if users of a university network have an understanding
that any subject is permissible, then it may be appropriate to have some technical

means for segregating topics.
3 This idea was seconded by Murray Turoff, who
noted that New Jersey Institute of Technology electronic forums supported the

discussion of very controversial subjects in private conferences that are advertised

in a directory. An affirmative choice must be made by the student before access to a

private conference is granted.
Carrying forward the theme of individual responsibility for enforcement,
David Hughes, a freedom-of-speech advocate and managing partner of Old

Colorado City Communications, suggested that users who wished to screen out

material they deem offensive could use a technological filter (akin to "Caller ID"

for telephones), assuming2 See, for example, Amy Harmon, "The 'Seedy' Side of CD-ROMs," 
Los Angeles Times
,November 29, 1993, p. A-1; John Schwartz, "Caution: Children at Play on Information

Highway," Washington Post, November 28, 1993, pp. A-1 and A-26.
3 This is an approach employed by America OnLine, which offers message boards and
conferences for different topics. At the same time, the library community believes that any

official scheme for "segregating" or labeling violates intellectual freedom. For example,
the American Library Association's "Statements on Labeling" says that ''labeling is the
practice of describing or designating materials by affixing a prejudicial label and/or
segregating them by a prejudicial system. The American Library Association opposes
these means of predisposing people's attitudes toward library materials for the following

reasons: Labeling is an attempt to prejudice attitudes and as such, it is a censor's tool. 
–"FREE SPEECH
58Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.such a device could be developed for electronic traffic.
4 This technological
solution would be the equivalent of a porch
Ši.e., it would allow offensive
messages to reach the door but not to enter the house. Still, other technical

approaches for screening undesirable material may not be viable in the electronic

environment. For example, broadcast media have often resorted to segregating

material not intended for children by broadcasting such material late at night; in
an electronic environment in which the material is available 24 hours per day,
such an approach becomes more difficult to implement.
The first concern of George Perry, vice president and general counsel for the
Prodigy Services Company, with regard to Scenario 1 was whether any laws were

broken; he was not sure, noting that the answer might depend on the nature of the

pictures. Therefore, the real question becomes the nature of the relationship

among the user, the provider, and, perhaps, the victim, he said. Perry did not see a

freedom-of-speech issue in the scenario, arguing that speech has never been

entirely free.
Given that electronic networks are a new medium with very few commonly
accepted rules of behavior, Perry emphasized the need for providers to establish

them. "I think it is absolutely critical that operators of these systems, whether they

are universities or commercial operations, establish their rules. 
– I don't think
that every network in which you express yourself has to have the same rules, but

you've got to have some rules; otherwise the place is just going to crumble."
A view that went farther was espoused by Hughes. He contended that the
primary responsibility in handling the explicit photographs lay with the

individual and that the university had no responsibility. If the university

responded to the incident by disconnecting the student from the network, then the

student should respond by demanding his or her freedom of electronic speech,

Hughes asserted.
4 The technological feasibility of an electronic filter is not at all a given, although some
prototypes are being developed. It is easy to imagine a filter that would delete or suppress
text-based messages that contained, for example, certain four-letter words; it would be far
more difficult, however, to develop a filter that could screen out bit-mapped graphic
images of humans in sexual poses. (One could, of course, screen authors' names and
subject keywords.) Moreover, any such filter would require a user to specify with some

precision what he or she found offensive, a feat not all individuals could accomplish.
Example-based learning techniques may enable a program to derive a filter based on a few
samples of undesirable material, but whether such techniques are feasible and applicable
on a large operational scale is the subject of considerable technical argument.
FREE SPEECH
59Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.He based this argument on the premise that the digitized photographs
constitute speech rather than property, and that freedom of speech is the

overriding principle. Methods of handling problems on electronic networks

should evolve from that foundation, Hughes argued, rather than from university

policies or social norms developed for other communications media.
In Hughes's view, the university's only responsibility in Scenario 1 is to
educate students and the public. He asserted that members of the public who lack

experience with electronic networks
Šincluding parents and newspaper reporters
Šare unable to make sound, objective judgments about such situations. On his
own network, Hughes educates and influences his user population to adhere to an

ethic. "We discuss that ethic, and out comes socially responsible behavior
Šnotby imposing external authority on them. I never delete, on my system, a piece of
mailŠnever, no matter how obtrusive. I handle it technologically sometimes [by
masking the appearance of the message] so that it is free speech, and we have a

discussion to the point of responsible group behavior." Others argue that masking

the appearance of the message is itself a form of censorship.
In closing discussion of Scenario 1, moderator Henry Perritt noted that
panel members generally agreed on the importance of establishing rules under

which electronic forums operate. Rules need not be the same from forum to

forum, as Perry pointed out, but they need to be explicit and give important

consideration to the views of stakeholders
Šoperators and users. Perritt pointed
out that the disagreements were over the extent (if any) to which other

mechanisms were needed to enforce those rules.
SCENARIO 2: NEGATIVE COMMENTS HARM A THIRD
PARTYIn an investment forum bulletin board hosted by a commercial network
service provider, several users are discussing the merits of investing in XYZ

Corp., a "penny stock" whose price can fluctuate widely on relatively small

trading volume. John, a regular user of the bulletin board, has gained some

credibility with other users for his stock picks. He posts a note on the bulletin

board that says: "I was heavy in this stock 4 months ago, but sold most of my

holdings last month. The company is out of cash, and sales are in the tank. Inside

management is waiting for the stock to go up a quarter point
FREE SPEECH
60Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to dump some big positions." The next day XYZ's shares fall precipitously on
heavy trading.Issue: Provider Responsibility and Liability
Lessig argued that because the First Amendment applies less forcefully in
the context of commercial speech, it may be better to first ask to what extent it is

reasonable to make individuals (in this case, the provider) seek out and screen

information to avoid harming others. Lessig outlined two points relevant to the

problem.First, he offered the analogy of electronic networks functioning as the
National Enquirer
 of cyberspace, in that no one could reasonably rely on
anything that was said. Thus, "the person has no claim they had been harmed,

because they shouldn't have relied upon [the information], and nobody should

have relied upon it." That is not to say, however, that speakers should be immune

from liability, Lessig added. It is only when individuals feel responsible for their

words and actions that others begin to give them credibility, he noted. Thus, if the

network is to gain credibility there must be some responsibility.
Adler was disturbed by the 
National Enquirer
 analogy, arguing that
credibility is essential if electronic networks are to evolve into the marketplace of

the future. Trying to ward off liability by warning users to distrust the network is

the wrong approach, he said; users must feel comfortable knowing that they do

not routinely risk any type of injury and that injuries, when sustained, can be

redressed. Moreover, the First Amendment has been linked to Oliver Wendell

Holmes's notion that the marketplace is where truth will prevail through a free

competition of ideas, Adler added.
5Lessig's second point was that what is reasonable liability depends primarily
on technology. If there were a simple way to search the bulletin board for

harmful information, then common law courts
5 Specifically, Justice Holmes wrote that "when men have realized that time has upset
many fighting faiths, they may come to believe even more than they believe the very

foundations of their own conduct that the ultimate good desired is better reached by free
trade in ideas
Šthat the best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted
in the competition of the market, and that truth is the only ground upon which their wishes
safely can be carried out. That at any rate is the theory of our Constitution. It is an
experiment, as all life is an experiment." 
See Abrams v. United States,
 250 U.S. 616, 630
(1919).FREE SPEECH
61Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.might find it reasonable to impose that duty on providers, he said.
6 However,
emphasizing his earlier point, Lessig pointed out that common law is made by

judges, who may be unfamiliar with electronic networks. "The biggest and, I

think, most frightening thing about regulation in this area is that the people doing

the regulation have no experience at all," he said. "They have no conception of

what cyberspace looks like or even feels like."
There was some dispute on this point. Marc Rotenberg, a privacy advocate
with Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, suggested that 
Cubby Inc.
v. CompuServe Inc.
 (described in 
Chapter 3
) was a landmark free speech case
that demonstrated that judges are beginning to understand electronic networks.

Rotenberg sympathized with CompuServe's argument that it acted as a

distributor, not a publisher, and that it did not know and had no reason to know of
the statements in question. The court agreed, emphasizing the First Amendment
and saying that CompuServe deserved the same protection as a traditional news

vendor. Rotenberg was most enthusiastic about the 
Cubby decision, calling it
"wonderful" and "sensible." He said the court appeared to be promoting

electronic networks as an information resource by limiting but not eliminating

liability for providers. Moderator Perritt suggested that even if judges didn't

understand the new technology, they could be educated about specialized subjects

through the testimony of expert witnesses and amicus briefs and that such

approaches could be encouraged for cases involving electronic networks.
Others, however, warned that the decision establishes troubling precedents.
Adler was disturbed by the finding that CompuServe was not responsible because

it had little or no editorial control. In fact, the provider did have the technological

ability to exercise control but chose not to do so, placing that responsibility on a

contractor, Adler noted; he further wondered whether publishers should be

allowed to pass liability on to a contractor simply by declaring themselves to be
distributors and thus lowering their liability. "So when
6 If the cost of searching the bulletin board for harmful postings were less than the value
of the damage caused by information likely to be on the bulletin board, common law
would hold the bulletin board owner liable for not undertaking a search if damaging

information were indeed found on the board. (More formally, the cost comparison would
be between the cost of the search and the expected value of the damage associated with
harmful information (i.e., the product of the likelihood that the information will be found
on the board times the damage it would cause if it were indeed found).) See Richard
Posner, 
Economic Analysis of Law
, 4th Ed., Little, Brown, Boston, Mass., 1992, pp.
163-169.FREE SPEECH
62Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.we are talking about rights and responsibilities in this world, one of the things we
have to consider is, do the responsibilities flow from whether or not you actually

have the capability, whether or not it is feasible for you to exercise control, or

whether or not you choose to place yourself in that position of exercising

control?" In addition, rights and responsibilities flow from a social decision

regarding whether it is beneficial to grant individuals the rights or to saddle them
with the responsibilities.The central problem with the 
Cubby decision, Adler said, is lack of clarity,
or failure to distinguish among the various electronic services and formats. Adler

said he feared that some readers of the decision would conclude that solicitation

of criminal activity, defamation, and other crimes or torts could be carried out on

electronic networks without liability.
Hughes said he was frightened by the notion that a provider's capability to
review materials translates into an obligation to do so. It is the provider that

defines its services and thus its obligations, he argued. (Of course, a provider

never has complete freedom, as it is subject to the laws of the jurisdiction in

which it operates.) Hughes said further that even a single system may have

multiple roles. For example, the Prodigy Services Company is a publisher, which
implies some review of content; but the service also carries free speech, for which
it should not be held accountable, according to Hughes.
The point regarding multiple roles was reinforced by Davis Foulger from
IBM, who argued that different types of computer-mediated communications

(e.g., electronic newsletters, conferences, and mail) may carry different types of

responsibility. Electronic newsletters, he suggested, may be entirely analogous to

print-based newsletters, with all of the liabilities of the latter carrying over to the

former, whereas an unmoderated conferencing forum may carry fewer

responsibilities. Given the flexibility offered by electronic networks to define the
type of communication, Hughes and Foulger agreed that the self-definition ought
to be the element that defines liability; for example, in the case of a commercial

network whose contractual agreement with users declares that the network owns

all data on its system, the network should be subject to all of the legal

mechanisms used to hold an individual liable for that data.
Hughes went on to note a further complication to the self-definition process:
the extensive interconnection between networks means that a given network may

be unable to control the input to it. Hughes asked: "To what extent am I

accountable for what someone else says on another system that happens to be

displayed on mine?"
Godwin argued that 
Cubby posed a "knew" or "should have known"
FREE SPEECH
63Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.standard of liability for defamation, and he thought that the decision was proper.
But Godwin also argued that the case does not imply that liability results from a

complete failure to exercise discretion or a decision not to exercise discretion. He

noted that "
Cubby is based on 
California v. Smith
,7 [in which] bookstores were
held to be not responsible for monitoring and not responsible for the specific

contents of their books [even though] bookstores can exercise discretion about
what they carry." He further argued that a broad kind of discretion need not
necessarily result in liability; such a freedom from liability would be important to

forum operators, who need to be able to shape the character of their forums but

who also want to avoid liability for the specific contents of those forums.
Providers were satisfied with the 
Cubby decision but said it leaves some
questions unanswered. Perry, while pleased that CompuServe was not held

liable, said a provider's obligation remains unclear. For instance, if a system is

large, with perhaps 50 million messages posted each year, how far should the

operator have to go in investigating allegations about a piece of information? "Do I
have an obligation to go find that thing in the 50 million [notes]? 
– Once I find
it, do I have an obligation to go out and discover the facts as to whether or not

what the individual was saying was true 
–?"Perry argued that, in the scenario he just outlined, both a publisher and a
distributor have an obligation to determine the facts. This responsibility is clearer

in the case of a publisher, he noted; in the 
Cubby case, the court found that if a
distributor is notified of a problem, then it, too, faces some liability unless it takes

action. Moreover, he warned that "it is very dangerous to make the publisher /

distributor distinction when it comes particularly to commercial operators,
because in fact they are a wide spectrum of different kinds of beasts. At one end
they may very well be publishers. On another end they may be pure distributors.

On another end they may be none of either. So I think it's dangerous for us to take

those preexisting analogies and try to apply the law that we have today that

applies to those areas, to this new medium."
In general, liability protection models from other media may not be
appropriate on electronic networks, Adler said, noting that the
7 In this decision (361 U.S. 147 (1959)) the U.S. Supreme Court held a distributor's lack
of editorial control precluded states from holding the distributor strictly liable for

publication contents (A.J. Sassan, "
Cubby Inc. v. CompuServe Inc
.ŠComparing Apples to
Oranges: The Need for a New Media Classification," 
Software Law Journal
, Vol. V,
1992).FREE SPEECH
64Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.distributor model suggests that "the best way to avoid any possible liability is to
exercise the least control. [But] I'm not sure that is socially responsible." Rule by

law is not necessarily so bad, he said, pointing out that, historically, citizens have

not objected to laws per se, but rather to the arbitrary exercise of law
Šlawwithout participation and consent.
As to how liability should be applied, Adler emphasized the distinction
between a common carrier and a service provider: the former is virtually immune

from liability because it is legally required to provide equal access to all users

without editorial control over content, whereas the latter can be held responsible

if it is notified of a problem and does nothing to eliminate the continuing harm. It

is not clear which definition applies in Scenario 2.
Issue: User Responsibility and Liability
Liability for defamation is a critical issue in the electronic environment. In
common law, the question of defamation rested on the truth or falsity of a

statement about an individual. However, in light of First Amendment

considerations, the Supreme Court has focused on the degree of fault that can be

attributed to the speaker, Adler said. Of course, if the speaker (or poster) of a

defamatory message is truly anonymous (i.e., if it is genuinely impossible to

determine the identity of the speaker with certainty, as might be the case if the
message originated on another network, for example), then the matter ends there,
and no party can be held liable.
True anonymity currently is rare on electronic networks.
8 In many more
cases, the true identities of speakers are confidential (i.e., the identities of

speakers are withheld as a matter of policy on the part of the service provider,

although the provider does in fact know these true identities). In such cases,

Adler maintained, "the question is whether the service provider is willing to

accept the liability for the harm that is caused by maintaining the promise of

confidentiality, or whether 
– there is a balance 
– that says there are compelling
interests which outweigh the values of the promise of confidentiality and require
disclosure."But Perry and Hughes took a somewhat different tack. Perry argued that a
user's liability on a bulletin board ought to be the same
8 Anonymous use of electronic networks is nevertheless expected to increase. Even
today, there are so-called "anonymous remailers" that accept e-mail messages and forward
them to their intended recipient stripped of any identifying information.FREE SPEECH
65Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as in any other circumstance. Hughes agreed, saying that John's note in Scenario 2
was an individual act of irresponsible speech, for which the provider was not

responsible. Both suggested that under the circumstances of Scenario 2, the

provider should not have to bear the liability to which Adler referred. Hughes

further argued that when identities are kept confidential as a policy choice on the

part of the provider, a complainant should seek the assistance of law enforcement
authorities and show probable cause for issuance of a search warrant (in a
criminal case) or a subpoena (in a civil case) that would compel the provider to

provide the sender's identity. In this case, the decision concerning whether to

divulge the speaker's identity does not rest with the provider but with law

enforcement authorities.
If the provider in Scenario 2 maintained the confidentiality of the originator
of the communication, thus shielding the only potential defendant, then the

provider still would not be obligated to report a violation to law enforcement

authorities, Hughes said, citing the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of

1986 (Public Law 99-508). However, he said, the provider has some fundamental

ethical responsibility. "Some things are right and some things are wrong,"

Hughes argued.
DISCUSSION AND COMMON THEMES
The balance between free speech and other values is tested regularly, and the
regulation of speech comes in many forms. Even in academia, usually regarded

as the bastion of free speech, users sometimes are banned from networks. Carl

Kadie, a graduate student in computer science at the University of Illinois and

moderator of the academic-freedom mailing list on the Internet, cited the example

of an Iowa State University student being expelled from the campus network for
copying materials from an erotic forum into an open forum meant for discussion
of newsgroups and newsgroup policy. The expulsion was lifted after protests from

Internet and campus network users, but access to the erotic forum remains

restricted. Kadie went on to argue that because many universities are state

universities and because many parts of the Internet are owned or leased by

federal or state government, lawsuits could be filed in these cases based on the

First Amendment,
9 although the law is weaker for cases involving library policy
on selection (or, more to the point, exclusion)
9 The First Amendment applies only to public forums, which can result from
government funding or a dedication to public use (e.g., an airport or a shopping mall even
if privately funded), and different types of speech may have different levels of protection.
FREE SPEECH
66Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of electronic resources. "I think many of these arguments have to be won or lost
on the moral argument and [by] appealing to freedom of expression
ŠacademicfreedomŠand can't depend so much on legal protections," Kadie said.
Still, users generally can be more outspoken on university networks than
anywhere else. Kadie expressed the hope that those who determine rules for

behavior on electronic networks will "learn from the experience (and, hopefully,

wisdom) codified in long-standing academic policies and principles. 
– I don't
think academia should be the only forum for free speech. 
– I would hope that
technical solutions such as 'kill files'
10 and the ability to create new forums [as is
done in Santa Monica] would be enough to have people [on nonacademic
networks] regulate themselves."
It may be difficult to transfer this principle of openness to other arenas. For
instance, corporate executives may want to control postings of material relevant

to company business. Economic considerations also may argue for the regulation

of speech at times. This is particularly true for commercial information

providers, as clients demand to be insulated from certain types of content, noted

Perry. Perry said, "There are different environments in which you have to deal

with the same set of problems, maybe with a different view and a different
historical and traditional background." These differences in perspective can lead
to conflicting views about what speech is or is not appropriate for public viewing

or exposure.
Finally, it was argued that free speech was not possible when one was denied
access to the electronic environment. As Sara Kiesler noted, "The purest form of

censorship is absence of access. If you can't have access to a network at all, then

you are completely censored from that forum. Therefore, we have to know who

has access, and, even for those who have physical access, who's being driven

off."There was broad agreement among panel participants that free speech is not
an absolute right to be exercised under all circumstances. The relevant issue for

free speech is what circumstances justify the uses of which mechanisms to

discourage and/or suppress certain types of speech. The nature of the

circumstances in which free speech should be discouraged is a matter of political

and social debate, but it is clear that policymakers have a variety of such
mechanisms at their disposal to discourage or suppress expression:
10 A "kill file" is a list of users (i.e., network accounts) whose messages are to be deleted
automatically from the set of messages shown to the owner of the kill file.
FREE SPEECH
67Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Educate and persuade:
 At a minimum, most people agree that an
important step involves persuasion and education, relying on voluntary

means to dissuade people from saying things that are arguably harmful,

objectionable, or offensive to others.
   Rely on contractual provisions:
 Someone agrees, as a condition of use, to
abide by regulations regarding the content of speech.
   Weigh political considerations:
 An institution may wish to weigh how it
will be seen in the eyes of its relevant public in determining the nature

of its response.
   Rely on market mechanisms:
 Grass-roots pressure on suppliers of
information services often forces change because suppliers fear losing

the business of those complaining.
   Explicitly rely on First Amendment freedoms:
 A state university may
have far fewer options for regulating speech due to the fact that it can be

regarded as an arm of government.
How are these issues different in the electronic networked environment?
Lessig asserted that
in ordinary life, social norms are created in a context where other things besides

speech are going on, things such as exclusion, anger, and the impact of local

geographies. 
– [These are the] sorts of things that help the process of norm
creation in a speech context. [But] what makes electronic networks so difficult

from the perspective of creating and molding norms is that the interactive human

behavior on these networks is mostly if not entirely pure speech. From the

constitutional perspective, this is the first environment in which society has had

to face the problem of creating and changing norms when the only thing it is

doing is trying to regulate speech.
The steering committee generally concurred with this assessment,
concluding that
   Networks offer a greater degree of anonymity than is possible for
speakers under other circumstances.
   Networks enable communications to very large audiences at relatively
low cost as compared to traditional media.
   Networks are a relatively new medium for communications, and there
are few precedents and little experience to guide the behavior of

individuals using this medium. As a result,
   Š Speakers are less familiar with a sense of appropriateness and ethics
here (treating a big megaphone as though it were a smaller one); and
   Š Policymakers are less confident in this domain.
FREE SPEECH68Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Electronic VandalismThe extent of electronic vandalism and other computer-related crime is
unknown. Annual losses in the United States due to computer crime have been
estimated at $2 million to $730 million, but these figures are suspect; several
studies have estimated that only 1 percent of all computer crime is detected, and

the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) estimates that of crimes that are

detected, only 14 percent are reported.
1 In any case, it is clear that security on
electronic networks is a growing concern.
2 Antivirus programs have become
almost ubiquitous, and, as Eberhard Wunderlich of AT&T noted at the November

workshop, there is a trend toward moving beyond user passwords to smart cards

for access control, encryption, and electronic signatures. In the first half of 1994,

concerns for security on the Internet were prompted by a rash of penetration

attempts, many of which were successful.
3But technology cannot guarantee absolute security. Forum participants
1 C.D. Chen, ''Computer Crime and the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986,"
Computer Law Journal,
 Vol. X(1), pp. 71-86, Winter 1990.
2 A classic case of network penetration is that of the Hanover Hacker, recounted by
Clifford Stoll in 
The Cuckoo's Egg: Tracking a Spy Through the Maze of Computer
Espionage, Doubleday, New York, 1989.
3 Peter H. Lewis, "Hackers on Internet Posing Security Risks, Experts Say," 
New York
Times, July 21, 1994, p. A-1.
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM69
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.indicated, for instance, that a system operator may have difficulty detecting a
fraudulent (i.e., stolen) user identification, particularly one forged by an expert.

As Mitchell D. Kapor, co-founder and chair of the Electronic Frontier

Foundation, said, "There's always some tiny fraction of the elite that is, in fact,

technically capable of inflicting huge amounts of damage. 
–"For those cases in which damage does occur, some remedy may be found in
the law, though even this remedy is subject to the caveat that its efficacy depends

on the reality of enforcement. If a district attorney refuses to prosecute or the

civil courts take too long to handle a lawsuit, the determination of trespass or

theft becomes an academic discussion.
SCENARIO 1: VIRUS DAMAGES BULLETIN BOARD
A computer club at a local high school sets up a dial-in bulletin board, using
equipment bought for the club by a banker whose son is club president. The

bulletin board is set up at the club president's home, and it can exchange

messages with other bulletin boards across North America. The banker also has a

computer system for working at home that is tied directly into the club's

computer; the banker's computer is used to write a public newsletter for his bank.

The telephone number of the bulletin board is distributed through a national

magazine, and over time, the following activities are taking place on the bulletin
board, although no club members are involved in any of these activities:
   Stolen credit card numbers are posted;
   Hate messages are sent to Canada, where such messages are illegal;
   A program is posted in a public space by Joe, a nonmember, and others
download the program and discover that it contains a virus that causes

considerable damage; and
   A second program is posted that is designed to disrupt network services
when run on a computer connected to a national network such as the

Internet or CompuServe.
Issue: Criminal Liability
Club members have no criminal liability for failing to monitor the activities
in this scenario, said Scott Charney, chief of the Computer
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM70
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Crime Unit at the Justice Department. If a potential criminal case involving a
computer warranted an investigation, both the law and sensible policy would

dictate use of the least intrusive means, such as a subpoena, to obtain

information, he said. However, the answers to several questions might alter this

response. The first question is how prosecutors learned of the problem; the club

members themselves might have reported it, for example, thereby inviting an
investigation.The second and more complicated question involves intent. "Suppose, for
example, that the people running this board knew about the illegal access codes

and were actually fostering it and encouraging it," Charney said. "That doesn't

mean the [bulletin board] is any less valid, but those running it may not be

innocent third parties anymore. And how do you investigate that and get the
evidence you need without infringing on the newsletter, which is protected under
the First Amendment to the Constitution?"
If they pursued the virus case in Scenario 1, federal prosecutors would not
seize equipment or search the bank computers, because neither the bulletin board

nor the bank is involved in criminal activity, Charney said. In fact, it is not clear

whether there is any criminal case at all; if the bulletin board is open to the
public, then Joe, even as a nonmember, has access authority and hence no
criminal liability, because the statute under which criminal liability is imposed

requires unauthorized access.
Issue: Deficiencies in the Laws
Mark Rasch, an attorney with the firm Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin, and
Kahn, said Joe's inappropriate behavior has two elements: possible unauthorized

access to the bulletin board and uploading the computer virus. Since Joe is
arguably an "authorized" user (anyone could be an "authorized" user of a public
bulletin board system, and 18 U.S.C. Section 1030 simply prohibits unauthorized

access), Joe might well escape any liability at all. As for the uploading of the

computer virus, "Prosecutors must prove Joe's intent. Why did he do it? The way

the federal law is structured right now, if Joe accesses with authorization, even

with intent to destroy and damage all the information in that computer, the

computer crime statute says he is not guilty of a crime, because it is his initial

access [that the law focuses on]."
44 Note that Joe may still be liable to prosecution under the applicable state's criminal
law, if any.
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM71
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Rasch suggested that legislators based the law on an imperfect analogy
Šanoffice break-in, where no matter what intruders do in the office, they are guilty at

minimum of trespassing. Although the analogy falls short, Rasch said lawmakers

have relied on such analogies because of the lack of common experience in the

environment of electronic networks. "When we see crimes in society, we can

relate to them as criminal acts because we have a common experience about what
is a crime and what is not a crime," he said. "And when we deal in cyberspace
and we deal in the electronic environment, we don't have those experiences. We

don't have those common human judgments. We don't have that ethical standard

to fall back on. So then we end up 
– trying to draw analogies."
Kent Alexander, now U.S. attorney for the Northern District of Georgia, said
Joe has extensive criminal and civil liability but that prosecuting him would be a

challenge. Alexander said the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 seldom

applies in real cases, adding that prosecutors often depend on broader laws such

as the wire fraud statute (18 U.S.C. Section 1343), which applies if a telephone is
used in a scheme to defraud. Alexander and Rasch both said a federal
destruction-of-property statute is needed.
That prospect prompted some caution. For example, Marc Rotenberg and
Michael Godwin argued that although it was appropriate to criminalize

undesirable behavior such as destruction of property and computer trespass, it

was unnecessary to specify what the instrumentality of such behavior was.
Godwin said the law generally approaches computers as if they were "inherently
dangerous" in ways that other general-purpose tools, such as hammers, are not; he

argued that this legal approach infringes on freedom of speech and that computer

use should not be overregulated in this manner. Still, Alexander insisted that

some computer-related laws are needed, because "cyberspace is 
– what we are
going to live in." Rasch said, "The reason we need specific computer crime

statutes is because analogies don't actually work perfectly," although he cautioned

that it would be preferable to target a potential miscreant's overall strategy rather

than a precise mechanism, because a vandal might be able to "engineer around" a

defined mechanism.Litigation specialist Thomas Guidoboni, of the firm Bonner and O'Connell,
agreed with other speakers that the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act is flawed. He

argued that victims should be able to recover damages through the civil system

but that criminalizing and jailing hackers does not benefit victims, other than by

serving as a deterrent. (The statute specifies punishment consisting of a fine and/
or imprisonment.) He contended that, although the Congress prohibited
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM72
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.computer trespassing, it did not address worse wrongs (such as the malicious
destruction of computer files): "They need to be educated. 
– [T]hey don't really
know what to prohibit."
Charney said the federal law should specify the type(s) of prohibited
network intrusion. He noted that the Justice Department has asked the Congress

to amend the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act because the ethics of computer

usage have evolved and users' roles have changed since 1986. "It's better to say,

'Look, if you upload a virus, even if you are authorized [to access the computer] 
–intending to damage, without authority, other people's material, that's going to be
criminal.' That way, everybody has plenty of notice and you've got a statute that
directly applies to the conduct." Such a statute should not criminalize legitimate

work with viruses, such as in the research community, he added.
Godwin noted that federal law doesn't require that 
intent to damage
 be
established, and he suggested it is bad policy for criminal laws to ignore intent.

He said criminal statutes generally, and rightly, focus on the intent or mental state

of the defendant, because "we try to criminalize people for setting out to do bad

things, not for unwittingly doing bad things." Joe's potential criminal liability for

putting out a virus that disrupts network service or that damages a "federal
interest" computer
5 may not reflect the proper balance between civil and criminal
sanctions, Godwin suggested, because the law now "makes no distinction

between someone who accidentally causes damage and perhaps a terrorist who

deliberately causes damage to vital systems." Rasch countered by arguing that

even if the statute itself makes no such distinction, it is possible to make

distinctions in other ways, such as in sentencing; he cited the sentence in the

Morris case as an example (
Box 5.1), arguing that Morris was not imprisoned
because the damage he caused was accidental.
Godwin noted that Morris had authorized access to the computer from which
he launched the virus. Guidoboni, who defended Morris, had argued

unsuccessfully that his client, as a member of the Internet community, had

authorized access to all computers on the system. Guidoboni pointed out at the

forum that "authorization" and "access" can be difficult to define for the Internet.

Guidoboni also warned against attempting to curb computer vandalism through

"foolish"5 As defined in the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986, a federal interest computer
is a computer used exclusively or part-time by the U.S. government or a financial

institution, where the offense affects the government's operation of the computer. The term
also applies if two or more computers, not all of which are located in the same state, are
used in committing the offense.
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM73
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.censorship, noting that the government refused to release the "cure" for the
Morris virus, for fear of hackers obtaining it. "So of course a lot of you people on

the Internet couldn't fix what was wrong, because our government didn't want to

give you the code to fix it. 
– [It was their effort to] prevent a perceived wrong
that probably did more harm in the end."
BOX 5.1 
UNITED STATES V. ROBERT T. MORRIS
, 1991Robert Morris was one of the first to be prosecuted under the
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986. As a Cornell University graduate
student, Morris wrote and released onto the Internet a "worm" program
designed to propagate itself automatically without harm to the host
computers, but due to a flaw in its design, the Morris worm caused
thousands of computers nationwide to crash on November 2-3, 1988. By
itself, the worm did no permanent damage, although the estimated cost of

rectifying its effects at each location involved ranged from $200 to $53,000.
As a graduate student in the Cornell University computer science
department, he had full and legal access to all the department's computing
facilities; these facilities were connected to the Internet.
Although Morris' defense claimed the worm was a benign test of
computer security that went wrong, Morris was convicted on the grounds
that he intentionally accessed remote computers without authorization. He
was sentenced to 3 years probation, fined $10,050, and ordered to perform
400 hours of community service, a sentence far less than the maximum
permissible under law. The conviction later was upheld by a federal appeals

court, and review was denied by the Supreme Court.
SOURCE: 
United States v. Robert T. Morris
, No. 89-CR-139
(N.D.N.Y.), aff'd 928 F.2d 504 (2nd Cir. 1991), cert. denied, 112 S. Ct. 72
(1991).Issue: Civil Obligations and Liabilities
Civil liabilities arise from the general principle in common law that a person
who has been wronged by another person is entitled to compensation for that
wrong from that other person. Charney suggested that Joe might have
considerable civil liability if the damage he caused was extensive. Alexander said

a civil case against Joe probably would not hold up, assuming there were no

federal agents or state police involved, because hackers usually are judgment-

proof.ELECTRONIC VANDALISM74
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(Hackers are usually judgment-proof because they are typically young people
who have no assets to seize.) Conversely, although the father in Scenario 1 has

not committed a criminal act, he probably will be sued because he and his bank

are the only parties with any money, Guidoboni observed. Whether there is a

valid case is doubtful, he added. Godwin noted that civil liability depends little, if

at all, on the intentions of a defendant.
Godwin argued that "to a large extent, many of the issues regarding liability
are not criminal law issues at all. We have a large body of civil law devoted to

negligence obligations, obligations to be nonnegligent in maintaining other kinds

of spaces, be it your yard or your business." He contended that, ultimately,

individuals who maintain forums will have some duties of care that arise from

civil obligations. He cautioned, however, that because an on-line bulletin board is
a forum for speech, whatever civil obligations are imposed on a system operator
must be consistent with the First Amendment.
6 He further contended that
distribution of virus codes or information, and general discussion of viruses, are

protected by the First Amendment. "It's always very troubling to discover that

someone's teenaged son or daughter has access to a potentially damaging bit of

computer code," he said. "But one of the choices that we have made in living in a

free society is to say we're going to allow people to be a source of a lot of risk.

We're going to risk having people who have dangerous information."
SCENARIO 2: MULTISYSTEM INTRUDER DAMAGES FILES
Computer A is penetrated by an unauthorized user. The intruder uses
Computer A to reach Computer B, where he causes extensive damage to files.

The operator of Computer A monitors the key-strokes of the intruder, who

eventually is caught. The intruder claims that the operator violated the

wiretapping statute.7 Computer A did
6 As private parties, Prodigy, America OnLine, CompuServe, or GEnie are not subject
to the First Amendment in the sense that they have the right to establish the rules that

apply to the use of their services as a contractual matter and to refuse to provide service to
those subscribers who do not adhere to such rules. On the other hand, actions that can be
legally taken by a governmental entity must be consistent with the First Amendment; to
the extent that such actions are required to enforce a contract, all parties to the contract are
affected by the First Amendment.
7 The wiretap statute is 
United States Code Annotated
, Title 18, Sections 2510-2521. To
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM75
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.not display a warning message regarding unauthorized access because its
operators forgot to install such a message, while Computer B did not display a

warning message on the premise that anyone accessing it from Computer A

would be an authorized user.
Issue: Trespassing and Theft
Scenario 2 is principally a trespassing case, and it illustrates the need for
computer crime statutes, Rasch said. Computer trespassing is abhorrent, he

asserted, even if no damage is done, because it destroys trust in the system. The

crime is different in character from a home or office break-in because the distrust

lingers. "When you are a user, and you see somebody without authorization on
your system, you don't know that he didn't do anything, and it can take you a very
long time to come to the conclusion that he didn't do anything," Rasch said. "It

would be like having a calculator that 1 out of every 100,000 times adds the

numbers up incorrectly."Rasch argued that although trespassing is a crime in itself, monetary damage
also should be calculated, to adjust the level of the offense. At the same time, he

raised the issue of whether stealing electronic information should be criminalized

at all. "If I steal the files in your office, you know I've stolen them. If, on the

other hand, I simply copy them, the law is not clear on whether I've stolen
something. In a computer environment, I can steal all the information in your
computer and you won't know it, and you'll still have all the information."
8Although the federal statute does not criminalize reckless or negligent
actions, Rasch said negligence will become an increasingly common
use wiretaps for collecting information about the content of communications, law
enforcement officials must obtain a court order by demonstrating probable cause and
necessity. However, a party to a communication can consent to its interception. Federal
policy holds that system operators do not have a privileged status allowing them to

monitor communications, and so federal agencies place notices on computer systems
warning hackers that they are subject to monitoring, according to Patrick Lanthier,
director of public policy and technology for Pacific Bell. Different policies may obtain
under state law.
8 There is a long legal tradition of protecting intellectual property, which is itself a legal
construction that vests in certain people property interests in the intangible (for example,

the law grants authors copyright protection and companies trade secret protection).
However, the boundaries that separate criminal versus civil liability for violating these
laws are fuzzier than those for governing theft of tangible property.
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM76
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.basis for civil litigation. As to whether reckless actions should be criminalized, he
acknowledged that this approach would help prosecute wrongdoing and

encourage users to be careful, but he noted that the problem of proving a

defendant's mental state would persist. He dismissed claims that intent can be

difficult to prove, saying, "A person is presumed to intend the natural and

probable consequences of his actions, so generally you can prove intent."
Godwin argued that the phrase "stealing information" implies that
information is property, when in fact an argument can be made that information

should be assumed not to be property.
9 To become property and be subject to
theft, information must meet certain tests, such as those imposed by copyright or

trade secret laws, he said. He agreed with prosecutor Charney that privacy is the

key issue in computer intrusion, just as it in wiretapping. "I think it's appropriate
sometimes to criminalize intrusion and the examination and even the copying of
data as perhaps the violation of a privacy interest," Godwin said. "But treating it

like a theft crime, I think, doesn't help the public consciousness of 
– the true
nature of these crimes."
While he supported the use of incentives to curb user negligence, Godwin
questioned whether criminal law is the right tool. Users already have incentives to

secure their systems and refrain from distributing damaging software; whether

these incentives are adequate is the question, he said.
Godwin argued that criminal behavior on electronic networks should not be
defined until "we actually have a sense of what the social norms are. 
– Many of
us just say it's obvious that intruding in a computer is like intruding in your

home," he said. "Believe me, if it were that obvious, then many of the people who
have done computer intrusions would never have done it, because these people
have never walked [without permission] into other people's homes."
Issue: Determining Damage
Assuming the two computers are in different states (i.e., a federal interest
computer was involved pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1030(e)(2)),
9 The question of whether or not information should be or can be regarded as property is
subject to considerable debate. What is undeniable is that certain types of information and
perhaps certain pieces of information (i.e., specific instantiations of those types) are
generally regarded by society at large as being more appropriately shared or appropriately
private than other types (and perhaps pieces) of information. Put differently, agreement on
the principles that differentiate these categories could not be expected to result if a group

of randomly chosen "reasonable people" were asked to articulate such principles.
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM77
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and the intruder is not authorized to access either Computer A or Computer B, the
intruder could be prosecuted under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (Section

1030(a)(5)) if damage totaled $1,000 or more,
10 Charney said. The intruder might
also face a misdemeanor charge under Sections 1030(a)(2) and 1030(a)(3) if he

accessed, without authorization, certain specified computers (i.e., computers used

by financial institutions, card issuers, consumer reporting agencies, or the federal
government).Charney stressed the difficulty of calculating damage, a necessary task in
determining whether a federal crime has been committed and how severe the

sentence would be. If all the files in Computer B were destroyed, for example, it

is not clear how to calculate their value, he noted. Charney also pointed out that,

ironically, if the operator of Computer B had complete backup files, any federal
crime effectively would be erased. "Does that make sense? I don't think so," the
prosecutor observed. Of course, the victim would most likely incur costs

associated with restoring the backup, changing passwords, cleaning up the

system, and so on, although the cost of the "ancillary" activities might well be

significantly less than the cost of recreating the destroyed files from scratch.
He applauded a recent U.S. Sentencing Commission recommendation for
new sentencing guidelines for computer crime that would focus not on economic

damage, but rather on confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data.
11 That
approach makes sense, Charney said, because in many computer offenses "the
real problem is not money, it's privacy and trusted systems, and I think we need to
address that."Guidoboni agreed with Charney that damage calculations are a problem. For
example, prosecutors in the 
Morris case claimed substantial amounts of economic
damage that would have been dismissed as "speculative" in the average civil

case, Guidoboni said.
Issue: Ethics and Education
Charney and Godwin agreed that computer users need ethics edu
10 This level of damage is likely, assuming that estimates of average losses are accurate.
The average loss due to computer crime has been estimated at $44,000 to $10 million

(Chen, "Computer Crime and the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986," 1990).
11 
Federal Register
, December 31, 1992. As of May 1994, the recommendation (revised
since 1992) had not been adopted.
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM78
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.cation.12 Charney noted that the Justice and Education departments recently
published a booklet for educators on the ethical use of information technologies.

Many computer hackers are not trying to damage anything; they simply are young

and do not know any better, he explained. In such cases, federal agents visit the

intruders' homes and tell the parents, and the problem generally stops. ''Look,

there will always be some percentage of the population that has a criminal bent,
and as they learn to use computers, they are going to do nasty things with them,"
Charney said. "But if you eliminate all these other cases that exist only because

the people haven't been educated, then you can apply what limited resources you

have left to the really serious cases."
Other forum participants offered conflicting perspectives on the ethical
status of computer users. Lance Hoffman, professor of electrical engineering and

computer science at George Washington University, felt he was "living in

fantasyland, listening to some of this discussion." He suggested that the term

"ethically educated computer user" might be an oxymoron, citing a class he
taught in which 22 out of 23 students did not feel that stealing information was a
crime. On the other hand, Rasch
Šas noted earlier
Šsuggested that "stealing
information" was not a crime.
Still other participants argued that many hackers have a sense of ethics,
citing the Legion of Doom as an illustration. The Legion of Doom was a group of

several dozen hackers who broke into telephone systems and computer networks.

The group acquired widespread notoriety beginning in 1989, when federal agents

raided the homes of three Atlanta members who had been trafficking in stolen

access codes. One hacker had broken into a Bell South computer and obtained an
administrative document. The crackdown continued into 1990, with raids in
Texas and elsewhere.13John Perry Barlow said these hackers "were astonishingly ethical people in
spite of the fact that they had been raised in an environment where they had

literally been without adult supervision,
14 both12 The need for ethics education was underscored in the CSTB report 
Computers at
Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age
 (National Academy Press, Washington,
D.C.), published in 1990.
13 G. Cartwright, "Clash of the Cyberpunks," 
Texas Monthly
, Vol. 21, pp. 104-106,
112-116, January 1993.
14 This may be hyperbole. At least one former member of the Legion of Doom says his
parents knew of his activities. Moreover, the ethics of these hackers were self-serving, and
they were fully cognizant of the law. For example, members were instructed to avoid
causing damage to files
Šnot for altruistic reasons, but so that they could avoid getting
caught.ELECTRONIC VANDALISM79
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in their homes and in their chosen environment (i.e., the electronic networking
environment). They had developed a set of ethics as a natural result of being in an

environment where law simply didn't apply." Argued Barlow, "If they didn't have

ethics, you would not be able to place a phone call
ŠeverŠin this country. They
are amazingly careful about what they do. And there is nobody who is in a very

good position to stop them." Alexander, who prosecuted the Bell South case,
15agreed with Barlow about their technical capabilities, noting that "if they had

wanted to shut down service in the entire Atlanta area or up and down the Eastern

seaboard or the entire country, they could have."
More recently (mid-1994), public attention has been called to the ethics
issue by the National Computer Ethics and Responsibilities Campaign, which

aims to provide people with the tools and pointers they need to use information

technology in responsible and ethical ways. Sponsored by several different

organizations,16 the campaign is undertaking a variety of activities intended to
encourage serious, ongoing discussion of the issue, lend the subject credibility
and impact, provide a strong rationale for commentators to focus on the issue,
create a structure that gets information into the hands of people who need it, and

raise public awareness. Its core message is that users of information technologies

have responsibilities that are peculiar to the management, development, and use

of those technologies. The campaign is not promoting any approach, "code of

conduct," position, or recommendation other than the need to raise awareness of

the positive and negative consequences of the analog-to-digital shift and of the

fact that tools and resources exist to help people make intelligent, informed

choices about how best to develop, manage, and use information technology

whether it is in the home, corporation, or classroom.
15 
United States v. Riggs aka The Prophet
, 967 F.2d 561, U.S. App. LEXIS 17592 (11th
Cir. 1992).
16 Sponsors of the campaign launch activities include the Atterbury Foundation, Boston
Computer Society, Business Software Alliance, CompuServe, Computer Ethics Institute,
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, Computing Technology Industry
Association, Electronic Privacy Information Center, Merrill Lynch & Co. Inc., Monsanto,

National Computer Security Association, Software Creations BBS, Software Publishers
Association, Symantec Corporation, and Ziff-Davis Publishing Company. Affiliated
organizations included EDUCOM, the Electronic Messaging Association, the IEEE
Computer Society, the California Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, and others.
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM80
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Issue: Operator Responsibilities and Liabilities
System operators and network service providers have an obligation to
provide security capabilities and procedures that discourage unauthorized access

and/or damaging conduct. But users of these systems and services have

obligations as well to use these capabilities and procedures. Guidoboni argued

that system operators should assume some responsibility for security rather than

depend on laws to compensate for bad management. In the 
Morris case, he noted,
passwords had been left in files that were accessible to nearly anyone. In a
similar vein, Alexander said failure to install adequate system security should

neither be criminalized nor become a basis for blocking prosecution of

intruders.17 He argued that common sense and the free-market system will
encourage adoption of safeguards. More recently, the Clinton administration's

Information Infrastructure Task Force has suggested that "users of personal

information must take reasonable steps to prevent the information they have from

being disclosed or altered improperly. Such users should use appropriate

managerial and technical controls to protect the confidentiality and integrity of

personal information."
18 Such a principle argues that individuals have an active
responsibility to protect information about themselves.
COMMON THEMES
An important theme of the dialogue, noted by several participants, was the
unusual degree of accord among the factions represented. For instance, a variety

of speakers stressed the need for user ethics education. In addition, prosecutor

Charney and civil liberties advocate Godwin agreed that privacy, more than theft

or specific damage, is the key issue in computer trespassing. (This is not to say,

however, that damage resulting from break-ins is unimportant. Indeed, even when

there is no explicit damage, companies may incur substantial costs if they are
forced to take a network out of service
17 In some European countries, failure to install adequate security can nullify any
criminal charges against an intruder; moreover, the system operator can be held liable,

Charney noted.18 See p. 3 in 
Principles for Providing and Using Personal Information
 and the
accompanying commentary, distributed for comments by the Information Infrastructure

Task Force Information Policy Committee Working Group on Privacy in the National
Information Infrastructure on May 4, 1994. Initial reactions to this document suggest that
this particular principle is the most controversial.
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM81
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.temporarily to check it out and patch security holes. In addition, a user's sense of
operating in a trustworthy computing environment may be compromised.)
Perhaps most important, a consensus emerged that federal computer crime
statutesŠUnited States Code Annotated
, Title 18, Section 1030
Šneeds to be
updated, although panel members differed as to how. This statute originated with

the Counterfeit Access Device and Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984

(Public Law 98-473) and was amended by the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of

1986 (Public Law 99-474). It provides criminal sanctions for individuals who

intentionally access a computer without authorization or exceed authorized
access; it does not address reckless or negligent access or intent to cause damage.
The law is difficult to apply in practice. Charney and others pointed out, for
example, that insiders pose a significant threat to network security: "We're seeing a

fairly dramatic increase in the number of insiders who plant viruses and other

types of malicious codes because they're either disgruntled or they're on their way

out the door . 
–" These cases are a challenge to prosecutors because the
defendants had authorized access to the system. Charney said legislation has been

proposed, although not passed, that would criminalize "unauthorized use"

instead. Rotenberg also emphasized the threat from insiders, suggesting that the
federal statute be revamped altogether to focus on actual harm and criminalizing
"people who cause damage and people who intend to cause damage."
Others pointed out that the definition of "authorization" is problematic,
especially in a networked environment designed to make it easy to share

computing resources. As Rasch said, "We have a question of what is somebody's

authorization on a network. 
– As a member of the Internet community, I can
send electronic mail to anybody on the network. And I can access their computer,

albeit for limited purposes.19 Therefore, I have authority [under one definition
19 One technical nuance to this point is the fact that Internet e-mail delivery is handled
by an independent "postal system" that is not under the direct control of a mail sender.
Thus, "Bob's" sending an e-mail message to "Alice" does not give Bob even limited access
to Alice's computer any more than Bob's sending a letter gives him access to Alice's postal
box. Perhaps the real issue is not who has access (though that is the concern of the law),
but rather what is legal to send through e-mail. (For example, what is the electronic

equivalent of a mail bomb?) A second technical nuance is that Bob might use another
capability provided by most Internet-connected computers, such as ''finger," that would in
fact require direct access to Alice's computer. (The "finger" command typically provides
information about a user with an account on the target computer.)
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM82
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of the word] to access every computer on the network. 
– Even worse, the
problem is not just authorization, it's also exceeding authorization. So even if you

are authorized to be on a system, if you exceed that authorization, you may be

subject to criminal sanctions." David Hughes pointed out that "it's not just

authorization on the Internet, but everything is getting connected to everything

else. 
– It looks like we are hooking up every network possible to every network
possible. – Furthermore, the information is moving, and you don't even know
what systems it's going through and whether you have authorization to go through

that system." In short, Hughes argued that basing criminality on whether a user

has authorized access to a system can raise some perplexing questions.
David R. Johnson, a lawyer with Wilmer, Cutler, and Pickering, pointed out
that the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act criminalized unauthorized access only

because the Congress was concerned that criminalizing electronic destruction by

users with 
authorized access could open up a new avenue for inappropriate
prosecution of whistleblowers and others engaged in First Amendment-type
activities.Still, the concordance among the panel members was seen as a positive sign.
Anne Wells Branscomb spoke for many when she observed that "the legal

profession seems to have made a bridge now to the computer scientists and the

user, [and the] managers of some of these systems. 
– [I]n the past I think they
have been talking at cross-purposes, have lived in different worlds."
In summary, electronic vandalism can be characterized along at least two
separate dimensions. The first involves the nature of the offense: electronic

trespass, electronic invasion of privacy, and destruction or theft of electronic

property. Electronic trespass can be captured by the idea that a trespasser is

executing commands on a computer that he or she does not have authorization to

use. Electronic invasion of privacy refers to the unauthorized examination of files
in a computer. Electronic destruction of property refers to the unauthorized
deletion or alteration of files in a computer.
The second dimension involves the intent or lack thereof on the part of the
alleged perpetrator. With a few exceptions, the presence of intent is what

determines the extent to which an alleged perpetrator can be prosecuted under

criminal statutes; in the absence of intent, liability for harmful actions is generally

restricted to civil liability.
Although expressed in terms relevant to computing, these notions are not
new. What computing and networking primarily change is the difficulty of

determining when a given offense has occurred. For example:
ELECTRONIC VANDALISM83
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Trespass. The concept of trespass is grounded in physical space that can
be precisely delimited. What is the analog of physical space in a medium

in which physical space has lost its traditional meaning? Before

networking became common, the concept of trespass could be applied to

an unauthorized user sitting at a terminal hard-wired to a mainframe.

The terminal was located in a physical space, and the user's presence
there, if unauthorized, clearly constituted trespass against the owner of
that space (who was also usually the owner of the mainframe). But when

computers are interconnected all over the world, and the user may be

accessing the network from his or her home and thus may not be subject

to the jurisdiction of any interested party, on what is the concept of

trespass based? Perhaps the unauthorized execution of commands is

sufficient, although this interpretation may be problematic when

execution is possible without a remote log-in that clearly demarcates a

point of (authorized or unauthorized) access.
   Invasion of privacy.
 In a physical space, an invader of privacy may well
leave tracks or other evidence that he or she has opened file cabinets or

closets. In many electronic environments, it is easy to view files and

directories without leaving any trace whatever. Thus, the owners of a

computer that has been compromised may have no idea of what

information the alleged invader has obtained. (At the same time, other
computer systems maintain logs, and so a trace of at least some activities
may exist, whereas espionage activity may take place with paper

documents, access to which may not leave any observable traces.)
   Destruction or theft of property.
 The concept of electronic property is
complicated by the fact that it, like all intellectual property, is

intangible. When physical property is stolen, the original owner no

longer has use of that property. Likewise, when it is destroyed, the

original owner must buy it again to replace it, thus incurring a cost that

is comparable to the cost of initial acquisition. But when electronic
property is stolen, the original owner may not even be aware of it
because he or she still has the use of it. When electronic property is

destroyed, and backups are available, it can be replaced at relatively low

cost.2020 The status of "low cost" as a relative descriptor must be emphasized. For example,
restoring a large database from a backup could require considerable work, although the
cost might still be much lower than the cost of reconstructing the database from scratch.

Moreover, "restored" files often do not contain the most recent changes made to them
(e.g., a file might be restored using the backup made yesterday, but such a backup would
obviously not include changes made since yesterday). Even worse, the absence of recent
changes might not be noted by the user. Finally, the backups themselves may not be
entirely reliable, and so it may not be possible to restore the "backed-up" version of the file

properly.ELECTRONIC VANDALISM84
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6Intellectual Property Interests
Protection of intellectual property interests, whether by copyright, trade
secret, patent, trademark, export law, or even encryption, is no simple matter even
in traditional communications media. Restrictions on photocopying are violated
routinely, though certain types of photocopying are protected by law under fair-

use provisions. Pop music is created through "sampling" of other compositions, a

practice of debatable legality that has parallels in electronic communications.

National approaches to property protection differ, while the status of

international copyright law is somewhat murky
1; and some U.S. laws related to
intellectual property are so arcane that users may not even be aware of their

existence or applicability.
1 International agreements such as the Universal Copyright Convention set minimum
standards for copyright laws, but nations still have divergent views of what copyright
means, according to Steven J. Metalitz, vice president and general counsel for the

Information Industry Association. For example, U.S. tradition holds that "copyright is a
limited monopoly that's given to encourage and give incentive to creation," while
Europeans view intellectual property as "an extension of the author's personality," Metalitz
said. In an effort to promote strong international standards for intellectual property rights,
the United States in 1989 signed the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and

Artistic Works; virtually every major nation is a signatory of that convention. See U.S.
Department of Commerce, 
Globalization of the Mass Media
, National
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), Special Publication
93-290, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1993.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS85
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Within this sphere of uncertainty, electronic networks generate special concerns,
and indeed the Internet itself is playing a significant role in changing the nature

of publication.
2 For example, in the research community, professional societies
are investigating ways to offer their journals through the Internet, and some have

already begun to do so. Many researchers would like to effectively circumvent

the traditional publication process, which can lead to years of delay, and make
their work available on the network for free. In other instances, many individuals
hesitate to use the Internet at all, fearing
Šwith some arguable justification
Šthatmaterial they created may be appropriated by others without permission.
The research community is not the only one affected. The on-line
availability of various publications raises questions regarding the limits of

electronic redistribution of print articles in general. In June 1994, the ClariNet

Communications Corporation, publisher of an Internet newspaper, was asked by

Knight-Ridder Tribune and its Tribune Media Services Division to cease its

electronic publication of syndicated columns written by Dave Barry and Mike
Royko, due to concerns about too much information piracy occurring on "the
net." It seems that a subscriber to ClariNet, the electronic newspaper, sent a copy

of a Dave Barry column from the ClariNet, presumably by e-mail, to a

nonsubscriber mailing list, where it then reached a Knight-Ridder employee who

reported it to executives at Knight-Ridder. In July 1994, the Working Group on

Intellectual Property Rights of the administration's Information Infrastructure

Task Force released a draft report on how copyright law and practices may need

to be updated in an age of highly interconnected electronic networks. The report

proposes, for example, that existing law be clarified to ensure that copyright law

protects the creator of works that are disseminated through electronic networks.
3Although intellectual property is traditionally the domain of copyright,
patents, and trade secrets, most of the discussion of intellectual property
2 For example, a recent CSTB study, 
Realizing the Information Future: The Internet and
Beyond (National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1994), found that "there is 
– broadappreciation that a robust market for networked information and resources is fundamental
to the success of the evolving National Information Infrastructure." Nevertheless, it is
"much less certain 
– how intellectual property protection can or should evolve to fit the
networked environment" (p. 160).
3 See 
Intellectual Property and the National Information Infrastructure,
 a preliminary
draft of the report of the Working Group on Intellectual Property Rights, Information
Infrastructure Task Force, July 1994. A revised version will be developed after public

comment and input are received.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS86
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.matters in a networked environment is related to copyright, and discussions at the
February 1993 forum reflected this weighting. Both scenarios in this chapter are

university-based because the university is a domain in which the clash among

competing values and rights (e.g., the value of the free and easy availability of

knowledge and information versus the right to receive compensation for one's

intellectual work) is often played out most clearly.
BACKGROUND: COPYRIGHT PROTECTION
The Copyright Act of 1976 (Public Law 94-553) protects "original works of
authorship" that are "fixed in a tangible medium of expression, now known or

later developed, from which they can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise

communicated either directly or with the aid of a machine or device."
4 The owner
of a copyright has exclusive rights to (1) reproduce the copyrighted work; (2)

prepare derivative works; (3) distribute copies to the public by rental, lease, or
lending; (4) perform the work; and (5) display the work publicly.
5 These and
other provisions are delineated in the 
United States Code Annotated
, Title 17,
Sections 101-120.
Copyright protection clearly applies to certain types of electronic materials.
The 1980 amendments to the Copyright Act of 1976 expressly protect computer

programs as literary works. The original expression of information in databases

can be copyrighted, though the facts themselves cannot, a position reinforced by

the Supreme Court decision in 
Feist v. Rural Telephone
 (see 
Chapter 3
). This
case eliminated copyright protection for white pages telephone directories, and
some believe that it has had a significant impact on the business and practices of
on-line database providers.
Original and creative text can be copyrighted as well, although enforcing
this protection can be onerous. An example raised by attorney Lance Rose in the

November 1992 workshop is that long e-mail messages could probably be

protected under copyright law, but for practical reasons (i.e., the legal costs) there

may be no legal recourse for violations. Other original and creative intellectual

creations whose status is ambiguous under current law include the "look and feel"

of an on-line service and a short e-mail message created by one person but posted
publicly by another.For users and system operators, it can be difficult to identify
4 U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Globalization of the Mass Media
, 1993.5 U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Globalization of the Mass Media
, 1993.INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS87
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.copyrighted materials, because current legal practice does not require posting of a
copyright notice (though notice is still required to qualify for recovery of certain

damages). Thus, the burden is on the user to know the law. Nevertheless, at least

some network operators, notably commercial information services, strive to keep

copyrighted materials off their networks. Commercial software is fairly easy to

identify and remove, but graphics are more difficult, according to Stephen M.
Case, president of America OnLine. (Even if images are copyrighted, it is
relatively simple to strip copyright notices from them in such a way that there is

no indication that they are protected by copyright.) Case takes this responsibility

to heart, even though he employs contractors to review system files.
6A 1993 federal court case, 
Playboy Enterprises Inc. v. Frena
, described in
Chapter 3
, underscores the need for caution, as it held that a finding of copyright
infringement did not require an intent to infringe. In another case involving the

posting of copyrighted video games on a public system with the knowledge and

encouragement of the system operator, a federal court granted a temporary
injunction in favor of the copyright holder on the grounds that it was unlikely
that a fair-use defense would be successful.
7SCENARIO 1: DATABASE AGREEMENT IS VIOLATED
The library of a large university connected to the Internet subscribes to an
electronic database (accessible via a gateway on the library system) and an

electronic journal (to be distributed to subscribers by electronic mail). The

database owner provides access for up to six users at a time, for a flat fee to be
paid by the library. A student exceeds the six-user limit on the database.
6 As Case observed, "
– the reality of it is the customer is a whole [lot] less accountable
for anything on the system. They are paying money to us. They are calling us when they
have problems. 
– [T]hey are going to hold us accountable. Similarly, from a practical
standpoint, any company that believes we are committing an infringing action will hold us
liable." Case's point also applies to music as well.
7 Sega Enterprises Ltd. et al. v. Maphia et al.
, 1004 U.S. Dist. Ct. for the Northern
District of California, March 18, 1994.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS88
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Issue: Licenses, Copyrights, and Enforcement Responsibilities
Forum participants generally agreed that the database subscription
agreement, or license, should be enforced by the university, not the provider, in

Scenario 1. Karen Hunter, vice president and assistant to the chair of Elsevier

Science Inc., said her company asks its licensee universities to "reinforce the

notion of copyright" and to stress the ethics of database use with faculty and

students. Hunter's chief concern is not how but whether the university tries to
enforce its agreement. The six-user limit in the scenario presumably applies to a
price, she noted; if the university cannot keep the system secure, then the price

needs to be renegotiated.
Robert A. Simons, general counsel and secretary for DIALOG Information
Services, said universities have a duty to comply with their subscription

agreements; the question is whether their controls are reasonable and, if a student

somehow bypasses reasonable controls, whether the university has violated the

contract. Such an incident probably would not concern the provider, he said,

unless it occurred frequently and the university obviously was not exercising any
control.If a faculty member violated the user limit, then the infraction would become
more serious, because a faculty member may be viewed as an agent of the

university, Simons said. "[For] faculty members, I think there is an even higher

duty, not only on their part but particularly on the university's part to educate them

as to what is right and what is wrong," he said. "I think the university has an
affirmative [duty] to publish 'do's' and 'don'ts' with respect to its network system,
much as it has the duty to post a sign on its photocopy machine in order that it

not be deemed a vicarious or contributory infringer."
Peter W. Martin, a Cornell Law School professor and former dean, said the
university should have a rule and a disciplinary mechanism for dealing with the

student in Scenario 1. University rules and regulations traditionally address issues

that "get at the core of the academic enterprise" and also affect the university

community, and this situation meets those criteria, he said. "[T]he traditional

mind-set would be to say to any third party 
–, 'That's an internal matter for us;
you can't force us to discipline.' And unless a faculty member or library
administrator or some other student cares and sort of launches a disciplinary

proceeding, it won't happen." At Cornell, Martin said, administrators would care

enough about the contractual agreement with the database provider that they

would initiate a disciplinary proceeding.
Nancy M. Cline, dean of university libraries at Pennsylvania State
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS89
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.University, was concerned about the need to be responsive to copyright issues and
said that expectations of behavior can be conveyed through policy guidelines,

faculty contracts, and student codes of conduct; once such expectations are

conveyed, the personal responsibility for appropriate use rests with individuals.

Beyond that, she was concerned about the prospect of being asked to enforce

certain types of contractual provisions having to do with access, pointing out the
difficulty of doing so as well as the concern for privacy rights. Her purchasing
decisions are based in part on the expectations and obligations tied to particular

products. For example, Cline can enforce concurrent user limitations but has

difficulty predicting the number of users (a total some providers request to assure

profits). It is difficult to "predict safely some of those boundaries without

jeopardizing the nature of scholarship," she said.
In that vein, she warned against focusing strictly on tight access controls
Šwhether through strict limitations on the number of users or through the

imposition of "per-access" fees that would effectively exclude the majority of

studentsŠwithout considering the purposes of education and research.
Universities should not be "blocking off access [to knowledge] and controlling it

so rigorously through contract or other types of containment processes 
– that it
would change the very nature of scholarship and research. 
– There's a vitality to a
lot of research that is predicated on people being able to discover and find and use

things that may not necessarily come to them through the usual channels." She

continued, "There is a great deal of discovery that goes on in a university context

that is serendipitous. People wander into things and thereby branch out and

discover a new technique, a new application, whatever. 
– I would hate to see a
graduate from microbiology go out into the workplace never having been able to

use MEDLINE
8 or some of these other [network] resources just because he or she
was the twenty-first student in a 20-workstation contract." She further argued that

limitations on access to certain materials reduce the likelihood that those

materials will be used and that if people cannot readily use these materials, there

may be no need for these materials to be generated in the first place.
Panel members could not offer an ideal mechanism for restricting use.
Simons said counting individual users is almost impossible and makes little

sense: "Publishers were almost unanimous in agreeing that counting noses or

heads is not the same as counting workstations. 
–8 MEDLINE is an electronic bibliographic database produced by the National Library
of Medicine.INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS90
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.It's almost impossible, and it's an impractical approach to try to count noses. It's
as if one is saying that without a copyright issue, I'm going to post something

with a thumbtack on a bulletin board, but only if you allow 20 people to look at

it, and not 21. 
– That doesn't make much sense in either a copyright
environment or a commercial environment." On the other hand, the number of

workstations with simultaneous access to the relevant files could be restricted.
But Ronald L. Plesser, an attorney specializing in new information technologies,
questioned whether physical access should be limited. He noted that many

universities issue personal identification numbers that can be used at various

workstations. He said that pricing strategies for handling such situations will

evolve in the marketplace.
Pamela Samuelson, a professor of intellectual property law at the University
of Pittsburgh, expressed concern about requiring users to know and abide by all

the details of many different licensing agreements. She agreed that universities

should foster discussions and establish guidelines regarding appropriate behavior

on electronic networks, suggesting that universities help foster a consensus about

what is "reasonable within that environment."
Plesser and Simons said current copyright law works fairly well in the
electronic environment, though improvements are certainly possible. Plesser said

the breakdown comes in enforcement. There are two problems, he said: how to

know when someone takes proprietary electronic material and plagiarizes it or

alters it, and how to identify the perpetrator so that he or she can be held liable

for damages or payment. "We've got to create maybe some new mechanisms of

enforcement, collection, [and] payment," he stated.
Emphasizing the distinction between licensing and copyright protections,
Plesser said licenses may be issued both for copyrighted works and for databases

that may not be copyrighted, and so copyright law is not always relevant to

property protection. "The fact that you can't copyright [material] or may not be

able to enforce the copyright does not necessarily mean you can't license it,

control the use, and control the issue," he said. "So I think the law comes from
two places." He noted that the 
Feist case (described in 
Chapter 3
) raised some of
these issues.Simons predicted that a mechanism will be developed whereby users may
obtain duplicates of copyrighted electronic materials for a fee; a notice specifying

acceptable and unacceptable uses of the materials could be placed on copyrighted

material so that users would be sure of the restrictions. A system of this nature

would transform electronic networks used for information access into an

electronicINTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS91
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.bookstore, he suggested. ''Once we do that, those publishers and authors who are
currently worried about placing their valuable data into this morass 
– will say,
'Aha, it's now a marketplace where I can go and buy and sell my wares. 
–'"Issue: Fair Use
Computer and network technology increases the ease with which electronic
text can be copied, distributed, and altered. Thus, David Johnson wondered "if the

copyright statutes that arose out of the print mechanisms are themselves

becoming hopelessly outdated." He went on to note that we may need to "give up

on an effort to protect particular artifacts of electronic text as if they were

property and instead focus on how to control access to information through
particular channels"; the proper route, he said, was to address "the repetitive
distribution of information through channels like libraries and universities and

institutions" and what that type of distribution would do to the nature of life in the

affected communities.
Licensing agreements for the use of electronic documents alter a university's
approach to discipline significantly, by effectively imposing a new definition of

fair use,
9 according to Martin. As a condition of providing service, the provider
has nearly unlimited power to place any restraints whatever on usage as long as

the university agrees to them in advance, he said. Martin described the agreement
as overriding fair-use provisions, in that "the leverage is there for the provider to
assert through license his own view of what is appropriate distribution of that

information, without regard to what fair use under the copyright laws would

allow." Martin further argued that "what's new about [the networking

environment] and its licensing framework via the universities is that universities

cannot, as they
9 Fair use is an exception to the rights of a copyright owner. These provisions (Title 17,
Section 107) allow use of a work for limited purposes. Fair use is judged according to (1)
the purpose of the use (i.e., commercial or private), (2) the nature of the original work
(i.e., fiction or fact), (3) the extent of the portion used (i.e., brief or substantial), and (4) the

effect of the use on the economic value of the original work. See M.F. Radcliffe,
"Intellectual Property and Multimedia: Legal Issues in the New Media World,"
Multimedia 2000: Market Developments, Media Business Impacts and Future Trends,
 M.
De Sonne, ed., National Association of Broadcasters, Washington, D.C., 1993, pp.
121-148. The recently issued preliminary draft of the report of the administration's

working group on intellectual property rights points out that the last of these provisions
has repeatedly been held to be the most important in determining the applicability of fair
use, a point that is certain to grow in significance as networks make possible much larger
markets for such work.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS92
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.could with print materials, put up signs next to the copy machines [describing
appropriate use] and then leave faculty and students to their own judgments,

protected by fair-use provisions."
Samuelson, however, said that fair use is determined not by publishers but
rather by law. "And I think it's really important to note, especially when you are

dealing with university contexts, that there has to be some room for fair use that

the community can participate in and not really rely on publishers to define what

the scope of use is." Copyrighted electronic materials are covered by the fair-use

provisions in copyright law, according to Samuelson; notions of fair use have
been extended to the electronic environment in at least two precedent-setting
legal cases.10In general, Samuelson said, users are becoming increasingly sensitive to the
boundaries of fair use, and a consensus is evolving that caution should be

exercised in reproducing and widely distributing the material of other authors

without explicit permission. She suggested that copyright law would remain as "a

kind of net" but that new mechanisms for handling these issues will evolve as the

Internet is used-increasingly for commercial services. She went on to predict "a

kind of transition from today's environment, in which people basically exchange
information without the expectation of the commercialization of that
environment, to an environment where commercialization is a more routine

[mechanism for distribution]."
Providers indicated that the question of who should determine fair use is
difficult to answer. Hunter said publishers are not so much "dictating" fair use as

trying to fill a legal void. Part of the problem is that, although the copyright

guidelines of the National Commission on New Technological Uses of

Copyrighted Works (an advisory commission established in the late 1970s to

address copyright issues as they related to new technologies) address fair use in
library photocopying, there appears to be no legal precedent for electronic
networks. "I think [fair use] will be defined by 
– negotiation and use and a lot of
other things, but I don't think it's fair to say that the law provides for fair use in

the electronic environment," Hunter
10 Samuelson cited 
Galoob Toys v. Nintendo of America and Se
ga v. 
Accolade. In the
first case, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held in 1992 that Galoob's enhancement of

Nintendo's Game Genie video game did not infringe on Nintendo's copyright, on the
grounds that the Galoob enhancement did not incorporate any part of the Game Genie
software but rather operated on the data bytes generated by that software (thus the
enhancement was not a derivative work based on Game Genie) and that the Galoob
enhancement did not harm the market for Game Genie (and was thus protected as fair

use). 
Sega v. Accolade
 is described in 
Chapter 3
.INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS93
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.said; "I don't think we have that yet." The confusion also was noted by Plesser,
who represents trade associations and private companies.
Issue: Effects of Property Protection Concerns on Authors and
ContributorsSome forum participants suggested that concerns about property protection
keep potential contributors out of the electronic environment. In running a legal

information institute at Cornell that distributes materials on the Internet, Martin

finds that many individuals are afraid to contribute because any contribution they

make can be appropriated by others: "They consider it like dumping some

valuable watches into Central Park
Š[they] will be gone." He also discerned
considerable confusion over the application of copyright law on electronic

networks, particularly with regard to how copyrighted information may be used

without the author's permission. Plesser agreed that many academics refuse to put
their software, texts, or other materials on the Internet, for fear of losing "the
value of their creation."
Hunter said the provider community is divided on this issue. "There are a lot
of publishers who are very reticent about the whole network environment," she

said. "There are others who say it's a reality, it's the future, and we have to get in

and test it." (In the period since Hunter made these remarks, such tests have

increased in number.
11) She likened the situation to a story about the designer of a
new campus who constructed the building but postponed laying down sidewalks

for about six months, to "see what paths people generate. That's the kind of world

we're in. I think we're trying to see how 
– [people] want to use the information."
Cline, on the other hand, said some groups of faculty are collaborating on
the Internet with great intensity, having established community understandings

about network use. Acceptance of the technology has gone so far that some

institutions accept electronic publications in tenure evaluations, she said. She

acknowledged the legitimacy of concerns about the quality of material

"published" electronically, but she did not believe that such publications, suitably

juried or reviewed, would be handicapped in comparison to print publications.
1211 See, for example, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National
Research Council, 
Realizing the Information Future
, 1994.12 Of course, maintaining the standards of review may be problematic if the ease of
publication and distribution translates into less care in preparation because of the lower
barriers to becoming a publisher or distributor.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS94
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SCENARIO 2: FOREIGN USER COPIES ENCRYPTION
SOFTWAREA university is connected to the Internet. Under a joint effort of its alumni
relations and industrial liaison programs, the university also provides library and

Internet access for Company X, a small start-up business founded by university

alumni, in return for stock options in Company X. To facilitate private

communications, the university provides RSA-based public-key encryption

software13 on its host computers, encourages the software's use, and maintains
databases that facilitate the lookup of the public-keys of all users using the

university as a node. Someone from Iraq accesses the university computers and
downloads the software [which is not approved for export to Iraq].
Issue: Obligations to Monitor
Martin, as the owner of an Internet mailbox that may be accessed from
foreign locations, said he feels no duty to monitor users who browse through his

system. He is not concerned about someone adding or manipulating files because

he controls those types of activities.
Other participants felt obliged to monitor their systems. Hunter said
providers have some obligation to inspect their materials for violations of law. In

the case of journal publication, inspection may be a responsibility of the editor or

reviewer of articles to be published. Simons views the export issue as so

important that his licensing agreements often require publishers to refrain from

using any material that would constitute "encryption data" under the International

Traffic in Arms Regulations or U.S. Department of Commerce rules.
14Otherwise, it would be possible to inadvertently "export"
13 "RSA" refers to a highly secure public-key encryption scheme. Software
implementations are available in the United States and elsewhere, although the software is

subject to U.S. export control laws.
14 As listed items on the U.S. Munitions List, certain highly capable cryptographic
technologies are regulated by the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR)

administered by the Office of Munitions Control in the Department of State. Specifically,
export of such technologies (and directly related technical data) is forbidden. In addition,
under the Export Administration Act, the Department of Commerce controls
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS95
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.such data and thus break the law, he said. He suggested that according to certain
views of export control, the mere presence of foreign nationals in attendance at an

unclassified domestic conference could be considered an export of technical data.
Lance Hoffman wondered whether faculty and universities understood their
obligations at all. He cited his experience in teaching a class on encryption that

includes students who are foreign nationals; all assignments are done on-line.

This combination of factors raises the possibility of inadvertent "export" of

materials that could be considered encryption data, which are treated as

munitions and barred from export by U.S. law (the International Traffic in Arms
Regulations). Hoffman said he doubted that university counsels are familiar with
this law.
Issue: Obligations to Turn Over Records
Participants said the university would be obliged to turn over certain records
to authorities as specified by law. Alan McDonald, a special assistant to the

assistant director of the Technical Services Division of the Federal Bureau of

Investigation (FBI), said an FBI request for transaction records would require

cooperation from the university, like any other service provider. The situation

probably is covered either by the Electronic Communications Privacy Act

(ECPA) or the general process of federal criminal procedure; the FBI might
obtain a subpoena under 
United States Code Annotated
, Title 18, Section 2703,
he said.
Plesser agreed that the university would have to comply with the ECPA,
assuming that the university, for billing purposes, kept records of which materials

were accessed and that law enforcement authorities requested that information.

The action required would depend in part on whether the request was for

transactional or content data, a distinction that is difficult to make in the scenario,

he said. (This issue is discussed further in 
Chapter 7.)"The university can't just hand [the data] over on request," Plesser said.
"They have to make sure that there is a legal process and that
the export of dual-use items, i.e., items that have substantial use that is both military and
civilian. Certain computer products with encryption capabilities are regarded as dual-use,
notwithstanding a general relaxation of controls on many computer and communications
technologies in March 1994. The definition of "export" is subject to some debate.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS96
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.it's quite defined, and that they are not notifying the person to whom [the
information] relates."
COMMON THEMES
The protection of intellectual property proprietary interests is problematic
even outside the networking context. Concerns for such protection have become

more widespread with the advent of easily available copying technologies such as

photocopiers, tape recorders, and video cassette recorders (VCRs). Seen in this

light, computer networks are yet another technology to facilitate copying.
At the same time, computer networks have properties that set them apart
from other copying technologies. For example, computer networks make easy the

large-scale redistribution of copied information. With photocopiers and VCRs, a

separate copy must be made for each new recipient. However, on computer

networks it can be as easy to send a copy of an electronic document (a book, a

musical recording, a photographic reproduction of a painting) to a thousand

people as to one person, and sending it to one can be trivial indeed.
15 Moreover,
while the laws of physics impose definite limitations on the extent of analog
copying, digital copies can be made with perfect fidelity; thus digital copies can
be made ad infinitum, vastly increasing the potential scope of redistribution

through the remote access capabilities enabled by networks. While a photocopy

of a book or a pirated video cassette recording or even a floppy disk must be

physically carried from place to place to transfer information, a computer network

can transfer information without such restrictions. Thus, laws and regulations

based on impeding the movement of physical objects across geographical

boundaries are increasingly difficult to enforce in a networked environment.
Previous copying technologies such as tape recorders and photocopiers have
resulted in a legal regime based on the concept of fair use; much of the debate

today revolves around the extent to which now-traditional concepts of fair use can

be sustained in a networked environment. In addition, electronic digital

technology changes the economic calculus. Before digital media and the

network, the limited number and quality of copies and the limited distribution of

those copies made individual copying insufficiently significant economically
15 Of course, such a statement does not take into account the struggles that many users
encounter in their daily travails with user-unfriendly technologies and interfaces.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS97
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to merit enforcement. Digital reproduction and network distribution enable much
broader circulation of higher-quality reproductions at the same expense of money

and effort and thus have very different economic consequences and implications.
Finally, digitally stored information can be altered with relative ease. The
same technology that enables perfect reproduction also allows changes to be

introduced in reproductions with relative ease. A few keystrokes can modify an

electronic document; absent the use of technology to guarantee that no changes

have been made, such changes are undetectable.
16 For example, digital
photographs can be modified to show scenes that never existed, and the viewer
will never know that they have been modified. Coupled with the ability to send
anonymous or pseudonymous transmissions, the potential to alter information in

largely undetectable ways raises new concerns and reinforces old ones about

maintaining the integrity of information and protecting the rights of the creators

of such information.
16 Technology is now available that can authenticate the integrity of digital data. It is
possible to digitally "sign" a given bit stream (file) in such a way that any modification to

the file while in transit, on a bulletin board, and so forth can be detected with very high
confidence. However, it is also true that digital signature technology is not widely used
today.INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY INTERESTS98
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7PrivacyLike the topics examined in previous chapters, privacy issues take on unique
aspects in the electronic environment. The discussion of Scenario 1 below centers
on four issues: the obligation to notify authorities of death threats, general
provider practices and responsibilities, liability for violating privacy, and ethical

and social issues. The later discussion of Scenario 2 focuses on legal privacy

protection for subscriber information, informed consent, and blocking unwanted

sales pitches. Both scenarios involved a relatively large commercial or university

provider. However, a wide range of sizes and types of providers is possible, and

so it is unlikely that one type of analysis or policy will fit all.
SCENARIO 1: OPERATOR LEARNS OF POSSIBLE DEATH
THREATJohn and Sally "meet" on a bulletin board provided by a commercial network
operator and then begin corresponding through e-mail. The operator has a

"standard" set of acceptable use policies that prohibit sending (through e-mail) or

posting (on either type of bulletin board) any "defamatory, obscene, threatening,
sexually explicit, ethnically offensive, or illegal material."
1 John receives a
private e-mail note from Sally's husband saying, "I know what's going on between

you1 This policy is similar to the one used by America OnLine.
PRIVACY99Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.two, and I'm not putting up with it. It's too late to save her. She's a gonner." John
notifies the operator and forwards a copy of this note, requesting that the operator

notify the local police in Sally's home town (since John has no way of knowing

where Sally lives).
Issue: Obligation to Notify Authorities of Death Threats
Panel members generally agreed that authorities should be notified of the
threat in Scenario 1, although they expressed different views on the legal

ramifications and requirements.
Speaking from the perspective of the common carriers, Kenneth R.
Raymond, director of Technology Strategies Analysis for NYNEX Telesector

Resources Group, noted that telephone users complaining of annoyance or

threatening telephone calls are given a special telephone company telephone

number and then referred to local law enforcement authorities. Law enforcement
officers provide the paperwork needed to obtain information from the telephone
company. "In this way, the common carrier provides the referral and the

information required by law enforcement authorities, placing the issue squarely in

the hands of those that are best able to deal with it."
Although Raymond acknowledged that "Scenario 1 is somewhat different, in
that two end users are communicating through a third party," he asserted that

authorities still need to be notified; the question is, What information can be

obtained in a timely manner? Basic notification of police is required in New

York, where state law requires that telephone operators who overhear certain
types of communications, such as those involving fraud or threats, report them to
law enforcement authorities, he said. Thus, said Raymond, the telephone

operator's duty to notify police is not a question here. Rather, the question is

whether others have a duty, need, or requirement to facilitate the provision of

information to help save Sally.
James E. Tobin, vice president for international consumer affairs at
American Express Company, agreed with Raymond that authorities need to be

notified in Scenario 1. He said the network operator can set up the expectation

that information will be kept private unless certain events occur, but "pragmatism
tends to override. In fact, I would say that, as important as privacy is, it would be
difficult to argue that a life is subservient to that important right of privacy. And I

think, leaving legalities aside, there are moral questions that come into play."
Tobin argued that John is the recipient and "owner" of the mes
PRIVACY100Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sage2 and therefore could report it to the police directly; then the police could find
out from the network operator where Sally lives. Even if the operator came across

the threat without John's help (e.g., in performing system maintenance), the police

should be notified, Tobin argued. "If there is any question, turn it over to the

police and let the chips fall where they may," he said. "If there is a reason to

believe that someone's life may be in danger, I think you just have to grit your
teeth, call your attorney, and turn it over to the police, or you are going to face the
consequences."Ann Harkins, then chief counsel to the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on
Technology and the Law, said the system operator has no clear duty under the law

but would be well advised to react practically, because there would be a

significant risk of a lawsuit for negligence if Sally were killed. Therefore, even

though the language of the threat is ambiguous, the operator should contact police

without disclosing any additional information about John or Sally, Harkins said.

She added that it was for all practical purposes irrelevant that the rules of the
system prohibited threats, because the life-threatening nature of the information
was the dominating issue.
One forum participant argued that the operator should do nothing. The
operator's position differs from that of John, who is arguably the owner of the

message, and the law is not clear as to the operator's obligation, according to

Marc Rotenberg of Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility. Using the

telephone analogy, the operator is acting as a common carrier and thus, according

to the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA), should not interfere,

Rotenberg said, emphasizing that the service is supposed to be confidential. He
added that the situation would be very different if the message involved had been
posted in a publicly accessible area. Finally, if the operator had monitored the

communications directly (rather than being told of the contents by one of the

participants), the operator might still be exposed to liability for that action even if

John were ultimately convicted of wrongdoing.
As to whether the operator would be liable for failing to act if Sally were
killed, Rotenberg suggested that the duty is not clear enough to invoke liability.

He argued that it may not be easy to identify the source of trouble; perhaps, for

example, John is the guilty party, having
2 Whether this claim would stand up in court is another matter. Under some court
precedents, it is the sender (i.e., the originator) of the message that "owns" it and who may

decide what can be done with it. Specifically, in a recent case involving the letters of J.D.
Salinger, the court decided that the letters belonged to Salinger and not the recipient; thus,
authority to release the letters rested with Salinger or his estate.
PRIVACY101Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.set up the situation to find out where Sally lives so that he can harm her.
Issue: General Provider Practices and Responsibilities
The mere existence of system rules does not guarantee that the system
operator will know the content of messages, as Raymond pointed out. One

approach, he noted, would be to remove from the network those users about whom

the system operator received complaints from other users. ''[I]f there is a

complaint that somebody does something that is inappropriate, and you then
investigate and find [that] 
– it's not something that requires law enforcement or
anything like that, you would then tell that customer that he or she is no longer

welcomed on this service."
Raymond further wondered how knowledge of questionable or potentially
reportable activities might reach system operators. In the absence of a specific

report by a user (as was made in the scenario), he thought that because

supervising user activities and message traffic would be difficult and costly, "I

would never be monitoring this traffic in any way, shape, or form, and I can't

imagine how you would do it," he said. Such a problem also affects network
service providers, who carry such large amounts of message traffic that it is for
the most part impractical to monitor the contents of all messages transmitted. In

such cases, the only practical approach is for the network service provider to

establish rules and guidelines on how its services are to be used and to rely on

end-user action to bring questionable activities to its attention and/or to monitor

public areas of message postings. Once the provider's attention is drawn to a

questionable activity, the provider is then in a position to take action (such as to

contact the appropriate law enforcement authorities).
Other forum participants expressed various views on how operators should
handle these situations. David Hughes of Old Colorado City Communications

said he would "communicate with the guy that's making the threat and say, 'You

made a threat that I interpret as a death threat. Do you understand the

consequences of that?" Vinton G. Cerf, president of the Internet Society, agreed

that operators should not specify responses in advance, explaining that he would

"rather say nothing and hold the ethical sense internally, and when a situation
arises, judge that myself."
On the other hand, Murray Turoff of the New Jersey Institute of Technology
said, "I would like to argue once again for more responsibility on the other side.

If you are going to have any policies on what sort of traffic you are going to allow

or not allow, you should
PRIVACY102Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.have clear-cut policies on what you're going to do when those policies are
violated."Issue: Liability for Violating Privacy
A number of participants suggested that the current legal regime, including
the ECPA, probably would protect the operator from liability for violation of

privacy if he or she notified the police. Harkins argued that Section 2702 (which

states that an operator 
may report such a communication to the police but is not
obligated to do so) would allow John to dispose of the message as he saw fit

without liability; in particular, he could be regarded as consenting explicitly to the

operator's disclosing of the message to the police, and both John and the operator
would be held blameless for that act. Justice Department prosecutor Scott
Charney said Section 2702 states that a service provider who inadvertently learns

the contents of a communication that pertains to the commission of a crime may

give it to the police; the statute thus may preempt any civil liability for violation

of privacy.
The protection might hold even if the threat turned out to be a hoax,
according to Rotenberg. If the operator notified police and the husband were

arrested, but the note turned out to be a prank played by Sally, then the operator

probably still would not be liable, Rotenberg said. He said a good samaritan law
3would protect individuals who offer help with good intentions but inadvertently

cause some harm.Michael Godwin of the Electronic Frontier Foundation and David Hughes
praised Section 2702 of the ECPA. Godwin said that "it strikes a balance between

the legal traditions of not imposing an obligation on individuals to prevent crime

with benevolence and an allowance for someone who is a good samaritan, who

does inadvertently discover that there is crime and wants to disclose it pursuant to

the ethical principle just articulated." Hughes called this distinction "extremely

important" and desirable.Issue: Ethical and Social Issues
Oliver Reed Smoot, Jr., an attorney who serves as executive vice
3 Westin described a good samaritan law as a statute essentially stating that "if a
passer-by or a bystander intervenes in a situation to attempt to do a good thing, but

worsens the situation or complicates the situation, that person will not be responsible
unless the bystander happens to be a professional, say a doctor, and doesn't use the
professional care that a doctor would bring to intervention in that situation."
PRIVACY103Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.president and treasurer of the Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers
Association, said that the threat of murder clearly outweighs privacy interests in

Scenario 1, but that a more ambiguous situation (i.e., one that involved a lesser

threat) might be more difficult to handle. He said the legal system provides a

formal, disinterested process for resolving conflicting values. In particular,

Smoot noted that under the criminal statute, "in order for the [operator's]
obligation to be created, what has to happen is that a prosecutor has to decide that
this is a serious enough problem to get a subpoena, or perhaps convince a

magistrate that a warrant is appropriate. And I think maybe that's a better way to

handle this, to resolve the conflicting values and to handle the ambiguity, than it

is just to say, 'Oh well, the system operator obviously has an ethical obligation to

disregard the privacy interest and pass this along,' because that's not at all obvious

to me."4Forum participants offered several views of the relationship between ethics
and the law. Patrick Sullivan, executive director of the Computer Ethics Institute,

suggested that ethics should take precedence in Scenario 1 and that any action

taken should be the same as in a nonelectronic environment. "In terms of the

ethics of the scenario, there is really no question," he said. "There is an obligation
to warn, and one isn't going to split hairs over linguistic interpretations of the
message. There will be a duty to prevent harm. 
–"But Alan Westin of Columbia University contended that legal questions still
must be answered. "So you frame [the question] first as an ethical dilemma, but in a

litigious society in which numbers of people have said that whoever has the

deepest pockets is going to face the lawsuit, and the system operator is the one
typically with the deepest pockets in this situation, you can't disconnect the
question of what is the legal liability from what is the ethical choice."
Attorney David Johnson suggested that the real issue, whether in an ethical
or a legal context, is not what actions are required but rather whether the operator

considers the situation carefully. "The ultimate duty may be to simply pay

attention to the question and be
4 Similar views have been expressed by Jeffrey Schiller, manager of MIT's campus
computer network, as a result of a real situation that occurred at MIT. Campus police

feared that a student was committing suicide somewhere and asked the university to search
the student's private electronic files for clues as to the location, Schiller said. He recalled
that "we decided that potentially saving a life was probably more important than protecting
privacy and so it was a pretty clear-cut decision. But I'm sure there are plenty of shades of
gray that can get interspersed here, so we need to develop, possibly over time, the

precedents of what's appropriate and what's not."
PRIVACY104Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.thoughtful about it," Johnson said. "
– Stone's book
5 on corporate responsibility
in a sense makes the point that we can probably, in an organized context like this

– go a long way by simply having a sense of procedures for deliberating
thoughtfully on these questions." Johnson further argued that it would be

appropriate for a defendant to assert in court that "even though he made a bad

call, he was thoughtful about it."
SCENARIO 2: PROVIDER SELLS USER PROFILES TO
MERCHANDISERSA commercial network operator collects information about the interests and
purchases of its users by keeping track of the forums and bulletin boards they use

and the purchases they make; it then sells this information to other

merchandisers. Users are not asked if they wish to participate in the redistribution

of such information.
Issue: Legal Privacy Protection For Subscriber Information
The redistribution of information in Scenario 2 is neither permitted nor
forbidden under current law, Harkins said. She asserted that the ECPA allows

companies to sell general information about subscribers to electronic services but

not the contents of their communications.
By contrast, the law is more protective of the privacy of cable subscribers.
The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 states that cable operators must

notify subscribers annually, in writing, concerning what personal information is

collected and how it is used. Subscribers may request that their information not

be used for these purposes. George Perry of the Prodigy Services Company noted

that, ironically, this provision would cover users of emerging interactive cable

services but not users of similar services provided through personal computers

and telephones.Rotenberg advocated applying the cable privacy model to electronic
commercial transactions. He argued that intrusion can be greater in the electronic

world than outside it, noting that mere participation in a forum or discussion may

be disclosed. "The problem is not only
5 Christopher D. Stone, 
Where the Law Ends: The Social Control of Corporate
Behavior, Harper and Row, New York, 1973.
PRIVACY105Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that there are commercial transactions which are generated through the use of the
network disclosed to others, but that one's participation in a forum or discussion

group [can be made available]. The facts of those exchanges or those inquiries

may be disclosed to others, and that takes concerns about privacy to a higher

level."Tobin said he would support use of the cable privacy model for electronic
networks but not necessarily a legal requirement for such notification. He did

stress that apart from legal constraints, companies have a commercial incentive to

avoid annoying their customers, who may take their business elsewhere.

Providers may use information about their customers so long as the latter know

about and approve it, Tobin said. "They may not find out," he added. "And if you

want to take that chance as a network operator, then you take that chance; but you
could end up with some serious trouble on your hands. 
–" Despite such
incentives, however, what types of behavior constitute "annoyance'' of customers

is the subject of much debate.
Harkins said privacy notice and consent mechanisms are not likely to be
legislated for electronic networks because the issues are so complicated and cut

across so many jurisdictional lines; five or six senate committees, for instance,

deal with privacy statutes. "The instinct, at least [from] what I've seen in the last 5

years, is to push and put a lot of pressure on industry to have its own watchdog

system –," she said.
Issue: Informed Consent
Participants generally agreed that users should have control over
dissemination of their personal information, but they also suggested that this

protection may be difficult to assure. Westin asserted that individuals should be

allowed to make their own decisions and choices about their personal privacy. He

suggested that electronic networks can place unique pressures on privacy, in that

electronic networks may be able to compile a "richer, more detailed profile" of a
user than can individual companies preparing one-dimensional lists of their
customers.Rotenberg argued that the public should be able to choose in advance
whether their personal information may be disclosed, just as they do in everyday

life, and that users should set their own risk levels, just as people do in the

physical world. "But unfortunately, in the electronic world, the default is in the

wrong setting, particularly in this area of electronic communications privacy,"

Rotenberg said. "The default [setting for] the transactional data is that it may be
PRIVACY106Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.publicly disclosed, sold, [and] collected unless someone says something to the
contrary. So I would pull us back in the other direction and give people a choice

about disclosing data [i.e., an opt-in choice
6]." Providers should assume 
allinformation is sensitive and therefore provide increased protection, Rotenberg

said.The need to obtain informed consent varies in salience and urgency,
depending on the nature of the information and society's attitudes about it, Tobin

said. "Opt-in" consent probably is not needed in direct marketing, he said,

because the risk of harm is minimal if a provider releases, for example,

information about who subscribes to 
Time magazine.
7 But, he argued, "as you
move down the spectrum toward medical information, certainly something as

sensitive as being HIV-positive or [one's] sexual lifestyle
Šthe potential damage
to somebody of that information getting into the wrong hands or even hands that
they don't want it in is so great that I think that consent in advance, probably in

writing, is required if you are going to do it at all."
Obtaining informed consent is not as easy as might be expected, Tobin said.
According to Tobin, at American Express,
every 6 months there is an attitudinal survey done of customers. We actually tell
them what we do with the information, but in a very superficial way. We tell
them what it results in. We tell them we take information on what they purchase
and merge it with other commercially available information, including some
credit bureau information, [and] put their names on mailing lists to offer them

products and services in which we believe they may be interested. And so what
we try to tell them is what happens. We don't tell them 
how it happens. We also
try to elicit from them, in their own words, what they expect, and we find that
they basically understand that we take subscription lists. Americans actually
have a pretty
6 With "opt-out," certain personal information may be disclosed unless the user
explicitly checks a box requesting that the information be kept private. With "opt-in," the
information is kept private unless the user explicitly checks a box indicating that the
information may be released. Advocates of opt-in suggest that an affirmative action

required to disclose otherwise private information is the best guarantor of privacy, but
information procurers argue that such a requirement would shrink to relatively small
proportions the information they could provide and would damage an industry that has
considerable economic and social importance. Opt-in places the burden of obtaining
consent on the information procurer, while opt-out places the burden of denying consent

on the individual.
7 Of course, the same lack of sensitivity might not apply to the subscriber list of a
newsletter on "paying less tax legally," especially if the Internal Revenue Service were
interested in that list to determine targets for audit.
PRIVACY107Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.good understanding of what happens in very broad terms. But the level of
sensitivity to it is surprisingly lower than you would expect.
At the same time, Tobin felt that the definitions of "informed" and "consent"
were debatable, and that the potential damage resulting from collection and use

of information is difficult to determine. ''We don't want to make that decision

[about the use of information]. 
– We don't want Congress to make that decision.
We want the customer to make that decision," Tobin said. "But the trick here is

how do you explain to these people the complexity of information that is

available to us, what we do with it, and what they get out of it? 
– I'm convinced
that the vast majority of our customers don't really understand technically what's
going on."Cerf said individuals tend to value convenience over privacy.
I think, judging from my own behavior and that of others, that we have a
remarkable ability to ignore risk in favor of convenience. And so when you're
confronted even with the understanding of how much information is floating
around about your personal habits, the convenience of ordering things over the
telephone with your credit card or sending something on e-mail 
– almost
invariably overcomes most people's reason for concern about privacy and other
kinds of risks. And so this raises an interesting question about whether we have
to contemplate saving people from themselves. I have no position at this point,
but I raise it as a very interesting subject.
Sara Kiesler of Carnegie Mellon University pointed out that "the way people
perceive risks is not always in direct parallel with the actual risk. That is, people

will get very concerned about things like getting brain tumors from using cellular
phones, and they will probably overevaluate the probability of damage. 
– It's
difficult for people to consider negative consequences that they can't actually see

in their minds, and the sharing of information about them is hard to visualize. [As a

result, people do not ask themselves] what bad things could happen to them as a

result of people knowing all these things about them." This, she said, explains

why convenience overrides risk: people are unable to visualize the negative

consequences. Kiesler also felt this phenomenon explained why people tend to

habituate to warnings (e.g., a message displayed daily on a user's computer stating

that electronic mail is not private) and to behave as though those warnings were

never displayed.88 Kiesler cited the example of transcripts used during the Rodney King case. In this
1992 case, Rodney King was beaten by members of the Los Angeles Police Department.
PRIVACY108Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The result is what Kiesler called the illusion of privacy. "When you don't
have cues around you about who else is there," Kiesler explained, "and especially

in electronic forums where you have lurkers [people who only receive messages

and never send them] and so on, what happens is that you have an illusion that

you are much more private than you really are. 
– [People] continue to say things
on networks that they wouldn't say otherwise, even though you warn them." Perry
concurred, saying many PRODIGY users are new to computers and do not
understand the difference between public bulletin board notes and private e-mail.

"And even after you explain it to them, they don't understand. So it really is a

very critical problem because the messages look so much alike and users treat

them kind of alike." William Dutton of the University of Southern California

questioned whether there is any legitimate expectation of privacy on electronic

networks yet, in that the courts have ruled out any such expectation on cordless

telephones.9Others felt that user education was a reasonable option, even while
advocating individual choice about disclosure. Raymond noted that personal

communications services will keep track of not only telephone and account

numbers but also location data. "Of necessity, additional information will be in

that database," he said, "and I think the informed-choice kind of approach
Šeducate consumers as to what goes in there and how it is going to be used
Šis one
reasonable way to handle it, because then they can decide whether it is worth it to
have that service or whether they would prefer not having that kind of
information collected."
Steven Metalitz, vice president and counsel to the Information Industry
Association, argued that the issue went beyond "convenience versus risk" to the

broader question of "overall benefit versus risk," posing the possibility that a user

might get "cheaper use of a system if he consented or if he did not opt out of your

information collection." Metalitz was troubled by "people sitting in this room

deciding that the public at large is not sufficiently educated about this. 
–A number of transcripts of police radio conversations describing the incident were
introduced as evidence at the trial. Kiesler argued that the police officers in question would
never have said the things they did if they had been conscious of the fact that all such

conversations were being recorded as a matter of department policy.
9 Congress decided in 1986 that, based on technological differences, the Electronic
Communications Privacy Act would protect conversations on cellular telephones but not

those on cordless telephones, according to Steven Metalitz. Court decisions have rejected
the claim that government eavesdropping on users of cordless telephone violates the
Fourth Amendment. Legislation may change this state of affairs in the future.
PRIVACY109Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.[W]e have to avoid the temptation to conclude that other people just can't
figure out what their privacy is worth, or 
– that we have to decide for them or
put our thumb on the scales for them as to how they should decide these things."
Issue: Blocking Unwanted Sales Pitches
Some forum participants believed that current techniques for blocking
unwanted sales pitches, whether in physical or electronic form, are inadequate.

For the sake of discussion, Westin suggested the use of an approach used by the

Direct Marketing Association (DMA): the DMA maintains a list of consumers

who ask to be removed from mailing lists, and each electronic network maintains a

master list of users who do not wish their personal information circulated; these
lists could be shared among the networks.
A number of speakers, however, felt the DMA system did not apply to
blocking sales calls or the sending of junk e-mail. They also noted other

problems. Allan Adler noted that use of the DMA list is voluntary and applies

only to national
Šnot regional or local
Šmailers. Tobin said the list is effective
only if a mailer uses the exact name and address provided by the consumer.
Sullivan noted that consumers who are unaware of the list appear by default to
want the mailings, when in fact they may not. Mitchell Kapor said the DMA list

is an example of an ineffective private-sector privacy code, saying the association

does not enforce the code.
Adler noted that the Congress, recognizing the problems with the DMA list,
enacted the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-243),

which calls for the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to establish a

method whereby consumers may elude unsolicited telephone sales calls. The

sponsors of the law originally wanted to establish a national database of
consumers who do not want to receive unsolicited sales calls, but merchandisers
opposed this idea. So the FCC decided that every solicitor must keep an in-house

"do not call" list, Adler said. If consumers who ask to be placed on the list are

called again within a certain time period, they may bring a civil suit, Adler said.
The electronic environment presents both unique problems and singular
solutions regarding sales pitches, which forum participants indicated is an

increasing problem. On the negative side, Cerf noted that whereas unwanted junk

mail may simply be thrown out, unwanted "junk e-mail" could clog an electronic

mailbox, blocking messages of higher priority from entering. "On some
commercial e-mail services, the size of the mailbox is of some finite length. It
runs out
PRIVACY110Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.after 100 messages and you get this little message that comes back saying there is
no room left. If my e-mail runs out of space and the important messages don't

make it, I'm going to get annoyed."
On the positive side, several speakers suggested that marketplace
mechanisms could resolve these problems. Turoff proposed that merchandisers be

required to pay consumers to whom they advertise, with the price set by the

recipients. He also suggested that users employ a screening feature to delete

material from a particular mailer. David Farber of the University of

Pennsylvania, for instance, runs an "invisible script" that quietly discards e-mail
from specific individuals and specific bins.
COMMON THEMES
First, the dialogue revealed that many providers and attorneys agreed on
several important points, including the efficacy of the ECPA
Šcodified primarily
at United States Code Annotated
, Title 18, Section 2702
Šand the prudence of
allowing users to make their own decisions and choices regarding their personal

privacy. Second, it was emphasized that models of ethical practice with regard to
privacy can be drawn from networked communities.
On the more general issues about privacy, it is clear that such concerns are
not new, and Americans have a strong tradition of wishing to be left alone. At the

same time, the right to privacy has never been an absolute one, and its costs and

benefits must be balanced against those of public disclosure and/or surveillance.
10Moreover, electronic networks have a number of characteristics that magnify
some of the traditional concerns.
A legal regime has developed around information stored on paper. How this
regime should be interpreted when information is stored electronically is

problematic. For example, in a technological environment in which the content of

a document can be assembled instantaneously from a multitude of sources, what

counts as a "record"? What about institutions that deliberately refrain from the
collection10 Westin's recent work with pollster Louis Harris found that the American public
divides into three categories on this subject: privacy fundamentalists (about 25 percent of

respondents), who are deeply concerned about privacy, want laws protecting their privacy,
and want to approve or reject use of their personal information for commercial purposes;
the unconcerned (18 to 20 percent), who "couldn't care less about privacy"; and the
pragmatic majority (56 to 58 percent), who value privacy but whose definition of
unreasonable invasion depends on "whether principles of fair information practices" or

"constitutional norms" have been followed.
PRIVACY111Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of certain types of electronic information to forestall requests for such records?
Many electronic networks produce vast and unique traces of both verbatim

communications and transactional data (e.g., who called whom when, network

usage statistics, user credit histories). What traces count as a record?
A second issue is that the many network interconnections give rise to
potential conflicts across international boundaries. Different nation-states have

different approaches to the protection of privacy (e.g., the United States takes a

sectoral case-by-case approach, protecting different types of information in

distinct ways, whereas Europeans focus on umbrella rules covering all personal
information, according to Metalitz), and there is no international privacy law.
11A third issue is that the meaning of the legal term "the reasonable
expectation of privacy" (the foundation for U.S. privacy law as enunciated by the

Supreme Court in 1967) is not clear in the electronic environment. For example,

it is clear that electronic networks tend to encourage frank if not imprudent

speech, thus magnifying the confusion over what circumstances provide a
"reasonable expectation of privacy." Even today, conversations on cordless
telephones tied to a base station are not afforded the same legal protection from

eavesdropping as cellular telephones that are truly mobile. The perceptions of the

"man on the street" about what is "fair'' may conflict with basic assumptions

regarding the conduct of business. Matters such as the extent of computer literacy

in the public may affect profoundly what constitutes reasonable expectations of

privacy.Given all the dilemmas, a variety of new measures
Šboth technical and
legalŠlikely will be needed to ensure electronic privacy and security.
Technology will not be able to provide perfect privacy or security, but

technological fixes can provide preventive measures to help reduce the range of

risks that are faced by users of electronic networks. Legal measures will be
necessary to help deal (remedially, if nothing else) with those circumstances in
which it is impractical or undesirable to use the technical measures.
11 Of course, there is little international criminal law, tort law, or intellectual property
law either. However, international cooperation on developing common approaches to
privacy is not entirely absent. Guidelines for developed nations were issued in 1981 by the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). The OECD
guidelines have become the basis for national law in 17 of the 24 member states (which
are located in North America, Europe, Japan and Australia), and the guidelines also have

been used by new democracies in Eastern Europe, according to Marc Rotenberg. More
recently, the European Community (EC) issued a draft data protection directive, which if
adopted would ban export of data from the 12 EC member states to countries lacking
adequate privacy protection.
PRIVACY112Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8Common Themes
Computer-mediated communications are now several decades old. In that
time, the power of computer technology to change the nature of communication
has been amply demonstrated. Early pioneers in the use of computer-mediated
communications had some glimmerings that a new medium for discourse was

about to emerge, and in recent years an incipient large-scale interest in the use of

such communications has proved their forecast to be correct.
At the same time, this large-scale interest has prompted and indeed
necessitated serious attention to the social issues that surround the formation and
evolution of communities on electronic networks. These issues are complex and
difficult to resolve.
VALUES AND NORMS IN NETWORKED ENVIRONMENTS
Networked communities are beginning to grapple with the rules that govern
(or that should govern) behavior on electronic networks. Less formal rules of
conduct and the means to enforce these rules are emerging as people acquire

more and more experience with electronic networks. In many cases, behaviors

sanctioned by those who
NOTE: The material in this chapter is based primarily on the thoughts of the steering
committee, although comments from other workshop and forum participants have been
used liberally when appropriate.
COMMON THEMES113
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.have had extensive experience with electronic networks are evolving even as
newcomers to the technology are having their first networking experiences. The

relevant legal regime is unquestionably changing, as new interpretations of

existing laws and even new laws are being enacted, but its presence and potential

influence on human behavior on electronic networks cannot be denied.

Technology surely has a role in providing tools that help to guide electronic
behavior along socially acceptable lines or help to mitigate the consequences of
miscreant electronic behavior, but the ultimate issues in this domain are social

and political.Some commentators and analysts believe that the emergence of social norms
should be left primarily in the hands of the people who will be affected (i.e., the

users of electronic networks). A legal regime (statutes plus the case law that

interprets those statutes) that does not make sense when applied to electronic

networks will tend to erode the ethical values on which that regime is founded.

As a result of such pressures, a set of new values will evolve that will ultimately
constitute the basis for a new legal regime. No one is smart enough to take into
account all of the ethical issues that will emerge, and so uncertainty is inherent in a

situation in which social norms grow and evolve rather than being created de

novo.At the same time, the "natural" evolution of old behaviors into new ones may
be problematic and perhaps socially undesirable. A maladapted set of social

norms could result for several reasons. One reason is that these rules might

evolve in the absence of a real understanding on the part of new users regarding

the power and reach of computer-mediated communications (examples are
provided in 
Box 8.1). As George Perry pointed out, "Individuals have never had a
megaphone the size of the cyberspace megaphone. Our society has to figure out

what to do with this power." Moreover, with new problems come new forms of

solutions. Perry recalled the example of the president of a business who

complained about something that was on a PRODIGY bulletin board. When told

that he could post his own message on the bulletin board to tell people what was

really going on, he said, "Oh! You suppose I could do that?" and the problem was

solved by that simple action.
A second reason is that electronic networks erase many of the physical
barriersŠsuch as geography
Što interaction. One important consequence is that
electronic networks can bring together people with radically different points of

view, moral persuasions, and interests. For example, it is clear that different
cultures value different ethical norms, and as a result, different behaviors are
considered ethical or unethical depending on the culture. To the extent that people
COMMON THEMES114
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.from different cultures must interact, conflict might be expected. A second
consequence is that government and other institutions whose influence is

determined largely by the physical control of borders and political boundaries

will find that influence challenged by continuing increases in electronic

commerce and social discourse.
BOX 8.1 EXAMPLES OF THE SCALING-UP PROBLEM
On Defamation
A person may write something on an electronic network that is
defamatory. Most likely he regards it in the same light as if he had made the
remark at a small cocktail party, and he thinks he has every right to defame

somebody at a cocktail party. In fact, he does not, but for all practical
purposes, he will not be sued for what is said at the cocktail party. Doing the
same thing on an electronic network has entirely different social
consequences (e.g., he is much more likely to be the target of a lawsuit for
defamation), but the lack of immediate cues to those differences may well

lead him to behave as though the social environment is the same.
On Copyright
An otherwise law-abiding person may well violate copyright laws in a
relatively small way (e.g., by performing excessive photocopying). The
electronic networking environment makes it easy to violate copyright laws in
a much larger way with approximately the same degree of effort, but again
the lack of immediate cues may well lead the person to believe that she is
doing the same thing she did with the photocopier.
A third reason is that electronic networks can act to raise barriers with
impunity. People who live within the same physical community are subject to

important homogenizing influences (e.g., they are exposed to the same
newspapers and radio and television broad-casts), and arguably these influences
support a common set of values. To the extent that a given electronic community

of people is closed to outsiders, traffic within that community can be made

immune to external scrutiny and indeed can be entirely insulated from the outside

world. Thus, it is not impossible to imagine the existence of different electronic

communities that share nothing but the same network protocol.
COMMON THEMES115
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.For these reasons, policymakers are understandably nervous about a legal
and social environment that is both fraught with ambiguity and whose future

evolution is also uncertain. Thus, the challenge for society at large is to balance

the desirability of "natural evolution" against its relatively immediate need for

guidelines to mitigate the risks of entirely unrestricted behavior that could affect

large numbers of new users. Although even more strenuous outreach efforts to the
electronic public and to policymakers will be necessary, an increasing degree of
discussion and dialogue between technologists and policymakers in recent years

gives rise to the hope that society is beginning to meet this challenge.
RECURRING CONCERNS
Taking a retrospective view of the November 1992 workshop and the
February 1993 forum and other events addressing similar issues, it has become

clear that several concerns recur consistently. As with many social tensions, an

individual is much more likely to attempt to balance competing interests rather

than side completely and totally with one of these interests. These points of

tension include the following:
   The extent to which the government should regulate behavior on
electronic networks
. For example, a benign view of government would
lead people to be less concerned about governmental malfeasance and to

be more willing to leave to government the discretion to make

appropriate judgments that balance competing concerns. For these
people, the law is a way to codify ethical principles and to provide a
uniform standard of behavior to ensure order, set social expectations, and

provide continuity. A correlate of this position is the belief that society

should understand
Šin advance
Šhow it intends to deal with rare
problems that may pose severe difficulties for the individuals affected.

Finally, people who believe in an active role for government in these

matters are often motivated to find a high degree of certainty in their

dealings with the communities involved.
On the other hand, a fundamental distrust of government would make
many people unwilling to give government the benefit of any doubt at

all; such people would insist that the role of government in regulating

behavior be kept to a minimum, and, fearing inappropriate government
action, they would oppose government controls or regulations on
computer technology and advocate privately negotiated (or community-

established) "rules of the road." Such people would believe that in many

cases, the law is too heavy-handed and
COMMON THEMES116
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.largely incapable of taking into account mitigating or aggravating
factors in deciding what should be done in cases of inappropriate

behavior, that an absolutely uniform standard is fundamentally

undesirable, and that some tolerance of ambiguity is both necessary and

desirable.   The role of the marketplace in influencing behavior.
 The view that
marketplace forces can and should regulate and define acceptable

behavior on electronic networks would lead people to be less concerned

about abuses that may be rare, even if they are severe. These people

would assert that large-scale systematic abuse can be controlled by

public opinion and pressure and deny the need for laws to regulate their

behavior. On the other hand, public opinion and pressure have not
entirely eliminated crime and other antisocial behavior in other
domains, and so it seems unlikely that the marketplace will entirely

prevent computer abuse. An additional dimension of this question is the

extent to which social defenses against undesirable behavior should be

based on matters of utility or economic feasibility or on matters of

fundamental rights.
   The value of sharing information freely versus keeping information 
private or proprietary
. The Internet is the preferred medium of
communications for much of the scientific community, a community

that highly values the free exchange of information. At the same time,

the livelihoods of many people depend on their creativity and intellect,

and they have an understandable desire to protect the compensation they
may receive for their intellectual work. In other cases, individual desires
for privacy may conflict with community interests in disclosure. At root,

the fundamental difficulty is that as a society, we regard some

information as appropriately sharable and other information as

appropriately private or proprietary, and there are no clear guidelines for

distinguishing between the two.
   The need for law that specifically relates to behavior on electronic 
networks. The assertion that network-specific law is needed represents a
claim that the current legal regime is not adequate for application to

electronic networks, perhaps as the result of an enabling technology that

changes much more rapidly than the relevant legal regime.

Nevertheless, it is clear that in the absence of network-specific laws, the
application of existing laws to electronic networks will have to be
interpreted in light of the new capabilities and limitations of the

medium.   The extent to which continuity with past precedents is desirable.
 Users
and providers of network services are, like it or not, inevitably bound by

the constraints of the environment in which they operate. But they may

have different beliefs about the desirability of such
COMMON THEMES117
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.continuity. The belief that continuity is desirable is one aspect of a belief
in the value of consistency and social stability. This position would lead

people to believe that social continuity, extended to electronic networks,

will give users of electronic networks a firmer grounding in what the

norms of behavior are (or should be). Those with a weaker belief in the

virtues of continuity tend to see electronic networks as an opportunity
for designing the ground rules of a new society from scratch and
avoiding the socially undesirable difficulties that continuity with the

past has created. In addition, they tend to be more concerned about not

foreclosing opportunities that the new technology may provide.
   The nature of informed consent relevant to providing information.
Although all stakeholders endorse in principle the idea that a user of

electronic networks making an agreement should give his or her

informed consent as a part of that agreement, there is debate over what

notions of informed consent should be applicable. Some believe that
informed consent should be predicated on understanding the general
purposes of the information collector. Others believe that true informed

consent requires that all of the possibilities (or perhaps a number of

examples that illustrate the true range of possibilities) for the disposition

of information be made available to the individual.
A second dimension of the informed consent issue is the disposition
of individuals who express no preference or inclination regarding their

putative rights on electronic networks. As a general rule, there is a high

degree of consensus that the wishes of individuals who explicitly choose
to participate or agree or who explicitly decline to participate or agree
should be honored. The debate is over the relative propriety of "opt-out"

nonagreement (an agreement that applies unless the individual explicitly

declines) and "opt-in" agreement (an agreement that applies only if the

individual explicitly accepts). There does seem to be something of a

consensus that when the potential consequences of an agreement are

more severe, opt-in agreement is more desirable. But there is argument

over what counts as a severe consequence.
The description of these themes is oversimplified, and it is doubtful that any
single individual could be associated solely with any one extreme. It is clear,

however, that the positions taken with respect to these themes are reflections of

personal value and social ideology or perhaps misunderstandings about how the

legal system works, rather than the results of technical deliberation.
In almost none of these situations does electronic networking raise
fundamentally new issues. Still, even when old concerns are magnified
COMMON THEMES118
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.through use of this technology, dispute and argument become apparent. The
reason is that to the extent that these old concerns have been resolved in the past,

their resolution has come about not because the concerns have disappeared or the

various stakeholders have changed their minds, but because political

compromises and the need to move forward have driven decisions. Thus,

resolution very much depends on the circumstances of the moment. Networking
technology reopens traditional debates largely because it threatens the status quo
that results from a given configuration of circumstances; with new

circumstances, new compromises become necessary and thus the same

fundamental questions need to be reexamined.
If this is true, the debate over social norms on electronic networks, in form
and even in structure, will not differ much from the debate over abortion rights,

school choice, sex education, crime, welfare reform, or any other controversial

social issue. This is not to say that the debates should not be taking place, but

only that our hopes about what such debates can accomplish should be
moderated. These debates will not resolve fundamental issues or even result in
consensus, but they can serve an educational role, illuminating and illustrating

issues and providing alternative visions of the future for the concerned public.

Ultimately, the debate will be resolved just as all debates over social philosophy

are resolved: over time and with a great deal of effort in the courts, newspapers,

schools, places of religious worship, and other public forums for argument.
COMMON THEMES119
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMON THEMES120
Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesAPPENDIXES121Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXES122Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
Network Technology
NETWORK BUILDING BLOCKS
The essence of an electronic network is connectivity between computers.
The first computers ran as stand-alone machines that could be accessed only from
their immediate physical location.
1 Later, they became reachable through "dumb"
terminals connected to hard-wired lines and dial-in ports. More recently,

computer-to-computer connections were implemented through hard-wired and

dial-in ports and through local area and wide area networks. Today, many

computers participate in the growing global network, sometimes referred to as

"the net." One of the main components of this network is the Internet, which

itself is a network of networks with international reach. Transmissions over the

global network may pass through several computers and network gateways before

reaching their final destinations.
When computers are networked, the network must support a method of
uniquely addressing the various computers connected to it. Any user regardless

of location (but connected to the network) who wishes
1 Even today, there are valid reasons to establish "islands" of computing capability that
do not interact with other systems. For example, a corporation may choose not to connect

its network or its individual computers to the external world because of security concerns.
Still, recent experience demonstrates that important and powerful synergistic effects are
possible when many individual computing elements are connected to each other.
APPENDIX A
123Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to interact with another computer must be able to refer specifically to that
computer and not some other computer. Assigning unique addresses to computers

on a network is the equivalent of assigning unique telephone numbers to

telephones connected to the telephone system.
Computer networks can implement store-and-forward communications,
real-time connections, and distributed computing.
STORE-AND-FORWARD COMMUNICATION
With store-and-forward communication, the contents of a communication
are temporarily stored on intermediate computers before reaching their final

destination. Electronic mail is a good example. A message is typed at the

originating computer and is then handed to a ''mailer" running on the same

computer or on another "mail host" computer tied in through a local area

network. Over some period of time, the message will be transferred to and
temporarily stored at a series of other computers until it reaches its ultimate
destination. At this destination, it is stored on a host computer until the addressee

checks her or his electronic mail.
Store-and-forward systems now generally have various enhancements,
including the capability to attach files and perform transfers. However, because

the native communication protocols of intermediate nodes are not controllable

throughout the process, or may in fact be unknown to all systems, file transfers

are often limited to text. In any case, the transmission of the message does not

create a real-time connection between the sender's and the recipient's computers,
and so true real-time interactivity is not possible.
One technical note: packet-switched networks also implement a kind of
"store-and-forward" communication of the packets that are the basic unit of

transmission. However, intermediate nodes forward packets nearly

instantaneously, and these packets remain at the intermediate nodes for very

short times.Real-Time ConnectionsA real-time connection is one that allows a user on one computer to access a
remote computer and directly perform actions on that remote computer. These

actions may be as simple as transferring files or searching a database on the

remote computer or as complex as controlling the operation of the remote

computer. Like the other types of interconnections, real-time connections now

often involve several levels of intermediate networks. These intermediate
networksAPPENDIX A
124Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.are transparent to the user, except that there may be some small time delay
induced by the bandwidth, processing, or data communications rate of the

intervening physical network media.
Historically, real-time access to remote computers was the first type of
networking to be widely developed. It was a practical way around the scarcity of

computing power, which was often measured in processor cycles. The idea was to

allow researchers to use powerful computers that they did not own themselves.

Even with the tremendous decreases in the price of computing power, real-time

connections play an important role in providing researchers access to the fastest
supercomputers.Distributed Computing
Distributed computing allows a database, file system, or application to be
dispersed across a networked set of computers. Some records in a distributed

database or files in a distributed file system may be replicated across several

computers to provide greater reliability, faster access, or simultaneous access to a

larger number of people. Applications may be distributed in order to take
advantage of unused resources on other machines, but they are also distributed so
that part of an application can run on a user's workstation while another part runs

on a file server or database server and accesses information requested by the

user.NETWORK SERVICES
Networks support many different types of computer-mediated
communications. The most basic form of communication, a "one-to-one"

message communication between two individuals, is supported through electronic

mail and real-time "talk" facilities that allow the parties to simulate a telephone

conversation through exchanges of text (advanced systems support voice and
video as well). But networking technology greatly expands this basic notion of
communication with ease. For example, networks also support the notion of

''one-to-many" communication, a mode that could be characterized as a broadcast

mode in which a single source transmits information to many people. Perhaps

most important, electronic networks support a mode of communication for which

there is no close historical analog
Ša many-to-many mode of communication in
which many people write and many people read simultaneously. A many-to-many

communications mode that can be operated for essentially the same individual

effort as a one-to-one mode is unprecedented in the history of
APPENDIX A
125Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.communications media.
2 This mode has facilitated a new pattern of social
interaction that is difficult to achieve through other communications media.
Described below are several of the most important forms of computer-
mediated communications. Note that these forms do not necessarily map cleanly

or uniquely to the one-to-one, one-to-many, or many-to-many modes described

above.Electronic Mail
Electronic mail (or e-mail) is today the single most common form of
communication on electronic networks. E-mail has gone mainstream as it is

increasingly used in business settings. E-mail is used most often in a one-to-one

mode to send private messages from one person to another. However, simply by

adding to the address list, it is possible to send (broadcast) the same message to

many parties, illustrating the use of e-mail in a one-to-many mode.
The primary advantage of e-mail communication is that it eliminates the
need for the message sender and receiver to be active simultaneously; a message

sent by one party need not be read by its recipient until it is convenient for the

recipient to read it. Postal mail or interdepartmental mail is similar but suffers

from the delays and uncertainties inherent in moving physical objects.
3 E-mail is
often used instead of the telephone because it solves the problem of "telephone
tag." It also provides a written record, and for many people it is free. Still, it is
usually more time-consuming to carry on a dialogue using e-mail, and there can

be uncertainty about whether the recipient has received a message and acted on

requests.Store-and-Forward Conferencing
Store-and-forward conferencing is a many-to-many mode of communication
in which messages are created by members of a group and read by others within

that group. Conferencing goes under many
2 The cost in resources required to support many-to-many communications is an entirely
different matter. In fact, the ease with which many-to-many communications can be

achieved (from the standpoint of the individual end user) may well mask the true cost in
resources needed in support. By all accounts, these resources are substantial.
3 E-mail is not immune to delays and uncertainties either, although overall delays are
generally much smaller than those associated with postal mail. The telephone system,
however, is highly reliable and operates in real time. Thus, fax transmission rather than e-
mail is often the most reliable way to transmit a single copy of a document.
APPENDIX A
126Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.names (e.g., electronic bulletin boards, "newsgroups," newsletters, forums,
mailing lists), but the basic idea is essentially public discussion. People post

messages, other people reply, and a structured conversation emerges over a period

of time.
The boundaries of the relevant group in a conference may or may not be
well defined. Some networked conferences strictly limit those who may

participate (e.g., a conference running on a corporate network may be limited

strictly to employees of the owning company). Other conferences are essentially

public: the group consists of anyone who wishes to join the conference. Still
other conferences screen potential members through an application process. In all
cases, potential conference members need to know of the conference's existence;

in a world in which electronic networks are ever more common, this may be the

most daunting admission "requirement" of all.
Some conferences are "moderated"; others are not. In an unmoderated
conference, all messages posted by all members are visible to all conference

members. In a moderated conference, a moderator screens or reviews messages

submitted for posting by group members. Messages that the moderator deems

irrelevant or inappropriate for public posting are eliminated or sent back to the
sender for revision. For example, a moderator may decide that a message
contains a personal attack on another group member and send that message back

with a request to rephrase the message.
Properly speaking, an electronic bulletin board is a mode of communication
in which all messages ever sent are easily accessible to all participants.
4 A user
viewing such a board would be able to see new messages as well as old

messages, perhaps dating back to a time before he or she had joined the bulletin

board for the first time. However, "bulletin board" has also come to mean an

automatic mail redistribution site. In this mode, a mail redistribution site is set up
to service discussion on a particular topic among a list of people. If the list is
open, then new participants can add themselves to the list automatically by

sending a request to the redistribution site. The discussion goes on as users send

mail on the topic to the redistribution site, and all members of the list receive it.
5Old messagesŠi.e., messages sent
4 Another use of the term "bulletin board" refers to small dial-in computer systems
typically operated by private "sysops." This type of system is described below in the

section "Computer Bulletin Board Systems."
5 This characteristic distinguishes it from a simple, individually owned mailing list, in
which the sender of a message must know the individual addresses of all those with whom

one wishes to communicate. Indeed, in some mail redistribution schemes, it is difficult if
not impossible for the message sender to know the individual identities (or addresses) of
everyone who receives the message.
APPENDIX A
127Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.among board participants before a given user joins the list
Šare usually not
accessible, unless someone has explicitly archived those messages. (A more

proper name of this type of bulletin board is a LISTSERVER.)
Real-Time ConferencingReal-time conferencing is a many-to-many mode of communication that is
similar to store-and-forward conferencing, except that the messages are sent back

and forth in real time. Real-time conferencing builds on the real-time connections

described in the previous section. One use of real-time conferencing is the real-

time chat, in which members of the conference are logged into the conference

simultaneously and messages typed by those members are displayed in real time.
Real-time chats are the typed network equivalent of citizens' band (CB) radio.
Two other forms of real-time conferencing are games such as multiuser dungeons

(MUDs) and multiuser simulation environments (MUSEs). MUDs and MUSEs

enable remote participants to join ongoing computer-mediated games (dungeons)

or simulations. More sophisticated real-time conferences based on audio and

video links are beginning to take place on the Internet today.
File Transfer
File transfers provide one type of remote access to information contained in
computer files: a user in New York can move a file to or from a computer located

in California. A file may contain text, graphic images, or any other type of

digitally encoded information. File transfers may be anonymous or restricted. In

the case of anonymous file transfers, any user on any computer connected to the

network can obtain a file, knowing only the location on which the file is stored
and the name of the file. Restricted file transfers are limited to some well-defined
group of individuals who, for example, can obtain certain files from certain

computers only if they have been granted access rights to those files.
Remote Computer Use
Another way to obtain information remotely is to use the network as
essentially a very long cable that connects a user at a terminal or workstation in

New York directly to a computer in California
Ša remote log-in. This user, sitting
in New York, has access to capabilities of the California computer that would be

available to a
APPENDIX A
128Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.user sitting at a terminal that was directly connected to it.
6 Remote use provides a
path for the retrieval of information that is not contained in complete files (e.g.,

the browsing of entries in a catalog, the conducting of a database search) and thus

not obtainable through file transfer.
Remote computer use makes it possible to share computing resources; a user
in New York in need of a faster computer may be able to find one in California.

At the same time, it is more difficult to control remote network-enabled physical

access to a computer than to control access when a user must physically appear at a

directly connected machine. Passwords and other security measures help to
control remote access, but facilitating ease of remote use and denying
unauthorized access are goals that are inherently contentious.
Information Search Services
As described above, one major use of electronic networks is to transfer
information between sites for the benefit of remote users. But all of the services

described above require that the potential user know a lot about the information

being sought: on what computer it is located and under what file name it is
stored. A potential user that does not know this information can be handicapped
in his or her search for information.
A number of tools have been developed for use on the Internet to help users
search for and retrieve information (
Table A.1
). Gopher and the Wide-Area
Information Server (WAIS), for example, provide a menu-driven interface for

obtaining information from both local and remote systems on the network.
Gopher gives the impression of a single large distributed database. Although
these and other information search tools are used for different purposes, they

share one theme
Šthey reduce the amount of "low-level" information needed by
the user to retrieve information, allowing him or her to specify a request for

information in terms that are more meaningful (e.g., by a set of key words or

phrases that specify the topic of interest on which information is being sought).
6 In many cases, the capabilities available to remote users are restricted due to security
considerations. In other cases, the capabilities are identical, and remote users have exactly
the same capabilities as do local users.
APPENDIX A
129Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE A.1 Information-finding Resources for Use on the Internet

Name of ToolType of Information

SoughtHow Search Is Specified
FingerE-mail address (log-in
name) of a user on a given

systemLast name of user, system

on which he/she may reside
ArchieUsually information in
text and binary files
File names to be searched

for on various FTP sites
GopherUsually information in
text and binary files
Menus that contain

descriptions of general
categories of interest; user

browses these menus and is

automatically connected to

the systems on which menu

items of interest are found
VeronicaFiles, gopher sites, and
menusKey words to be searched

for on various gopher

menus, key words
associated with various
filesWide-Area Information

ServerInformation in filesKey words or phrases
likely to be found in the

files that are desired. (If the

file is not text, key words

may be appended to

auxiliary files that point to
the desired nontext file.)
World-Wide WebInformation in filesHyper-text search; a user
browses a document and

comes across a reference to

locate. (He/she pursues an

automatic link from that

item in the document to the

reference.)MosaicaInformation in filesMouse pointing and
clickingWhoisInformation about a user

without knowing the

system on which he/she

may reside
Name of user
NOTE: A more complete description of most of these services can be found in Ed Krol, 
The WholeInternet: User's Guide and Catalog
, O'Reilly and Associates, Sebastapol, Calif., 1992.
a Mosaic is a convenient and easy-to-use graphical user interface to the Internet that became popularin the latter part of 1993 and has been responsible for driving much of the recent Internet use. Mosaic

makes use of many of the resources described above.

APPENDIX A
130Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A ROUGH TYPOLOGY OF NETWORKS
A very rough typology of the various types of networks is the following:
global network, computer bulletin board systems, and commercial services. The

typology is rough because there is some overlap between the types, but as a first

approximation it will suffice.
The Global Network and the Internet
The term "global network" is used to refer to the worldwide connection of
computers and networks that is part of and connected to the Internet. The Internet

is a set of interconnected networks, numbering in the tens of thousands and most

of which make use of a protocol suite known as TCP/IP for communication. The

Internet is perhaps the single most important driver of the global network.
Networks other than the Internet have some significance as well, though the
networks described here can connect to the Internet. BITNET is a cooperative

network consisting mostly of academic institutions and even today provides

primary connectivity to network communications for certain institutions. Usenet

is a network that supports only newsgroups. UUCP refers to an associated

network that supports only mail but not newsgroups. Fidonet is a network that
connects personal computers, primarily those using MS-DOS.
7Computer Bulletin Board Systems
From a technical perspective, a bulletin board system (BBS) is quite simple.
In its most basic form, a BBS involves a computer with a modem on a telephone

line. BBS users make their connections by telephone, and data flows between the

user and the BBS. Connections between user and BBS are transient, lasting only

for the duration of the telephone call. A user dials a connection to the BBS and
may interactively read "messages" posted by others, and, if authorized, post his
or her own messages. The connection from the user to the BBS is typically a

terminal-style interface, e.g., a VT100 terminal emulation, rather than e-mail in

the sense described above.
BBSs are an example of grass-roots computing
Šinexpensive, generally
informal, open to everyone with a modem and a computer, and often
7 For more discussion of these and other networks, see John Quarterman, 
The Matrix:
Computer Networks and Conferencing Systems Worldwide
, Digital Press, Bedford, Mass.,
1990.APPENDIX A
131Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.short-lived. Some BBSs charge for usage, others seek voluntary contributions,
and still others are entirely free of charge. BBSs cover a wide range of subject

material, e.g., coin collecting, parakeet raising, politics, lifestyle, religion, law

enforcement, distribution of government information, and hacker information.
The low cost of setting up and running a BBS has allowed many individuals
to establish their own. In 1992, Jack Rickard, editor of 
Boardwatch magazine,
estimated the number of publicly accessible bulletin boards in the United States

at 45,000, and the number has grown substantially since then.
8 Many BBSs are
connected to each other or to other networks; other BBSs stand alone. Freenets,
of which one of the most famous is the Cleveland FreeNet, are community-based
networks that are open to the public and provide BBS capabilities. They serve

many of the same functions as public libraries and town meetings.
Commercial Services
A number of commercial networks have emerged in the last decade. Among
the most prominent are CompuServe, the Prodigy Services Company, Genie, and

America OnLine. Although the services provided by commercial networks vary,

they generally include access to a variety of information sources (e.g., magazine

and newspaper articles, financial information for publicly owned companies),

electronic mail among subscribers, public conferences on a variety of subjects
ranging from romance to nuclear energy, and a variety of consumer services
(e.g., home shopping). In general, commercial services charge users for the time

they are connected to the network and for the specific services they use (though a

set of basic services may be available for a fixed fee). Policies exist regarding

acceptable use of the network services offered, and they are enforced to varying

degrees.9 Common carriers (e.g., local exchange companies) may begin to offer
similar services in the near future.
8 This total includes only systems run by either individuals or companies that would
welcome a call from a stranger. These bulletin boards typically host between 200 and

2,000 callers each, with an average "unique" caller base of about 250 per board
(discounting the common caller base among boards), according to Rickard. This indicates a
total U.S. caller base of over 11 million
9 For example, a commercial information service might offer a public "chat" service to
its users (i.e., a conference), subject to the condition that users not engage in the use of
profanity. These "terms of service" may stipulate that participants using profane language
are subject to disconnection from the conference, but in actual practice action may be
taken only when another participant complains. Another service might terminate the

connection when the profane language first appears.
APPENDIX A
132Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE INTERNETThe Internet is a worldwide network of networks that originated in research
and education communities but now also accommodates some commercial

traffic. Member networks share a common set of protocols that enable

communication between them, but each member network is administratively

distinct in much the same way that a given road might pass through a number of

separate and distinct states with different law enforcement practices and rules of
the road. As a result, the Internet does not have the character of a single, centrally
run organization, though certain aspects of its operations are coordinated. The

Internet provides all of the functions and services described in the section

"Network Services," above.
OrganizationThe organization of the Internet is best described in terms of progressively
higher levels of aggregation:
   The local view.
 Typically, the local view centers on an institution. The
institution has a mainframe computer or a local area network, and people

use terminals, personal computers, or workstations that are physically

wired to the network or the mainframe.
   The regional view.
 At the next level of aggregation, each of those local
networks or mainframes is connected into some sort of a regional

network. Thus, the regional network consists of many interconnected

state or local networks. For example, the California Education and
Research Foundation Network (CERFNet) alone connects more than 150
academic and commercial institutions to the Internet. There are a few

dozen regional networks, most of which began as academic cooperatives

and some of which have become commercial enterprises. In addition,

several fully commercial enterprises now provide Internet connections to

institutions.   The national view.
 Regional networks serving research and education
users have been connected through a high-speed "backbone" network

known as NSFNET, which has been run with financial support from the
National Science Foundation since 1988. (NSFNET is expected to be
replaced in 1995 by a web of competing commercial and nonprofit

backbone networks.) Some networks outside the United States are

multinational, e.g., NORDUNET (Scandinavian nations) and DANTE

and EBONE (Europe).   The global view.
 The Internet now reaches internationally. In recent
years, various links have been established to networks in other
APPENDIX A
133Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.countries. However, the detailed structure of networks in these other
countries may not parallel that in the United States. (For example,

networks internal to other nations are often similar to regional networks

in the United States.)
But even these views do not quite explain the "true" nature of the
interconnections among Internet institutions. For example, multiple connections

between regional mid-level networks on an ad hoc basis are common; it is even

possible for individuals to become Internet sites on their own. The resulting
network is more like a seamless and tangled web of interconnections that conform
to the common protocols than a hierarchically structured organism. Among other

things, the Internet's lack of hierarchy makes it far more robust and adaptable to

new circumstances.ManagementThe management of the Internet is decentralized. All Internet sites share
communications protocols and an agreed-upon set of naming and addressing

conventions. A central body, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, allocates

Internet addresses. Day-to-day operation is conducted by a set of hierarchically

related Network Information Centers. Other than these shared elements, very
little is common, though a spirit of friendly cooperation enables this decentralized
operation to function. As Susan Estrada, former executive director of the

California Education and Research Foundation Network, noted, "everybody or

nobody" runs the Internet.
In the past, the decentralized character of the Internet has interfered with
enforcement of the NSF acceptable use policy (AUP). The AUP attempted to

regulate the nature of traffic carried across NSFNET and was intended to restrict

the use of NSFNET to research and education purposes. However, many

commercial enterprises are (and have been) connected to the Internet. Since a
user generally has no way to control the precise routing of any given traffic, a
commercial user may send commercial traffic across NSFNET without knowing

it (or even caring about it). Indeed, the NSF AUP has often been honored more in

the breach than in actual practice. (It is expected that efforts to apply this policy

will change in 1994-1995 as NSF support for the backbone is reduced and the

backbone network is privatized.)
APPENDIX A
134Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Size and Scale
Since it is so easy to add a connection to the Internet, the size of the Internet
changes rapidly. The Internet connects more than 70 countries (around 150

countries if e-mail links to the Internet are included), between 2 million and 20

million users, and some 3,000 newsgroups. It also connects many thousands of

information archives of various sorts. The Internet connected 46,000 domains in

July 1994,
10 and the number of added networks doubles every year.
11 These
numbers are growing rapidly. For several years, the traffic across the NSFNET
backbone (measured in terms of number of packets of information carried) has

grown at an average rate of 15 to 20 percent per month, driven primarily by

increases in the number of users.
A BRIEF HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The earliest roots of computer networking can be clearly traced back to the
time-sharing services of the 1960s. At that time, computers were large and

expensive, and consequently rather scarce. Time-sharing, using remote terminal

communications, was developed as a way to expand the availability of limited

computing resources. General Electric and Tymshare were among the better
known, early commercial time-sharing services; many universities and companies
maintained their own time-sharing mainframe computers. As computers became

more common, many corporations established their own mainframe-based local

area networks, often with proprietary networking technologies. Subsequently,

they linked a number of their own computing sites to form the first long-haul or

wide area networks. Xerox, Digital Equipment Corporation, International

Business Machines (IBM), and American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T)

were among the early pioneers. Also beginning in the late 1960s, networking

began to move out of the single-corporation realm with the establishment of

several small, experimental, packet-switched networks in Europe to link scientific

research facilities.
Today's widespread availability of fast, reliable, global, and nearly
ubiquitous networking is directly related to two significant developments:
10 A ''domain" is approximately one administrative entity that is connected to the
Internet; typically, it is a single university or a single company. The domain may be
subdivided into a number of smaller subdomains.
11 Vinton Cerf, personal communication, 1994.
APPENDIX A
135Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ARPANET and personal computers. ARPANET was developed in 1968 by the
Advanced Research Projects Agency of the U.S. Department of Defense and

implemented in 1969 by Bolt, Beranek, and Newman both as a network research

project per se and, as it turned out, a very successful method to link military

research computers. It demonstrated the viability and system-wide reliability of

long-haul packet-switched networks. The development of the Transmission
Control Protocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP) in the mid to late 1970s
enabled the linking of a growing number of wide area and local area networks via

ARPANET and thus greatly increased the number of researchers with network

access. This linking of a number of networks eventually led to the use of the

name "ARPA Internet" in 1977 to stress the internetwork aspects of this growing

resource for scientific research. More formally, "Internet" was formed in 1983,

when the Defense Communications Agency reorganized military networking and

mandated the use of the TCP/IP protocols for all hosts on military networks.
In the mid to late 1980s the National Science Foundation (NSF) established a
number of supercomputer centers to make greatly increased computing power

available to the broad spectrum of research scientists outside of the military

research community. After some initial experience using ARPANET, NSF

established the NSFNET backbone for the Internet in 1987 and 1988 and began to

link an increasing number of colleges and universities to the network. This greatly

increased both the capacity and number of users on the network and reinforced
the fact that the original ARPANET had become only one of the many networks
on an already large and continually growing Internet.
APPENDIX A
136Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX BWorkshop Schedule and Session
DescriptionsSCHEDULEThursday, November 5, 19928:00 a.m.Continental Breakfast

8:30Welcome

8:45Session 1
ŠInternet10:30Break

10:45 a.m.Session 2
ŠCommercial Information Services
12:30 p.m.Lunch

1:30Session 3
ŠGrass-roots Networks
3:15Break

3:30Session 4
ŠMapping Different Network Services Onto Different
Metaphors5:30 p.m.Reception and Buffet Dinner
Friday, November 6, 19928:15 a.m.Continental Breakfast

9:00 a.m.Session 5
ŠContent, Censorship, Accuracy, Defamation
NoonLunch

1:00 p.m.Session 6
ŠPrivacy and Proprietary Interests
4:15 p.m.Session 7ŠSummary and Wrap-up
APPENDIX B
137Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SESSION DESCRIPTIONS
The first three sessions are to be devoted to examining user, provider, and
outsider perspectives on different types of networked communities. Sessions 1 to

3 will address the following questions:
   What policies, laws, regulations, or ethical standards apply to the use of
these services, who sets them, how are they developed, and how are they

enforced?   What are users' expectations regarding privacy and protection of other
proprietary interests?
   What are the rights, responsibilities, and liabilities of providers or
operators of these services?
   What are the rights, responsibilities, and liabilities of users of these
services?   What problems arise from connecting systems offering these services to
systems that operate under different policies?
Sessions 5 and 6 are to be devoted to examining important issues that cut
across different networked communities.
Session 1ŠInternet

Chair: Stephen Kent

Presenters:Jeffrey Schiller (Massachusetts Institute of Technology)
Susan Estrada (FARNET)
David Farber (University of Pennsylvania)
The Internet is the largest network in the world, connecting over a million
users through thousands of subnetworks running through universities, industry,

government agencies, and other organizations. This session will identify the

rights and responsibilities of the Internet community, including the organizations
that offer Internet nodes or gateways and the people who use electronic mail and
other Internet services.Session 2ŠCommercial Information Services
Chair: George Perry

Presenters:Stephen Case (America OnLine)
Murray Turoff (New Jersey Institute of Technology)
Patrick Lanthier (Pacific Bell)
Eberhard Wunderlich (AT&T)
APPENDIX B
138Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Commercial information services (including enhanced services to be offered
by common carriers) offer (or will offer) the general public on-line information,

bulletin boards, electronic mail, and conferencing facilities, and consumer

services to their subscribers. This session will focus on the rights and

responsibilities of the providers of such services and members of the public who

use them.Session 3ŠGrass-roots Networks

Chair: Mitchell Kapor

Presenters:Tom Grundner (Cleveland FreeNet)
Jack Rickard (Boardwatch)William Dutton (University of Southern California)
Grass-roots networks encompass efforts like FreeNet and local community
bulletin board systems such as those operated by Santa Monica or by libraries;

they are characterized as being generally small in scale (compared to the Internet)

and have a populist flavor.
Session 4ŠMapping Different Network Services Onto Different 
MetaphorsChair: Anne Wells Branscomb

Presenters:Davis Foulger (IBM)David Johnson (Wilmer, Cutler, and Pickering)
Henry Perritt (Villanova University)
A number of metaphors (e.g., printing presses, corner soapboxes,
telephones) have been used to describe electronically networked

communications. But all such metaphors break down at some point. This session

addresses what is special about electronic communication and how the metaphors
generally used to understand electronic communication succeed and fail.
Session 5ŠContent, Censorship, Accuracy, Defamation
Chair: George Perry

Presenters:Sara Kiesler (Carnegie Mellon University)
Carl Kadie (University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign)
Allan Adler (Cohn and Marks)
Jean Polly (NYSERNet)APPENDIX B
139Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Questions to be addressed in this session:
   Given the global but largely selective reach of networks, what
characterizes the judgments of a given networked community regarding

content?   On what basis are policies regarding acceptable use formulated?
   What policies, laws, and ethical standards establish acceptable content?
   What is the impact on various stakeholders of violating acceptable use
policies?   What is
Šand should be
Šthe operator's responsibility for user violations
of acceptable use policies?
Session 6
ŠPrivacy and Proprietary Interests
Chair: Dorothy Denning

Presenters:William A. Bayse (Federal Bureau of Investigation)
Steven Metalitz (Information Industry Association)
Lance Rose (Attorney)
Alan Westin (Columbia University)

Marc Rotenberg (Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility)
Questions to be addressed in this session:
   What is the nature of the proprietary interests held by the various
stakeholders in networked communities?
   What considerations should be taken into account to determine the
legitimacy of asserted proprietary interests?
   How can these proprietary interests be protected?
   How have different networked communities acted to safeguard or deny
these interests?   What are the responsibilities of a service provider to protect the privacy
and proprietary interests of the users?
   What should be the obligations of providers (or communities) to assist
law enforcement or other officials (with or without court orders) in

providing access to electronic communications (contents, addresses, and

so on)?   What government controls, if any, should be placed on the use of
cryptography?APPENDIX B
140Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Session 7
ŠSummary and Wrap-Up
Since this workshop will provide the intellectual underpinning for the next
event (i.e., the forum in Spring 1993), it will be important to summarize what the

group learned during these two days and what types of questions would be

relevant for the forum. The committee chair will summarize key points and then

invite discussion from committee members and other workshop participants.
APPENDIX B
141Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
Forum Statement of Purpose and Agenda
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
Participation in electronically networked communities is growing by leaps
and bounds. The environments for networking include the Internet, commercial
network service providers, local bulletin boards, and both intra- and inter-
enterprise networks. Network-based businesses are proliferating and growing, and

non-profit networks, particularly those that serve the research and education

communities, are rapidly expanding their services.
Growth in electronic networking raises many policy issues. How much, if at
all, can network service providers restrict access to or specific uses of their
services? How much, if any, responsibility do network service providers have to
safeguard the privacy or proprietary interests of their users? How do the

expectations of individual and corporate network users accord with existing laws?

The responses of the general public, private organizations, and government to

these questions will shape the progress and impact of electronic networking in

U.S. society.Building on its historic concern for nationwide information infrastructure,
the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) chose to focus its

second strategic forum on key policy issues associated with the conduct of
electronic networking activities. It appointed a steering committee chaired by Dr.
Dorothy Denning to
APPENDIX C
142Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.organize the project's activities. As a first step, CSTB hosted a small workshop in

November 1992. Prominent researchers and policy analysts were invited to air

their views in a roundtable discussion on a variety of questions concerning rights

and responsibilities in networked communities.
The present strategic forum builds on the November workshop discussions
and expands the dialogue to a wider community. To achieve this broader

discussion, forum panelists and moderators will explore several scenarios that

illustrate the kinds of questions, issues, and choices that must be made in

operating, managing, and setting policies for networked communities. The

scenarios for panel discussions are described at the end of this program.
AGENDAThursday, February 18, 19935:00 p.m.Registration and Reception

6:00Dinner

7:00 p.m.Welcome to the Academy by Philip M. Smith, Executive Officer  
Keynote Speech by Congressman Edward Markey, Chair, House

Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance
Friday, February 19, 19937:30 a.m.Registration and Continental Breakfast

8:30Welcoming Remarks
 Frank Press, National Research Council Chair
 Dorothy Denning (Georgetown University), 
Forum Chair8:45Setting the Stage
 Technical Tour Through Cyberspace
Š Mitchell Kapor (ONTechnology)
 The Legal Landscape of Cyberspace
Š Anne Wells Branscomb
(Harvard University)

 The Legislative and Policy Context of Cyberspace
Š Richard Wiley
(Wiley, Rein, and Fielding)10:15 BreakAPPENDIX C
143Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10:35Free Speech  

 Henry Perritt (Villanova University School of Law), 
Moderator Allan Adler (Cohen and Marks)
 George Perry (Prodigy Services Company)
 Reid Crawford (Iowa State University)
 David Hughes (Old Colorado City Communications)
 Lawrence Lessig (University of Chicago)
11:45 a.m.Lunch with Special Presentation by John Perry Barlow (founder,
Electronic Frontier Foundation)      
1:00 p.m.Electronic Vandalism
 Oliver Smoot, Jr. (Computer and Business Manufacturers
Association), 
Moderator Kent Alexander (King and Spalding)
 Scott Charney (Department of Justice)
 Michael Godwin (Electronic Frontier Foundation)
 Thomas Guidoboni (Bonner and O'Connell)
 Mark Rasch (Arent, Fox, Kintner, Plotkin, and Kahn)      
2:00Protection of Proprietary Interests
 David Johnson (Wilmer, Cutler, and Pickering), 
Moderator Nancy Cline (Pennsylvania State University)
 Karen Hunter (Elsevier Science Publishing Company)
 Peter Martin (Cornell Law School)
 Alan McDonald (Federal Bureau of Investigation)
 Ronald Plesser (Piper and Marbury)
 Pamela Samuelson (University of Pittsburgh)
 Robert Simons (DIALOG Information Services)      
3:00Break

3:20Privacy
 Alan Westin (Columbia University), 
Moderator Ann Harkins (Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Technology and the
Law)
 Kenneth Raymond (NYNEX Telesector Resources Group)
 Marc Rotenberg (Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility)
 James Tobin (American Express Company)
APPENDIX C
144Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4:30Synthesis and Concluding Remarks by the Forum Steering Committee

 Dorothy Denning (Georgetown University), 
Forum Chair Anne Wells Branscomb (Harvard University)
 Mitchell Kapor (ON Technology)
 Stephen Kent (Bolt, Beranek, and Newman)
 George Perry (Prodigy Services Company)
5:00 p.m.AdjournAPPENDIX C
145Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
Keynote Speech: Networked Communities
and the Laws of Cyberspace
Edward Markey
Chairman, House Subcommittee on
Telecommunications and Finance
As many of you are aware, we are in a time of transition. As of last night,
the Clinton administration has begun the political transition from 12 years of

Republican economic policies, launching the nationally televised ''airwave"

assault of Operation Shared Sacrifice with an address to Congress. The "ground

war," wherein we get into the nitty, gritty details of legislation, will come later

this spring.
Although it is an ancient Chinese curse to live in interesting times, it's an
exciting time to be here in Washington because of all the transition and the

change.Everyone is throwing out the old speeches about gridlock and divided
government, the misguided regulatory state, and the lack of vision. And you

should see what the Democrats are doing. New material is being written all over

town. Gone are the jokes about George Bush and grocery scanners. Tough to get a

smile with a line about Dan Quayle or anything these days. If he were still

around, somebody could crack a joke about Vice President Quayle, as head of the

Space Council, proposing that the country build a "cyberspace
NOTE: Speech delivered on February 18, 1993, for the CSTB strategic forum. The
version here was transcribed from a tape of the speech, supplemented with the printed text
of Mr. Markey's speech.
APPENDIX D
146Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.station" before the Japanese do. But he's not around, so we won't use any of those
jokes.It is a good time, instead, to talk of technological transition and the change it
is spawning throughout industries and indeed, throughout American society. As

all of you know, technologies are moving increasingly from analog to digital

forms of communication, and whole industries are undergoing a transition being

wrought by the convergence, or growing together, of digital technologies.
This technological transition or convergence is leading inexorably toward
the creation of a new mega-industry: the information industry. Comprising

computer companies, software houses, telephone and cable companies,

manufacturers of wireless gadgets, and others, the development of this mega-

industry and its harmonization of what we more often think of as diverse

technologies and distinct industries are taking place at a heady pace.
A quick look around at what is happening out there can astound even those
who follow such developments, as I do, rather closely. For instance:
   Hollywood is going digital. New computer-controlled special effects like
"morphing," which allowed villainous characters in 
Terminator 2
 to
constantly change form, digitized movies, and computer-simulated

prescreening, which saves producers thousands of dollars, are becoming

commonplace. The "high-tech" efforts of today are allowing "digital

actors" from yesteryear, like Humphrey Bogart or Groucho Marx, to

come alive again on the screen, or to dance with Paula Abdul in soft-

drink commercials. Columbia has talked about releasing its movies and
interactive video using digital distribution over telephone lines and cable
TV to homes and theaters.
   In health care, a recent study by Arthur D. Little concluded that
advanced telecommunications could help cut the cost of health care

delivery in this country by $36 billion annually through "telemedicine,"

remote video doctor-patient consultations, and electronic filing of

claims.   In education, the advent of digital communications in the classroom, from
ISDN-based distance learning projects to interactive media as a new tool

in teaching, could help make the telecommunications infrastructure of

tomorrow the "great equalizer" in U.S. education by linking resources

and students, rich and poor, urban and rural, and by giving everyone

access to the Information Age.
   In manufacturing, the agile techniques that telecommunications-
conversant CEOs employ could mean that the "virtual corporation" may

help Bill Clinton achieve a "virtual economic recovery."
APPENDIX D
147Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In short, the rapid technological change and the new networks being
created will increase efficiency and create thousands of jobs.
All of this excites the imagination. And I'm excited to have a "front row
seat" to it all as chairman of the House Subcommittee on Telecommunications

and Finance, which oversees and legislates in the area of telecommunications. At

its heart, it's the subcommittee of MTV and Hollywood, of telephone networks,

cable companies, and computers.
Historically, though, policymakers and regulators have tended to look at the
telephone industry, the cable industry, or the television and broadcast industries

as distinct entities defined by their technologies. We speak of wires and switches,

antennas and cables, regulated services and tariffs. Often, policy debates revolve

around intraindustry or interindustry tugs of war, with legislators and regulators

feeling a little like the mythical creature of 
Dr. Doolittle
Šthe "pushme-
pullyou"Ša llama with two heads facing in opposite directions. Policy stasis was
frequently the result. In such scenarios, creating a national network and
articulating overarching policy goals for the country can be an arduous task.
I do feel, however, that this year we are on the cusp of dramatic change that
will bring success. With Bill Clinton and Al Gore, along with Ron Brown at the

Commerce Department, we have an administration that understands the nature of

technology and the economic role it can play. Moreover, they are also people who

understand the "small-D" democratic potential of these new information networks

and place more importance, I believe, on some of the basic principles of personal

privacy that we should all be vigilant in protecting. We've gone from a president
who didn't know about grocery scanners to one who not only knows what a
"PBX" is, but knows the capacity of the one in the White House and is unhappy

with it!Tonight's forum, where we talk of the nature of "community" in a networked
world and the rights and responsibilities of the members of that community, gets

us beyond the wires and the switches to the electronic culture that exists on the

ends of the line and between the wires
Šthe amorphous, borderless world of
"cyberspace." Although cyberspace existed before author William Gibson coined

the term in his book 
Neuromancer, word of this new realm, this electronic
frontier, has only begun to capture the imagination and attention of the general
public recently.
Of course, appearing on the cover of 
Time magazine helps to get the word
out. (So, "cyberspace" does have newfound name recognition
Šalthough it would
probably have to make some rounds at Manchester
APPENDIX D
148Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.coffeehouses before it would be a top vote-getter in the New Hampshire
primary.)What happens in cyberspace, and what its popular emergence portends for
our society, is what I'd like to talk about tonight. I want to step back and

highlight some of the tough issues that lurk just over the horizon of our electronic

frontier. It is important to raise the issues now. This is a new arena for

communications and law. Conferences like this one provide a great service by

sharing information and perspectives and by trouble-shooting potential problems.

In short, when we begin to address the rights and responsibilities of cyberspace,
we will be boldly going where no policymakers have gone before.
Before we can discuss "communities" in a networked worldŠbefore we getto the larger, national network
Šwe must first look at an individual human being
and that individual's relationship to the technology.
When Harvard's Mark 1 computer and the Eniac computer were being
brought on-line back in 1944 and 1945, the budding dream of many a computer

scientist was to create ever more complex machines. The ultimate goal was to

create a machine that could think like a human being, to move beyond the simple

logic, the programmed syllogisms, the endless zeros and ones
Što artificial
intelligence and thought processes that would mimic and indeed rival humans.
Science fiction novelists have long written of such machines and robots. The
ambition was to have machines play an integral role in human society. The

paradigm has changed in recent years. Ironically, today we talk of what role

humans can play in an interconnected network of machines.
The culture that develops in cyberspace will have both good and bad
elements, analogous perhaps to the "thinking machines" dreamt of in science

fiction, which sometimes acquired human qualities we ourselves would often like

to forget. Think of "Hal," the on-board computer that took over control in the

movie 
2001: A Space Odyssey
, and one is reminded that there can be less than
benevolent consequences from technological advances.
Ironically, after World War II, as computers began to evolve and become
more sophisticated, a debate was also raging in the field of human psychology
Šthe behavioralist school was maintaining that humans were actually more

"computer-like," in the sense that human actions and behavior stemmed from

predictable logic or conditioned behavior. Hungarian writer Arthur Koestler,

more famous perhaps for writing the antitotalitarian classic 
Darkness at Noon
 in
1941, wrote another novel, 
Ghost in the Machine
, in 1967 in reaction to
behavioralist psychology.
APPENDIX D
149Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Koestler's almost visceral defense of distinctly human qualities of emotion
and judgment foreshadow some of what we may encounter when trying to

understand the dual nature of cyberspace
Šboth the mechanical and human
aspects of it. Because it is a human creation it will embody all of the

eccentricities, judgment, reason, sense, and dreams we consist of ourselves along

with our flaws, weaknesses, and prejudices.
Almost 25 years ago, shortly after Koestler's novel was published, Robert
Kennedy went to Detroit, a city that had recently been torn apart by a riot, and he

spoke to how we measure the wealth of a community and the difficulty in

quantifying intangible assets or values. He said,
We cannot measure national spirit by the Dow Jones Average nor national
achievement by the gross national product.
For the gross national product includes air pollution and advertising for
cigarettes, and ambulances to clear our highways of carnage. It counts special
locks for our doors and jails for the people who break them. 
– The gross
national product swells with equipment for the police to put down riots in our
cities. And though it is not diminished by the damage these riots do, still it goes

up as slums are rebuilt on their ashes.
And if the gross national product includes all this, there is much that it does
not comprehend. It does not allow for the health of our families, the quality of
their education, or the joy of their play.
– The gross national product measures neither our wit nor our courage,
neither our wisdom nor our learning, neither our compassion nor our devotion to
country. It measures everything, in short, except that which makes life
worthwhile; and it can tell us everything about America
Šexcept whether we are
proud to be Americans.
Similarly, we can look at the speeds of our telecommunications networks,
the millions of miles of cable, fiber, and copper, ascertain the processing power

of advanced computers, and measure their memory capacities. We can look, too,

at the profit margins of software providers, movie studios, and record companies.

In the final analysis, we can tell people everything about the state and quality of

our network except those things that make use of such a network worthwhile.

Whether the "console community" that is developing in cyberspace is one of

enjoyment and wonder or the potential domain of digital derelicts who may

pillage our community with acts of "electronic wilding" is the question Robert

Kennedy would ask today.
We all have to remain cognizant of the fact that for all the glitter and gold
out there on the frontier, there is, existing simultaneously, a
APPENDIX D
150Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sinister side to cyberspace. It is an aspect of life that every community, whether
real or virtual, has to deal with. So even as we look to the network and to the first

colonies on the electronic frontier to empower human beings with the tools of the

Information Age, to improve people's lives, and to provide entertainment and

enjoyment, the potential for harm in the networked community may become more

than a "virtual reality"; it may become a real reality.
In 1989, I requested a comprehensive report from the General Accounting
Office (GAO) on how federal agencies use, obtain, verify, and protect personal

information; how individuals are made aware of information collected about

them; and what telecommunications and network facilities agencies' systems use

to transmit data. The GAO reported that personal information at the federal level

is maintained in about 2,000 program management, payroll, personnel, financial,
and other types of systems. Data in these systems included social security
numbers, names and addresses, and financial, health, education, demographic,

and occupational information. The GAO reported that although data in about 91

percent of the systems were covered by the Privacy Act, many agencies still share

the personal information they maintain with other federal, state, and local

agencies, as well as with the private sector.
The GAO study also indicated that the government obtains information
electronically from third-party sources. Twenty percent of the agencies surveyed

reported that they collected personal information electronically from third-party

sources, such as credit bureaus, state divisions of motor vehicles, and insurance

companies. This study raises two issues for us. One, How does the government

continue to protect the integrity of information collected about us for legitimate
purposes? and two, Is the government collecting only the needed information?
The same GAO report noted that some of the government's largest databases
of personal information are accessed remotely and electronically. Forty-five

percent of the databases surveyed were accessed through the public switched

network, such as through AT&T or MCI, or through easily accessed commercial

networks. The security of such systems is an obvious concern we will need to
address on an ongoing basis.
A more recent GAO survey, one I requested just last year, had to deal with a
proposal some of you may be aware of from the FBI to meet its future

wiretapping needs. In requesting the GAO investigation, I wanted to ascertain

what technological alternatives to making the entire telephone network
Šincluding computer equipment
Š"wiretap ready" for the FBI were available. I
also wanted to find out what
APPENDIX D
151Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.exactly the FBI's wiretapping needs were and what the estimated cost would be.
The study concluded that in its April of 1992 legislative proposal, the FBI did not

define its wiretapping needs adequately. No specifics and no cost estimates were

available.I can't tell you what alternatives to making computers, PBX equipment, and
the telephone network "wiretap ready" may be available to the FBI because the

Bureau classified that portion of the GAO report as national security information. I

will tell you, however, that it is my personal belief that searching for alternatives

to their current proposal is where the FBI should be focusing their efforts.
This is not only an issue of privacy; for U.S. manufacturers of
telecommunications equipment, the FBI proposal and the NSA [National Security

Agency] standard on encryption may also pose threats to the viability of their

products on the international market. Because of my role as chairman of the

Telecommunications Subcommittee, I felt obligated to investigate the issue

thoroughly before any legislative proposals having far-reaching, or perhaps
unintended, consequences moved through Congress.
I understand that the FBI considers wiretaps an essential information-
gathering tool when fighting crime. But I am hopeful that some accommodation

can be found because I feel strongly that we need to make our networks,

databases, and terminal equipment more secure, not less secure, to invisible

trespassers and others. The same is true for wireless encryption. The National
Security Agency wants the industry to accept a standard that many believe is too
easy to decode. As the telecommunications revolution goes wireless and

telephone conversations, computer data, and business information increasingly

travel through the air, we need to make sure privacy and confidentiality are

protected to the maximum extent possible.
Let me get away from the government's side of cyberspace to some of the
threats to personal privacy as they arrive from the private sector or from private

individuals.First, private industry. Erik Larson published a book last year called 
TheNaked Consumer
. In it, he unveils some of the tools Madison Avenue is
employing to find out more about you and, subsequently, how they direct their

sales pitch to you accordingly. New marketing technologies are being refined
using sophisticated software that takes huge amounts of information collected
from various sources and combines it into a single database. Larson calls this

cross-referenced information "recombinant information." It can include court

records, credit card balances, bank account information, magazine subscriptions,

store purchases, and a "host of personal data
APPENDIX D
152Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.collected discretely by companies of all kinds and then widely, avidly, and
aggressively marketed to anyone willing to pay for it."
Larson notes in his book, for instance, that in 1988, one long-distance
company began trading the names of its millions of customers. Anyone who

rented the list could select customers who were female, who made international

calls, or who traveled a lot. The author relates that the long-distance company

tracked customers' travels through the use of the company's telephone calling

card, designed to be used on the road.
Much of the collecting of personal information about Americans may be
occurring anytime someone calls an 800 or 900 telephone number. Unbeknownst

to most Americans, companies can receive the name, billing address, and

telephone number of every caller to their 800 or 900 numbers. This information

can then be reused, bought, and sold without restriction.
In the last session of Congress, I offered legislation to help combat this kind
of personal information hijacking. I will introduce it again this session and will

push for its adoption aggressively. It requires that recipients of personal

information gleaned from the network during an 800 or 900 call NOT reuse or

sell that information without receiving the 
affirmative consent of the caller first.
I'd like to read you a short excerpt from another book, this one by Jeffrey
Rothfeder, called 
Privacy for Sale
. By reading it, I think I'll give you all some
senseŠif you don't have it already
Šof how much information is readily
available.The author writes:
I chose Dan Rather as my test case because I was told the stoic, tight-lipped
CBS anchorman has taken numerous steps to guard his personal information.
With this in mind, he seemed like the perfect subject to assess the limits of the
[information] underground. 
– But in the end, it only involved extra keystrokes
on my computer and patience. I started with Dan Rather's credit report because

that's the simplest bit of confidential information to obtain.
But to get that I needed his complete address and preferably
Šbut not
necessarilyŠhis social security number. So I began by requesting from the
superbureau Rather's credit report header, which contains biographical data

taken from credit bureau files and usually available by just typing in a person's
name. – Once I had Dan Rather's address and social security number, getting
his credit report was easy. 
– It's hard not to be envious of a clean credit report
like Rather's. –However, delving further into Dan Rather's electronic alter ego offers a
slightly different perspective on him. 
– I obtained a list of the stores he shops
at and how much he spends. 
– I learned
APPENDIX D
153Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.that Rather doesn't spend a lot on entertainment. Shopping seems to be more his
speed. – He shopped at five clothing stores and ate at only two restaurants, both
ethnic. Rather spent 10 times more on apparel than on dining out."
That's all I'll read to you, but you should know that it is just the tip of the
iceberg of things the data superbureaus have on all of us.
As you can see, the Information Age is about more than just information.
What we're communicating is not just raw data. It's values; it's meaning. It's a

message about the very purpose of our lives. Communications has the power to

change the way people live, the power to overthrow governments.
As networked communities in cyberspace develop further, the rights and
responsibilities of all of its inhabitants, and all of us as well, need to reflect the

underlying power they possess, in addition to the promise the network holds for

us.By looking at an individual's relationship with the machines and the
network, we can also try to formulate boundaries of law in the network's

borderless world that will serve well the community which inhabits it. In a sense,
we begin with a sort of "technological anthropology" and work from there to the
manifestation of human potentialities and needs in the technological milieu of the

network as a whole. John Sculley of Apple Computer has spoken of developing

"human-centric" technology to reflect his company's emphasis on development of

information appliances for everyday people.
In 1991, Professor Laurence Tribe of Harvard Law School gave an address
at the first conference on computers, freedom, and privacy, out in California,

entitled "The Constitution in Cyberspace." The question he raised was how

constitutional protections written two centuries ago remain intact in the context
of a world, a digital world, the Constitution's framers could never have
envisioned.It is a fundamental question for us. As a policymaker at the federal level, I
will be holding hearings on these issues, especially the electronic consequences to

personal privacy in the Information Age. Big questions loom for us to answer
Šquestions that will need not only legal, copyright, First Amendment, or
communications law answers, but also societal and political answers as well. We
will be breaking new ground in this increasingly interconnected world.
Here are some of the questions we will have to explore and attempt to find
answers to:
   Are the fundamental values of our society so universal and enduring that
they will not be threatened by the advent of new technologies or any new

subcultures such technologies produce?
APPENDIX D
154Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Or will cyberspace become some lawless place, where the Constitution
is cracked open by fiber fissures created when trying to convert a 200-

year-old parchment into a binary world of zeros and ones? Can it

continue to be a "living, breathing document?"
   Or will cyberspace develop its own distinct laws? Will it develop
"digital vigilantes" to patrol and police the electronic bulletin boards and

electronic highways? What indigenous political institutions may develop

in such a vacuum?
   Could a closed system develop in the network with its own closed value
system?I agree with Professor Tribe when he stated that science and technology
open options, create possibilities, suggest incompatibilities, and generate threats.

Yet they do not alter what is "right" and what is "wrong."
 Because in the absence
of relevant laws, egregious transgressions of what most of us perceive to be right
and wrong can occur. This includes both unauthorized electronic trespassing and
infringements upon free speech rights, as well as some of the tactics employed by

hackers, "phone phreaks," and others.
Once we clearly define what the rules are, then we can deal with some of
those digital desperados out there like the Dark Avenger
Šthe Bulgarian
notorious for spreading his computer viruses around the world. The most recent
issue of 
Discover magazine, for instance, contains excerpts from a book which
relates how the Dark Avenger has developed a virus that will mutate in 4 billion

different ways, making it very difficult to vaccinate a system against. When the

network goes global, how do we protect ourselves against cross-boundary access

to personal data or infringements on our community? Will the privacy rules that

govern U.S. systems be adhered to if the network or data is accessed from

abroad? We need to build in such protections sooner rather than later.
I have also seen the magazines of the so-called "cyberpunk" community
Šmagazines like 
2600: The Hacker Quarterly
. A recent issue, for example,
contained articles on how to steal long-distance service from a pay phone, how to
defeat call-back verification, a program for a "simple C virus," and other articles

indicating, quite explicitly, how to operate on the margins of, or to cross, what

most of us would consider responsible behavior. Without appropriate laws that

speak to our new, networked communities, the risk is that some of the citizens

may be lost, not knowing exactly what their rights and responsibilities are.
Often, when engaged in the legislative arena, I find myself exasperated by
representatives of certain groups or certain industries who
APPENDIX D
155Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.appear to walk through life with blinders on
Šfailing to see the larger forces at
work or the proverbial ''big picture." Similarly, there are numerous "geniuses" in

the telecommunications or computer arena
Šself-described futurists and others
Šwho appear to me to walk through life with binoculars on. They can see way
out into the distance, yet anything in the immediate future is completely out of

focus.Luckily there are some who do see the immediate, pragmatic steps we need
to take, for the good of the network from a technical sense, but who also remain

cognizant of the possible pitfalls nearby from a societal perspective
Špeople like
Mitch Kapor and those at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, for instance, Gene

Kimmelman and Mark Cooper at the Consumer Federation of America, and Jan

Goldman from the ACLU's Privacy and Technology Project. And there are others
in this room as well. I look forward to working closely with all of you in the
future on both the technical, regulatory side of cyberspace and on the societal,

privacy implications as well.
As I said earlier, it is important to do this now. To not look at these issues is
running the risk of logging on one morning and entering the vast emptiness of a

monadic realm that perverts our hopes for a true community with invasions of

privacy and digitized demonstrations of injury and violence.
To make our vision of a networked community a reality, we have to
remember the core values behind the Communications Act of 1934
Švalueswhich apply as well in cyberspace as they did in the New Deal. One value is to

ensure universal access to every person in our country
Šrich or poor. Another is
to ensure diversity:
   That there is a multitude of "media tongues" that can speak;
   That you don't have to work for the biggest and most powerful
companies, or be a certain kind of person, to get access;
   That the 
smallest voices
, those articulating 
creative ideas, those with
information to communicate, have access to the telecommunications

network;   That they can be free and strong and separate from the larger voice that
may want to be more monopolistic and drown them out, and that localism

can be, in fact, fostered through this network; and
   That it's not just a couple of voices coming from New York or Los
Angeles, but voices all across the country that can use the

telecommunications system.
For this reason I am advocating that America needs to take an interim step
on the way to a fully functional broadband system for the country, a step that will

avail a great number of people the opportunity
APPENDIX D
156Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to access a little bit of the future today, through digital telephone service to the
home.The power of communications is the power to help us learn more about the
world and to bridge the gaps that separate our differences. I would like to work

with all of you to make that kind of network a "real" reality.
Thank you for inviting me to speak with you tonight.
APPENDIX D
157Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX EBiographical Sketches
STEERING COMMITTEEDorothy E. Denning
 (steering committee chair) is a professor of computer
science at Georgetown University, where she is currently working on policy and
technical issues relating to cryptography and wiretapping, and has served as an
independent reviewer of the government's escrowed encryption system. Before

coming to Georgetown in 1991, she was a member of the research staff at Digital

Equipment Corporation's Systems Research Center, a senior staff scientist at SRI,

and an associate professor of computer science at Purdue University. She is

author of 
Cryptography and Data Security
 and numerous papers on information
security, and in 1990 received the Distinguished Lecturer in Computer Security

Award. Dr. Denning is chair of the International Cryptography Institute

sponsored by the National Intellectual Property Law Institute and cochair of the

Association of Computing Machinery's Conference on Computer and

Communications Security. She is past president of the International Association

for Cryptologic Research. She received a Ph.D. degree in computer science from

Purdue.Anne Wells Branscomb
 is a member of the Center for Information Policy
Research at Harvard University. She is a communications lawyer with practical
experience representing broadcasters, cable television
APPENDIX E
158Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.companies, database providers, semiconductor chip manufacturers, and
publishers of newsletters, newspapers, and books. Ms. Branscomb is an honors

graduate of the George Washington University Law School, holds degrees in

political science from Harvard University and the University of North Carolina,

spent a year as a visiting scholar at the Yale University Law School, and studied

international relations at the London School of Economics as a Rotary Foundation
Fellow. She has served as chair of the Communications Law Division of the
American Bar Association's Science and Technology Section. She is also a

member of the U.S. Department of Commerce Technical Advisory Board, a

trustee of EDUCOM, a member of the Commission on Freedom and Equality of

Access to Information, a trustee of the Pacific Telecommunications Council, and a

contributing editor to the 
Information Society
 and the 
Journal of Communication
.Mitchell D. Kapor
 is cofounder and chair of the Electronic Frontier
Foundation, an organization that works to develop and implement public policies

to promote openness, diversity, and innovation in emerging electronic social

environments. He is also chair of ON Technology, a developer of local area

network applications for collaborative computing. He received a B.A.

(psychology, linguistics, and computer science, 1971) from Yale College and an
M.A. (psychology, 1978) from Beacon College, and studied management as a
postgraduate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan School of

Management (1979). Mr. Kapor is founder of the Lotus Development

Corporation and served as its chief executive officer and president (1982-1984),

and also chair (1984-1986). He is the designer of Lotus 1-2-3, Agenda, and many

other software applications. Mr. Kapor is the chair of the Commercial Internet

Exchange (CIX), a not-for-profit association involved in the development of

arrangements and facilities that connect independent networking carriers into a

global information infrastructure. Mr. Kapor served on the Computer Science and

Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council. He is also an

adjunct research fellow at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of

Government in the area of information technology policy.
Stephen T. Kent
 is chief scientist, Security Technology, for Bolt, Beranek,
and Newman Inc., where he works with commercial and government clients to

develop solutions for network and computer security problems. He served as a

member of the Internet Architecture Board from 1985 to 1994, and chairs the

Privacy and Security Research Group of the Internet Research Task Force. Dr.

Kent served on the Presidential SKIPJACK Review panel and various National
Research Council
APPENDIX E
159Rights and Responsibilities of Participants in Networked CommunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.technical panels, and was a member of the board of directors of the International
Association for Cryptologic Research from 1982 to 1989. He received the S.M.,

E.E., and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of

Technology. He is the author of numerous articles on network security and has

lectured on the topic throughout the United States, Europe, and Australia.
George M. Perry
 is vice president and general counsel for Prodigy Services
Company, which he joined in 1984 (then called TRINTEX); he has oversight of

issues relating to the rights and responsibilities of a commercial electronic

information and transaction provider. He is also responsible for tracking federal

and state regulatory policies as they relate to PRODIGY's provision of

competitive services and technologies. He received a B.A. (1961) from Columbia

University and a J.D. (1964) from the University of California at Berkeley. Mr.
Perry is currently concentrating on issues and policies that impinge on the
delivery of information services to the general public in the constantly changing

technology and regulatory environment.
APPENDIX E
160