DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/4815Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research Agenda192 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-05179-8 | DOI 10.17226/4815Committee to Study Information Technology and Manufacturing, National ResearchCouncilInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.InformationTechnologyforManufacturingA Research AgendaCommittee to Study Information Technology and ManufacturingComputer Science and Telecommunications BoardCommission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and ApplicationsManufacturing Studies BoardCommission on Engineering and Technical SystemsNational Research CouncilNational Academy PressWashington, D.C. 1995Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of theNational Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy ofSciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the

committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation (under Grant No.MIP-93/2296).  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 94-67789International Standard Book Number 0-309-05179-7Cover:  The manufacturing ÒwheelÓ shown is intended to suggest the integration through information
technology of manufacturing activities both among and across the four basic elements of an idealized
process.  The concept is discussed in Chapter 2 of this report.
Available from:
National Academy Press2101 Constitution Avenue, NW
Box 285Washington, DC  20055
800-624-6242202-334-3313 (in the Washington Metropolitan Area)B-483Copyright 1995 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of AmericaInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE TO STUDY INFORMATIONTECHNOLOGY AND MANUFACTURINGPETER WILL, USC/Information Sciences Institute, ChairBARBARA M. FOSSUM, University of Texas
DENNIS M. HOGAN, Dennis M. Hogan Associates
NEAL LAURANCE, Ford Motor Company
KEN J. LINDSAY, Northrop Aircraft Division
EUGENE S. MEIERAN, Intel Corporation
RAJ REDDY, Carnegie Mellon University
WYCKHAM D. SEELIG, AT&T Network Systems
GILBERT S. STAFFEND, Allied Signal Automotive
IVAN E. SUTHERLAND, Sun Microsystems Laboratories(through February 1994)LOUISE H. TREVILLYAN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
DANIEL E. WHITNEY, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
EUGENE WONG, University of California at Berkeley
PAUL K. WRIGHT, University of California at Berkeley
RICHARD A. WYSK, Texas A&M UniversityROBERT E. KAHN, Corporation for National Research Initiatives,Special AdvisorStaffMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Computer Science and TelecommunicationsBoardTHOMAS C. MAHONEY, Manufacturing Studies Board(through September 1994)MICHAEL A. McDERMOTT, Manufacturing Studies Board(through February 1994)GREG MEDALIE, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board(through April 1994)HERBERT S. LIN, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board(from April 1994)LESLIE M. WADE, Project AssistantiiiInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARDWILLIAM WULF, University of Virginia, ChairFRANCES ALLEN, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
JEFF DOZIER, University of California at Santa Barbara
DAVID J. FARBER, University of Pennsylvania
HENRY FUCHS, University of North Carolina
CHARLES M. GESCHKE, Adobe Systems Inc.
JAMES GRAY, San Francisco, California
BARBARA J. GROSZ, Harvard University
DEBORAH A. JOSEPH, University of Wisconsin
RICHARD M. KARP, University of California at Berkeley
BUTLER W. LAMPSON, Digital Equipment Corporation
BARBARA H. LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN MAJOR, Motorola Inc.
ROBERT L. MARTIN, AT&T Network Systems
DAVID G. MESSERSCHMITT, University of California at Berkeley
WILLIAM H. PRESS, Harvard University
CHARLES L. SEITZ, Myricom Inc.
EDWARD SHORTLIFFE, Stanford University School of Medicine
CASMIR S. SKRZYPCZAK, NYNEX Corporation
LESLIE L. VADASZ, Intel CorporationMARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, DirectorLOUISE A. ARNHEIM, Senior Staff Officer
HERBERT S. LIN, Senior Staff Officer
JAMES E. MALLORY, Staff Officer
RENEE A. HAWKINS, Staff Associate
GLORIA P. BEMAH, Administrative Assistant
LESLIE M. WADE, Project AssistantivInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MANUFACTURING STUDIES BOARDCHARLES P. FLETCHER, Aluminum Company of America, ChairSARA L. BECKMAN, University of California at Berkeley
LESLIE A. BENMARK, E.I. Du Pont de Nemours & Co. Inc.
STEVEN J. BOMBA, Johnson Controls Inc.
BRIAN E. BOYER, Northrop Aircraft Division
GARY L. COWGER, General Motors Corporation
HAROLD E. EDMONDSON, Hewlett-Packard (retired)
THOMAS G. GUNN, Gunn Associates Inc.
ALISTAIR M. HANNA, McKinsey & Co. Inc.
GEORGE J. HESS, The Ingersoll Milling Machine Co.
CHARLES W. HOOVER, JR., Polytechnic University
STEPHEN C. JACOBSEN, University of Utah
RAMCHANDRAN JAIKUMAR, Harvard University
J.B. JONES, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
DONALD KENNEDY, International Association of Machinists and AerospaceWorkersTHOMAS L. MAGNANTI, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOE M. MIZE, Oklahoma State University
JACOB T. SCHWARTZ, New York University
HERBERT B. VOELCKER, Cornell University
PAUL K. WRIGHT, University of California at BerkeleyROBERT SCHAFRIK, Acting DirectorvInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON PHYSICAL SCIENCES,MATHEMATICS, AND APPLICATIONSRICHARD N. ZARE, Stanford University, ChairRICHARD S. NICHOLSON, American Association for the Advancement ofScience, Vice ChairSTEPHEN L. ADLER, The Institute for Advanced Study
SYLVIA T. CEYER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
SUSAN L. GRAHAM, University of California at Berkeley
ROBERT J. HERMANN, United Technologies Corporation
RHONDA J. HUGHES, Bryn Mawr College
SHIRLEY A. JACKSON, Rutgers University
KENNETH I. KELLERMANN, National Radio Astronomy Observatory
HANS MARK, University of Texas at Austin
THOMAS A. PRINCE, California Institute of Technology
JEROME SACKS, National Institute of Statistical Sciences
L.E. SCRIVEN, University of Minnesota
A. RICHARD SEEBASS III, University of Colorado
LEON T. SILVER, California Institute of Technology
CHARLES P. SLICHTER, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
ALVIN W. TRIVELPIECE, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
SHMUEL WINOGRAD, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
CHARLES A. ZRAKET, The MITRE Corporation (retired)NORMAN METZGER, Executive DirectorviInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMISSION ON ENGINEERING AND TECHNICAL SYSTEMSALBERT R.C. WESTWOOD, Sandia National Laboratories, ChairH. KENT BOWEN, Harvard University
NAOMI F. COLLINS, NAFSA:  Association of International Educators

NANCY R. CONNERY, Consultant
RICHARD A. CONWAY, Union Carbide Corporation
SAMUEL C. FLORMAN, Kreisler Borg Florman Construction Company
TREVOR O. JONES, Libbey-Owens-Ford Company
NANCY G. LEVESON, University of Washington
ALTON D. SLAY, Slay Enterprises Inc.
JAMES J. SOLBERG, Purdue University
BARRY M. TROST, Stanford University
GEORGE L. TURIN, Teknekron Corporation
WILLIAM C. WEBSTER, University of California at Berkeley
DEBORAH A. WHITEHURST, Arizona Community Foundation
ROBERT V. WHITMAN, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
CHARLES E. WILLIAMS, Toll Road Investors Partnership IIARCHIE L. WOOD, Executive DirectorviiInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the
general welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in

1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern-
ment on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce Alberts is president of the

National Academy of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of out-
standing engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of
its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility
for advising the federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also

sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.
Dr. Robert M. White is president of the National Academy of Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academyof Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The

Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.  Dr.

Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy ofSciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology
with the AcademyÕs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federalgovernment.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in
providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineer-
ing communities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the

Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. Robert M. White are chairman

and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceAt the request of the National Science Foundation, the National ResearchCouncilÕs Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) and Manu-facturing Studies Board (MSB) formed the Committee to Study Information
Technology and Manufacturing in April 1993.  The committee of 16 individuals

from academia and industry was charged with determining the computer science
and engineering research needed to support advanced manufacturing.In preparing this report, the committee reviewed and synthesized relevantmaterial from recent reports and initiatives, interviewed a number of researchers
and practitioners in the field, and met five times to discuss the input from these
sources as well as the independent observations and findings of the committee
members themselves.  (Contributors to this report are listed in Appendix A.)  It

shared its preliminary thinking with a broad community in an interim report.1Reviewers of that document noted a number of issues as deserving of further
study that are addressed in this final report.  The committee included experts from

the information technology (IT) and the manufacturing domains, individuals in-
volved in research and development as well as implementation, and individuals
experienced in the manufacture of mechanical and electronic products.2  In short,
ix1 Computer Science and Telecommunications Board and Manufacturing Studies Board, NationalResearch Council.  1993.  
Information Technology and Manufacturing:  A Preliminary Report on
Research Needs.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
2 In the interests of keeping this project manageable, the committee concentrated on discretemanufacturing.  It did not address continuous manufacturing (the production of substances and
materials) to any significant degree.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the committee was by design highly heterogeneous, a characteristic intended topromote discussion and synergy among its members.The committee focused on articulating a vision of IT-enabled manufacturingin the 21st century, identifying the obstacles to achieving the vision, and identify-
ing research topics that address the obstacles.  Its deliberations centered on the

three thrusts outlined by the former Federal Coordinating Council for Science,
Engineering, and Technology in its Advanced Manufacturing Technology initia-
tive:¥ÒIntelligentÓ manufacturing equipment and systems;
¥Integrated tools for product, process, and enterprise design; and¥Advanced manufacturing technology infrastructure.Since these thrusts were outlined, the present administration has emphasizedto a much greater degree the importance of a national information infrastructure
that would support many activities of national importance, including manufactur-
ing.  That issue was considered by the committee as well.
The range and combination of research topics recommended by the commit-tee are an essential feature of this report.  Some of the topics chosen by the

committee have been proposed by others in prior reports; the need for work in
some areas is enduring.  Some topics fall into areas of long-standing need but are

advanced with new emphases.  Because of limited time, the committee was

unable to assess in depth the topics it identified.  Moreover, it did not specifically

address areas other than information technology that might prove beneficial to
manufacturing; such areas include new physical processes that might be devel-
oped to shape and fabricate discrete components.  In preparing this final report,

the committee drew heavily on the preliminary report it issued in late 1993.  Its

efforts in subsequent meetings served to develop more fully, validate, and comple-
ment the ideas presented in that earlier report.  A site visit to an engine plant in

March 1994 (described in Appendix B) provided a firsthand demonstration of the
productive use of current information technology in manufacturing.  In addition,
a National Science Foundation workshop in May 19943 (attended by some com-
mittee members) helped to crystallize some of the ideas presented in the material
on the design process.The CSTB and MSB are grateful to the National Science Foundation, tothose who made presentations and/or submitted written material to the commit-
tee, and to those who reviewed this report and its predecessor.  CSTB will be glad

to receive comments on this report.  Please send them via Internet e-mail to

CSTB@NAS.EDU, or via regular mail to CSTB, National Research Council,
2101 Constitution Avenue NW, Washington, DC  20418.  The committee, of

course, remains responsible for the reportÕs content.xPREFACE3 See Mukherjee, Amar, and Jack Hilibrand (eds.).  1994.  
New Paradigms for Manufacturing.NSF 94-123.  National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContentsEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
1VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH12
Introduction, 12Information Technology and the Increasing Complexityof Manufacturing, 13Purpose, Scope, and Content of This Report, 15Flexibility for the Future, 16Recognizing Information TechnologyÕs Increasing Capability in aChanging World, 17Balancing Current Needs and the Development ofFuture Capabilities, 23Looking Ahead, 25The Potential Impact of Information Technology on theManufacturing Enterprise, 26The Broad Vision, 26
Nearer-Term Prospects for Improvement, 28Product and Process Design, 28
Shop Floor Production, 30
Business Practices, 33New Manufacturing Styles, 34The Virtual Factory, 35
The Programmable or Reconfigurable Factory, 36
The Networked Factory, 38
Microfactories, 39xiInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiCONTENTSGetting From Here to ThereÑThe Need for Balance and aConsidered Approach, 40The Research Agenda, 42Technology Research, 42Product and Process Design, 42
Shop Floor Control, 43
Modeling and Simulation, 45
Enterprise Integration and Business Practices, 47Non-Technology Issues, 472MANUFACTURING:  CONTEXT, CONTENT, AND HISTORY49
The Economics of Manufacturing, 49
The Nature of Manufacturing, 50
The Historical Context of Manufacturing, 56Early Paradigm Changes, 56
Recent Changes and Their Effects, 583INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN60
Introduction, 60
Design Paradigms, 62Electronic Design, 62
Application to Mechanical Design, 65Needs and Research for Mechanical Design, 66Research for Product Description, 70
Research for Process Description, 76
Research for Tools to Support Integrated Product andProcess Design, 79Research Areas Not Specific to Manufacturing, 80Geometric Reasoning, 80
Knowledge and Information Management, 81Specific Research Questions, 824SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION84
Introduction, 84
Scheduling Factory Activities, 85Centralized Control, 85
Decentralized Control, 92Autonomous Agents, 92
Work and Logistics Flow, 94Controlling Individual Factory Activities, 95Equipment Controllers, 96
Sensors, 102Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxiiiFacilitating Continuous Improvement, 105Controlling and Managing Product Configuration, 106
Specific Research Questions, 1075MODELING AND SIMULATION FOR THE
VIRTUAL FACTORY109

Introduction, 109
Considerations in the Development of Virtual Factories, 110Learning from Past Problems, 110
Determining the Requirements for Effective FactoryModels, 111Modeling Technology,  113

Representing and Capturing Manufacturing Expertise, 116
Research Areas Not Specific to Manufacturing, 1186INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES119
Introduction, 119
Architectures and Standards, 121
Integration, 123Redesign of Business Practices, 123
Intra-enterprise Integration, 124
Inter-enterprise Integration, 128Non-manufacturing-specific Research, 130Information Retrieval Systems, 131
Software Engineering, 132
Dependable Computing Systems, 134
Collaboration Technology and Computer-supportedCooperative Work, 1357ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE136
Targeting the Decision Maker, 137
Motivating Technology Transfer and Academic-IndustrialInteraction, 137Motivating Introduction and Implementation of InformationTechnology, 142
Understanding Organizational Issues, 142Human Resources, 142
Communications, 143
Organization for Ad Hoc Tasks, 143
Informal Hierarchies of Status, 144Overcoming History and Managing Risk, 144
Providing for Technology Demonstrations, 147Stimulating the Adoption of Open Standards, 149Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xivCONTENTSDeveloping Better Metrics of Performance, 151Developing New Models for Accounting and Valuation, 152
Emphasizing Education, Training, and Retraining, 153BIBLIOGRAPHY156

APPENDIXES
AList of Contributors163
BSite Visit to Romeo Engine Plant, March 23, 1994165

CIllustrative Advanced Long-range Technology Demonstrations169
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSxvInformationTechnologyforManufacturingInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Executive SummaryA manufacturing business is devoted to the production of tangible objectsthat are high in quality and competitive in cost, meet customersÕ expectations for
performance, and are delivered in a timely manner.  Finding and achieving the

appropriate balance among these attributesÑquality, cost, performance, and time
to marketÑchallenge all manufacturing businesses.  Those companies that are

successful in meeting that challenge remain in business; those that are not usually
disappear.In a manufacturing environment that is perhaps changing more rapidly nowthan during the Industrial Revolution, competing successfully will require that
U.S. manufacturers increasingly provide customers with shorter times between
order and delivery and between product conceptualization and realization, greater
product customization, and higher product quality and performance, while meet-
ing more stringent environmental constraints.  Accomplishing these goals will

require major changes in current manufacturing practices; such changes include
the use of new and/or more complex manufacturing processes, greater use of
information to reduce waste and defects, and more flexible manufacturing styles.This report outlines a broad research agenda for applying information tech-nology (IT)1 to improving the manner in which discrete manufacturing processes
will be carried out in the 21st century.  These processes include the design of
1 IT includes the hardware that computes and communicates; the software that provides data,
knowledge, and information while at the same time controlling the hardware; and the interfacesbetween computers and the tools and machines on the manufacturing shop floor.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGproducts and processes (e.g., converting customer requirements and expectationsinto engineering specifications, converting specifications into subsystems), pro-
duction (e.g., moving materials, converting or transforming material properties or
shapes, assembling systems or subsystems, verifying process results), and manu-
facturing-related business practices (e.g., converting a customer order into a list
of required parts, cost accounting, and documenting of all procedures).  This

report also discusses the need for non-technology research to better understand
human resource and other non-technical aspects of manufacturing.THE POTENTIAL OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYIN MANUFACTURING
An enormous amount of information is generated and used during the de-sign, manufacture, and use of a product to satisfy customer needs and to meet
environmental requirements.  Thus it is reasonable to suppose that the use of

information technology can enable substantial improvements in the operation,
organization, and effectiveness of information-intensive manufacturing processes
and activities, largely by facilitating their integration (Figure ES.1).  Equipment

and stations within factories, entire manufacturing enterprises, and networks of
suppliers, partners, and customers located throughout the world can be more
effectively connected and integrated through the use of information technology.Information technology can provide the tools to help enterprises achievegoals widely regarded as critical to the future of manufacturing, including:¥Rapid shifts in production from one product to another;¥Faster implementation of new concepts in products;¥Faster delivery of products to customers;¥More intimate and detailed interactions with customers;¥Fuller utilization of capital and human resources;¥Streamlining of operations to focus on essential business needs; and¥Elimination of unnecessary, redundant, or wasteful activities.The development and implementation of new information technology tomeet these goals will be shaped by organizational, managerial, and human re-
source concerns that have prevented manufacturers from exploiting fully even
the technology that exists today.  Sensitivity to these concerns will be essential to

the successful development and implementation of the information technology
associated with visions of manufacturing for the 21st century.Information technology can be used to meet a range of needs of manufactur-ing decision makers (Box ES.1).  These needs suggest a research agenda with

both technological and non-technological dimensions; the primary targets of this
research agenda include:Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3Integration through
Information
TechnologiesBUSINESSDESIGNPRODUCTSMarketingTaking ordersDocumenting proceduresDistributionCost accountingPRODUCTIONReceiving work ordersSchedulingMoving materialAssembling productsGathering product dataConverting customer requirements to engineering 
specificationsConverting specifications to subsystemsVerifying designsTesting fabrication processesFIGURE ES.1  Information technology as a means to integrate various basic manufactur-ing activities.¥Operational control of factories and their suppliers,¥Tools for product and process design,¥Modeling and simulation of the entire spectrum of factory operations(virtual manufacturing), and¥Enterprise integration and use of other capabilities provided by the evolv-ing National Information Infrastructure to support 21st-century manufacturing.Other aspects of manufacturing, specifically physical processes, are not addressedin this report except as they relate to information technologyÕs potential role incontrolling them.KEY FINDINGSThe key findings of this report are the following:Finding 1:  Information technology has a major role to play in the manufac-turing environment of the future.  The information-intensive nature of manufac-
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGBOX ES.1 Needs of Manufacturing Decision Makers andExamples of How Information Technology CouldContribute to Meeting ThemExample of InformationNeedTechnologyÕs Contribution
Situational awareness. Both white-collar andTo promote and enhance
blue-collar personnel must be informed aboutsituational awareness, an
events in the manufacturing environment. AnIT-based factory
unexpected event may be anything from theinformation system could

breakage of a tool or the delay of a shipment to adisplay the status of
design change made to a product.various tools and machines
on the shop floor.Diagnosis of problems. Decision makers need toTo assist in problem
identify the nature and extent of problems.solving, diagnostics aboard

Unexpected events can have a variety of causes.a tool could be transmitted
For example, a tool may cease functioningto a shop steward in real
because it blew a fuse, because the bit broke, ortime.

because the motor seized due to a lack oflubrication. The stoppage could also have beenthe result of another error or problem somewhereelse on the shop floor. Knowing what caused theproblem is key to fixing it.Analytical tools. Decision makers need toTo enhance analytical
evaluate and test various problem-solvingcapabilities, information

approaches and strategies. For example, atechnology-based
decision maker may need to choose betweensimulations could help
allowing a cell to operate at reduced speedfactory managers

(lowering the throughput but also the risk ofunderstand the
damage) or operating it at full speed (increasingconsequences of different
the likelihood that the tool will have to be shutcourses of action.

down entirely for repairs).Dissemination channels. Solutions to problemsTo enable timely
must be disseminated. For example, informationdissemination of solutions
about the appropriate speed choice for the toolto problems, information
described above is needed both by the on-sitetechnology networks can

crew and by the machineÕs manufacturer.be used to provide relevant
text and graphics to allaffected sites.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5turing across all component activities will place ever-higher premiums on thefaster, more accurate, and more useful presentation and analysis of the informa-
tion streams associated with these activities.  More, and more timely, information

will be needed for decisions on the shop floor and in executive suites alike;
information-intensive programmable processes and automated on-line control
can improve product quality and manufacturing flexibility; greater integration
among design, production, and marketing will lead to a greater need to share
information.  Only by judicious use of information technology will manufactur-

ing personnel from chief executive officers to factory floor workers be able to
assimilate and use these streams of information.At the same time, information technology is only one dimension of enhancedfuture manufacturing operations; other important dimensions range from a better
understanding of basic science and engineering phenomena in various domains to
insights into the organizations and institutions that will be the users of advanced
information technology.  Progress in these other dimensions is also needed.
Finding 2:  Current information technology is inadequate to support the
manufacturing styles and practices that will be needed in the 21st century.  More-

over, although individual demonstrations in particular manufacturing activities
today hint at the potential impact of information technology, high degrees of
integration have not yet been achieved.  Open architectures and standards (cur-

rently absent) are needed to attain higher degrees of integration, because as the
capabilities and applications of the National Information Infrastructure increase,
the penalties associated with closed or proprietary manufacturing systems will
only grow.  Better information technology will also contribute to major improve-

ments in product and process design and to more efficient and flexible shop floor
operations, as well as to the planning and business capabilities of factory manag-
ers.  Research on information technology in a manufacturing context is needed to

enlarge the flexibility available in the future for manufacturing managers.Finding 3:  Exploiting the full potential of information technology to im-
prove manufacturing will require addressing many non-technological matters, as
well as the technical areas.  For very good reasons, manufacturing managers are

cautious about the promises of information technology and concerned about un-
derestimating the potential risks of investing in it; these managers will require
information technology that meets their needs as they understand those needs.
Questions of technological risk, work force adaptation, and organizational resis-
tance cannot be dismissed; if information technology developments are to be
viable and acceptable in the factory environment, such questions must be directly
addressed and resolved.The potential benefits of improving manufacturing performance are enor-mousÑthey relate to the basic good health of the domestic and internationaleconomies.  On the other hand, the risks are significant; the business landscape is

littered with the hulks of companies for which the use of technology did not solve
deeply rooted problems.  This report seeks to identify research directions in
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGinformation technology that can help to support and sustain a vibrant U.S. manu-facturing enterprise.RECOMMENDATIONSThe committeeÕs recommendations for research fall into two broad catego-ries:  those related specifically to increasing the sophistication with which it is

possible to apply information technology to manufacturing needs (a technology
research agenda) and those related specifically to increasing the likelihood that
such technologies will indeed be used appropriately in future manufacturing
endeavors (a non-technology research agenda).  Given the charge of the commit-

tee to focus on a technology research agenda, recommendations related to the
first category are emphasized.  In many respects, however, the non-technological

areas require more attention, since such areas are usually the most difficult in
which to effect change.A Technology Research AgendaThe ultimate goal of the information technology research agenda outlined inthis report is to expand the envelope of technological options and capabilities for
managers of 21st-century manufacturing businesses.  But it is reasonable to sepa-

rate research efforts that can have an incremental impact on actual manufacturing
operations in the nearer future from those that may have a revolutionary impact in
the farther future.  Research that is likely to have an impact in the shorter term is
most likely to benefit from awareness of social and organizational issues.With this perspective in mind, the research areas relevant to product andprocess design (Chapter 3) and shop floor production (Chapter 4) appear most
promising in the nearer term.  Factory modeling and simulation (Chapter 5) are

farther-term, higher-payoff research areas.  Nevertheless, it must be recognized

that manufacturing is Òan indivisible, monolithic activity, incredibly diverse andcomplex in its fine detail . . . [whose] many parts are inextricably interdependent
and interconnected, so that no part may be safely separated from the rest and
treated in isolation, without an adverse impact on the remainder and thus on the
whole.Ó2  This fact largely precludes the identification of specific 
Òsilver bulletsÓout of which all other progress in the field would flow.Integrated Product and Process DesignIn the area of integrated product and process design, the following questionswarrant attention:2 Harrington, Joseph.  1984.  
Understanding the Manufacturing Process:  Key to Successful CAD/
CAM Implementation.  M. Dekker, New York.
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7¥ How should the information associated with products be captured andrepresented?  Issues relevant to this question include the representation of
high-level functions for manufactured mechanical or electromechanical prod-
ucts, the creation of abstractions that contain the right amount of detail for
their use at different points in the design process, formalisms for the repre-
sentation of both domain-independent and domain-specific information, the
interchangeability of product data models for use by different parts of the
manufacturing operation (e.g., design, fabrication, test, maintenance, up-
grade), and the relationships between high-level function abstractions and
the physical reality of geometry and materials.¥ How can manufacturing processes be represented?  Process description
involves languages for description and models of specific manufacturing
processes, both as they actually exist and as they might be improved.  Lan-

guages will have to express in compact form not only nominal process be-
havior but also variant behavior.  They should have features that support

checking for correctness and completeness and should be translatable across
technical domains.  Models of specific processes must include the informa-

tion necessary to support dynamic control of individual operations and to
take local environmental conditions into account, and they must faithfully
represent real manufacturing processes as they exist.¥ How should tools be constructed that support product design?  An integral
aspect of product design is how to make trade-offs (e.g., among cost, perfor-
mance, and reliability; between alternate space allocations; between making
or buying a component; between long-term operating costs and initial costs;
and so on).  Designers would benefit greatly from tools that would help them

evaluate these trade-offs in a rigorous and systematic manner.  Presentation

and display tools for visualizing different design alternatives would also
support the product designer.  Finally, it will be essential to develop tools

that support analysis of the Òoff-nominalÓ behaviors that result from manu-
facturing inaccuracies or deliberate variations introduced into a generic de-
sign.Shop Floor ProductionIn the area of managing shop floor production, the following questions war-rant attention:¥ How should shop floor tools be controlled?  Machine controllers are the
fundamental interface between a factory automation system and the fabrica-
tion or assembly tools themselves.  Research is needed that will result in an
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGopen architecture for machine controllers and in a good language for describ-ing unit processing operations.¥ How should shop floor operations be scheduled?  Effective real-time dy-
namic scheduling of shop floor operations is central to ensuring the efficient
use of shop floor resources.  Effective real-time scheduling requires continu-

ous tracking of the status of jobs, work cells, tooling, and resources and
should support reactive scheduling and control (e.g., rerouting work flows to
compensate for a problem or exploiting fortuitous windows of opportunity in
individual work cells).  In addition, real-time schedulers must give human

decision makers convenient and transparent access to relevant information
and tools enabling them to make trade-off decisions regarding release, reor-
dering, sequencing and batching, and other matters.  Finally, new production

planning and scheduling optimization techniques are needed.¥ How should sensors be integrated into the shop floor environment?  Sen-
sors provide accurate real-time information on what is happening on the shop
floor and at individual work cells that is not available through other means.
Such information is needed to guide unit processes as well as to provide
status information and situational awareness at higher levels of authority
(whether automated or human).  The future manufacturing facility will use

many different types of sensors, creating a requirement for a standardized
control system into which sensors can be plugged with minimal bother.
Reliable operation will also be at a premium.Factory Modeling and SimulationIn the area of factory modeling and simulation, the following questionswarrant investigation:¥ How can an individual production line be simulated?  Although it will notbe possible to fully simulate even a modest factory for many years, it may be
possible to simulate individual production lines.  Research in this area would

build on the single-activity models already in use in manufacturing to inte-
grate their functions and to provide a comprehensive overview of the produc-
tion line.¥ How can virtual factory simulations be validated?  A key question in any
simulation is the extent to which it provides an accurate representation of
reality.  Simulations can be tweaked and otherwise forced to fit empirical

data, but since the purpose of a factory simulation is to make reliable predic-
tions about a factory operation for which there are no empirical data, manag-
ers will need strong assurances that a simulationÕs prediction of a new fac-Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9tory configuration faithfully reflects what would actually occur.  Research is
needed to develop methods of validation that provide such confidence.¥ How is the complex and voluminous information associated with a factorybest presented to users?  User perspectives and needs are not homogeneous,
yet the information presented to different users will all be derived from the
same data sources, whether a factory model is operating in control mode or
simulation mode.  The visibility and transparency of activities to all relevant

users across the enterprise are prerequisite to achieving effective control.¥ How can the consistency and accuracy of concurrently used models beguaranteed?  A factory model is most likely to be some aggregation of
smaller models, each built to represent or simulate or control some single
factory activity.  Ensuring that the assumptions underlying these models and

the data streams driving them are consistent across the board will be a major
challenge.¥ How should dynamic interactions among these interconnected and interre-lated models be understood?  As smaller models are aggregated into a large
factory model, it is inevitable that they will interact with each other (since the
processes and products they represent also interact with each other).  Under-

standing the nature and scope of these interactions will be a major challenge
with important implications for ensuring model fidelity and validation.Information Infrastructure to Support Enterprise IntegrationElectronic networks and related elements of information infrastructure arelikely to be the means for achieving a relatively complete integration of the
manufacturing enterprise, including activities within a given firm as well as
activities undertaken by suppliers and customers outside the firm.The following questions suggest research areas relevant to enterprise inte-gration:¥ What standards should support the passing of information between thevarious architectures and the interconnection of different systems within the
manufacturing enterprise?  Today, incompatible representations of knowl-
edge and information are common in computer-aided design, computer-aug-
mented process planning, and computer-aided manufacturing.  These incom-

patibilities are major obstacles to enterprise-wide integration.¥ How can standards be made to accommodate some upgrade capability?  In
the absence of an upgrade capability, technology vendors worry about pre-Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGmature freezing of technology and customers worry about intrinsic obsoles-cence.¥ How should real-time communications architectures be implemented?Robust real-time control systems for tools such as cutters will demand net-
work architectures that can tolerate dropped messages or delayed message
arrival.  Thus research is needed to formulate the principles for construction
and operation of networks that can support time-critical message delivery in
a context of interconnecting, multipurpose networks.¥ What tools and capabilities are needed for human- and machine-basedinformation and resource searching?  These essential capabilities should
become part of the underlying network service infrastructure in order to
increase network performance and efficiency.A Non-technology Research AgendaThe issues relevant to exploiting the full power of advanced informationtechnologies go beyond traditional engineering research.  Researchers in eco-

nomics, organizational studies, and management science may contribute a great
deal to understanding how manufacturing enterprises can actually make use of
such technology.  Non-technical problems are often exacerbated, for example, by

the globalization of industry, in which the relationships with suppliers, custom-
ers, design centers, and factories are increasingly distributed over a wide band of
cultures, time zones, and expertise.  Those wishing to accelerate the adoption of

advanced information technology for manufacturing must ensure that human,
organizational, and societal factors are aligned so as to support its acceptance and
maximize its benefits.  Many mechanisms can facilitate such alignment, includ-

ing sabbatical programs for industrialists and academics in each otherÕs domain,teaching factories created to prepare future manufacturing specialists, and ad-
vanced technology demonstrations that illustrate the benefits of information tech-
nology for factory performance.In addition, considerable research in social science will be necessary tofacilitate the large-scale introduction of information technology into manufactur-
ing.  New technologies generally require new social structures if those technolo-
gies are to be fully exploited.  Innovators will have to confront issues such as the

division of labor between human and computer actors, the extent and content of
communications between those actors, and how best to organize teams of human
and computer resources.  Continual upgrading of skills and intellectual tools will

also be necessary at all levels of the corporate hierarchy.A particularly important step in supporting 21st-century manufacturing willbe to develop accounting and financial schemes that enable manufacturers to
account for their increasingly critical intellectual and information assets in theInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11same way that the generally accepted accounting principles of today allow themto treat building and pieces of equipmentÑas capital expenditures (i.e., expendi-tures that relate to the long-term value of a company).Finally, standards and metrics are a mix of both technical and non-technicalissues.  Standards are needed to support and facilitate interoperability and open

architectures and systems, while metrics are needed to determine the impact of
information technology on various dimensions of manufacturing.  The technical

work required in both areas is substantial, but the organizational and social issues
that need resolving before appropriate standards and metrics are in common use
also deserve much more attention than has been given to date.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURING121Vision and Recommended
Areas of ResearchINTRODUCTIONThe manufacturing sector is the crucible in which many technologies arerefined and fused for the purpose of making things that people need or want.  In

1993 manufacturing accounted for 18 percent of the $6.4 trillion gross domestic
product and for nearly 18 million jobs in the United States (U.S. Department of
Commerce, 1994; Council of Economic Advisors, 1994).  Broadly defined, manu-

facturing includes all of the activities involved in determining the needs of poten-
tial customers, conceiving and producing products to meet those needs, and mar-
keting and delivering those products to the ultimate customer.  Money is made

and needs are satisfied by meeting quality, cost, performance, and time-to-market
goals for the product being manufactured.  These attributesÑquality, cost, per-

formance, and time to marketÑmay be taken to be the yardsticks against which
any new advance must be measured.Given that U.S. leadership in certain areas of manufacturing is no longer therule, it is reasonable to ask what needs to be done to regain international leader-
ship in manufacturing. Suggestions abound, but in the absence of a clear strategy
in this area, federal decision makers have struggled to find the right mix of
investment in manufacturing research.This quandary has extended beyond the funding agencies to the universitiesand to academic research.  There are few departments of manufacturing at U.S.

universities because many academics do not believe that manufacturing is an
academic discipline.  Moreover, the disciplines basic to making progress in manu-

facturing belong not only in the ÒhardÓ sciences and engineering in physics,Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH13mathematics, mechanical and electrical engineering, industrial engineering, com-puter science and engineering, chemistry, and materials science but also in the
ÒsofterÓ sciences of sociology, psychology, management science, and economics.
Even though these separate disciplines are individually supported by funding
agencies and universities, there is a lack of focused attention on how to integrate
basic knowledge from many disciplines into knowledge that furthers manufactur-
ing goals.Information Technology and the IncreasingComplexity of ManufacturingAt the same time that this lack of strategy is apparent, all dimensions ofmanufacturing (e.g., products, markets, processes) are becoming more complex,
diverse, and international.  Indeed, common products such as automobiles can

have thousands of parts, and modern aircraft and integrated circuits include mil-
lions of parts or active elements.  Each of these products takes years to design,

requiring the effort of hundreds or even thousands of people worldwide.  Com-

plex new products based on information content and their accompanying infor-
mation-dominated design and manufacturing methods already require us to deal
with entirely new scales of complexity.1  Some products require such levels of
precision, delicacy, or cleanliness that people can no longer make or assemble the
parts; in some cases, they cannot even see them.To realize these and other products, manufacturing firms must cope withdesign processes (e.g., converting customer requirements and expectations into
engineering specifications, converting specifications into subsystems), produc-
tion processes (e.g., moving materials, converting material properties or shapes,
assembling products or subsystems, verifying process results), and business prac-
tices (e.g., converting a customer order into a list of required parts, cost account-
ing, and documentation of procedures).  The illustration on the cover indicates

the relationships among these various elements of manufacturing and the role of
information technology (IT; Box 1.1) in integrating them (see also Figure 1.1).
By providing ways to facilitate and manage the complexity of these information-
intensive processes, as well as to achieve integration of manufacturing activities
within and among manufacturing enterprises, information technology will play
an increasingly indispensable role in supporting and even enabling the complex1 A case in point is very large scale integrated (VLSI) chips.  A single VLSI chip may have several
million transistors with submicron feature sizes.  A complex system may have hundreds of chips andtens of millions of transistors.  Logic design, functional tests, fault tests, timing, placement, and
wiring data run to gigabytes per chip.  Validation of a design may involve many millions of simu-

lated test cases.  Finally, different aspects of chip design are coupled, so that changes required in the
logic design (for example) often affect the analysis of derived fault, timing, and place and wire viewsof the logic.  Similar observations apply to airplanes, ships, and cars.
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGBOX 1.1  Information Technology for ManufacturingÑ
Definition and ElementsAlthough there are many definitions of information technology (IT), this reportdefines IT as encompassing a wide range of computer and communications tech-nologies.  IT includes the hardware that computes and communicates; the soft-
ware that provides data, knowledge, and information while at the same time con-
trolling the hardware; and the robots, machinery, sensors, and actuators oreffectors that serve as the interface between computers and the outside world,specifically the manufacturing shop floor.  Note also that the effective use of infor-
mation technologies demands considerable investment in training and mainte-
nance.  Examples of IT include the following:
¥ ComputersWorkstationMainframe
ServerPersonal digital assistant¥ Communications devices and infrastructureTelephoneLocal area networkWide area network
Wireless network¥ SoftwareOperating systemArtificial intelligence expert system for product configurationComputer-assisted design package
Animation and simulation softwareVirtual reality simulationsSoftware for total quality management and inventory control
Scheduling package¥ SensorsMachine vision
Tactile and force sensorsTemperature sensorsPressure sensors¥ Actuators or effectorsRobot armAutomated ground vehicle
Numerically controlled cutterMicroactuatorsInformation technologies are focusing to an increasing degree on knowledgeand information rather than data alone.  That is, advances in information technol-
ogies over the last 40 years have enabled the manipulation and processing of
increasingly abstract and higher-level forms of information.  For example, indus-
tries cannot rely only on postmortem quality control data to detect product defects:modern quality assurance requires that potential problems be traced back through
the manufacturing system for high-level analysis at each manufacturing unit.  IT
that is used in support of such an approach depends as much on knowledge anddiagnosis as on simple data gathering.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH15Integration through
Information
TechnologiesBUSINESSDESIGNPRODUCTSMarketingTaking ordersDocumenting proceduresDistributionCost accountingPRODUCTIONReceiving work ordersSchedulingMoving materialAssembling productsGathering product dataConverting customer requirements to engineering 
specificationsConverting specifications to subsystemsVerifying designsTesting fabrication processesFIGURE 1.1  Information technology as a means to integrate various basic manufacturing
activities.practice of manufacturing.  In the decades to come, information technology may
have an impact on manufacturing performance and productivity comparable to
that of mass production.Purpose, Scope, and Content of This ReportThis study was conducted to identify areas of information technology-relatedresearch needed to support future manufacturing.  The committee chose to define

manufacturing broadly as the entire product realization process, from specifica-
tion through design and production to marketing and distribution.  Although it

believes that information technology has important applications to both continu-
ous and discrete manufacturing, the committee focused on discrete manufactur-
ing as the type in which the problems of applying information technology are
most pressing.  It did not include in its deliberations such important dimensions

of manufacturing as the study of physical processes in manufacturing, although it
did address information technology as it might be applied to controlling these
processes.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGChapter 1 of this report outlines some of the technical and other challengesconfronting the manufacturing enterprise at the outset of the 21st century, ex-
presses a vision of future manufacturing based on what is known today and what
might be expected from information technology-related R&D efforts in the fu-
ture, and recommends a research agenda aimed at achieving this vision.  Chapters

2 through 7 elaborate on the contents of Chapter 1.  Chapter 2 presents the context

for manufacturing.  The R&D agenda implied by the vision of Chapter 1 is the

subject of Chapters 3 (product and process design), 4 (shop floor production), 5
(factory modeling and simulation), 6 (information infrastructure issues), and 7
(nontechnology issues).  Chapters 3 through 7 explore in more detail the research

questions that must be answered successfully if the vision of a robust and interna-
tionally competitive 21st-century manufacturing enterprise is to be achieved.  A

list of contributors to the report, a description of an engine plant visited by the
committee, and sketches of possible advanced long-range technology demonstra-
tions are given in Appendixes A, B, and C, respectively.FLEXIBILITY FOR THE FUTUREIn the manufacturing environment of the 21st century, several trends willplace increasing pressure on manufacturers:¥Larger numbers of product variants will be required to meet user demandsfor greater product customization.  This will lead to pressures to reduce produc-

tion lot sizes while maintaining unit costs at an economic level.  Manufacturers

will need production facilities that are economic and profitable at very low vol-
umes and that have low ÒfixedÓ costs.
¥Increasing dispersion of manufacturing operations is likely.  Successful
manufacturing companies will be forced to develop effective global manufactur-
ing networks, Òknitting togetherÓ the skills and capabilities of individual units
located around the globe to create a seamless international production capability;
organizationally, the factory floor will see self-directed work teams ÒmanagingÓthe day-to-day operations of the firm with minimal real-time supervision, with
white-collar labor focusing much more on the creation of new and improved
products.  These trends will almost certainly lead to a reduction in the average

size of manufacturing facilities, the increasing use of ÒtemporaryÓ assets (via
leasing or other cost-sharing arrangements), and the development of common
processes so that manufacturing activities can be moved rapidly to locations that
need increased production.¥Shorter time to market will become even more important than it is today.One aspect of this issue will be the ability to deploy technology rapidly.  Another

will be the ability to execute customer orders rapidly.  Manufacturing concerns

will emphasize work force skills and empowerment in order to meet marketplace
needs for speed.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH17¥Global environmental concerns seem certain to motivate the developmentof ÒgreenÓ and recyclable products and manufacturing systems that use fewer
material resources.2  Manufacturing systems should be able to accept 
ÒusedÓproducts that they have fabricated, disassemble the received items into compo-
nent parts, and determine which parts are reusable or which are convertible into
recyclable raw material with the ultimate goal of a product that leads to zero scrap
material.  Of course, products will need to be designed with such goals in mind.
Responding to these challenges will require unprecedented flexibility.  Flex-
ibility in manufacturing is associated with rapid responses at the appropriate level
to new information and constraints, which may range from changes in consumer
preferences or international trade regulations or union requirements to a tempo-
rary fault in a crucial piece of machinery on the factory floor.  Whatever the

source of change or constraint, information systems in the factory must enable an
appropriate response.  Information technology will enable better planning and

organization as well, helping to control the events to which responses are needed.Recognizing Information TechnologyÕs IncreasingCapability in a Changing WorldThe role of information technology in manufacturing can be seen in theincreasing use of computers to underpin product design and fabrication processes
and to support related business processes such as sales and distribution.  To date,

the primary uses of information technology in manufacturing have been to con-
trol machinery and tools on the shop floor, to assist with administration in areas
such as accounting and bookkeeping, to speed the transfer of information, and to
support the management of product and process complexity (e.g., through com-
puter-aided design (CAD) or manufacturing resources planning).  Table 1.1 com-

pares past and present characteristics and roles of IT in manufacturing.Although these roles will continue to be important, the committee believesthat information technology will become an increasingly significant source of
support for different types of decision making needed in manufacturing (Box
1.2).  This belief in the benefits of information technology is based on three

premises:2 A recent agreement between two European auto manufacturers establishes a recycling networkaimed at decreasing waste.  It has begun to increase awareness of the importance of creating environ-
mentally correct products for sustainable development around the world.  In other cases, the produc-

ers of tires and batteries have been challenged to produce a product that can be disposed of withoutlandfills.  Taxes have been imposed on the purchase of new batteries and tires to help offset the cost
of disposal.  Yet such efforts are still the exception given the scope of manufacturing worldwide.
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGTABLE 1.1 Past and Present Information Technologies and Their Roles inDevices and Activities Integral to ManufacturingPastPresent
InformationTechnologyComputingMainframe computersPersonal computers and workstations
platformfor most computing
DatabasesMostly paper records,Large amounts of business data
stored in file cabinetsresident on electronically searchable,
remotely accessible databasesInformationHuman informationDatabase retrieval systems now the
retrievalspecialists (e.g., public andbasis for managing complex problems
private librarians andinvolving more subassemblies and
corporate informationmore interactions with suppliers
expediters)Data300 bits per second; hence,1 to 10 megabits per second, often
communicationmajor restrictions on thecarried over local or wide area
size, complexity, andnetworks. Hence, large models (e.g.,
usefulness of the itemsaircraft or automobile bodies) sent
communicatedquickly, permitting designers states or
continents apart to collaborate moreeasilyManufacturingTechnologySensorsMostly analogHeavily digital
RecordingChart recordersComputer-readable media
mediaControl logicMostly classical controlClassical control theory still used;
and machinetheory (as exemplified bymodern control theory (state space
controllerthe proportional-integral-analysis), fuzzy logic, and neural
derivative controller);network controllers more common
machine controllers usingmany subsystems based
on programmable logiccontrollersInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH19TABLE 1.1 ContinuedPastPresent
ControlAnalog amplifiers,Personal computers. Paper tape largely
systemselectromechanical relays,replaced by computer-controlled
and pneumatic and hydraulicmachines operating on CLData; data
actuators; automatedsometimes received through a
machining operationscomputer network. Programmable

performed using APTtechnology enabling faster and more
programming that generatedaccurate control, with the end result
cutter location data (CLData)that much more complex parts can be

on paper tapemade much more quickly
EngineeringPracticeAnalysisRelatively minimal; manualExtensive and computer-supported to a
processes; based largely onlarge degree (computer-aided design to
past practiceÑknowledge ofrepresent solid geometry of parts and
what did and did not work inassemblies, kinematic motions of

the pastparts, and some of the machinery used
to make and assemble them);computer-aided engineering models of
mechanical parts and assemblies usedto simulate kinematic analysisDesign forProducts largely standard,Higher degree of variety and
product varietywith few options for buyerscustomization possible
Product testingExhaustive testing ofComputerized simulation and
physical modelsengineering analysis as substitutes for
much physical testing; physical testingnow used primarily as a finalverification of designEngineeringÒOver-the-wallÓ engineering,Concurrent engineering (working on
stylewith market research,requirements, design, and production
product design, andsimultaneously) increasingly recognized
production working inas important and slowly becoming a
isolationcommon organizational objective,
although not by any means the normtodayProblemLong face-to-face meetingsElectronic conferences, either by
resolutionbetween participants totelephone alone or with video support,
address problems requiringto address problems; meetings and

attention by more than onemeeting overhead thus reduced
department in a companycontinuesInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGProductionOperationsProduct dataAlmost entirely paperElectronic form for many types
recording andrecords and engineering(especially for product or component

usedrawingsshape and geometry)
SchedulingScheduling to maximize theScheduling to balance high levels of
philosophyuse of (expensive) machinesmachine and personnel use and low
and people and to maximizelevels of inventory (minimizing WIP)

work in process (WIP)ContingencyScheduling softwareSoftware giving many shop floor
managementtask-oriented and notpersonnel access to constantly updated
responsive to contingencies:information on status of machines,
software told what was tolocation of breakdowns, and schedule

be done, and the humanrealization
operator was expected tocarry out the taskRelationshipSystems completely separateSystems still separate, but operating
betweenand functionedconcurrently
productnonconcurrently
engineering
and productreleaseInformationPaper traveled with theIn many factories, bar-code
flowproduct through assemblyidentification of parts moving through
linesproduction that keep track of their
positions and tell machinery whichsteps to perform; bar codes, coupledwith digital status keeping, often used
to develop systems that minimizeÒguess workÓ on inventory levels and
improve use of assetsTABLE 1.1 ContinuedPastPresent
¥Information technology will facilitate appropriate reuse of knowledge(e.g., reusing the design of a previously produced part rather than designing a
new one from scratch), thus enabling decision makers to build on precedents and
past decisions that have subsequently been validated by experience.¥Information technology will enable a high degree of integration amongthe various processes of manufacturing:  product design and process design, shop
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH21BOX 1.2 Needs of Manufacturing Decision Makers andExamples of How Information Technology CouldContribute to Meeting ThemExample of InformationNeedTechnology
Õs ContributionSituational awareness. Both white-collar andTo promote and enhance
blue-collar personnel must be informed aboutsituational awareness, an

events in the manufacturing environment. AnIT-based factory
unexpected event may be anything from theinformation system could
breakage of a tool or the delay of a shipment to adisplay the status of

design change made to a product.various tools and machines
on the shop floor.Diagnosis of problems. Decision makers need toTo assist in problem
identify the nature and extent of problems.solving, diagnostics aboard
Unexpected events can have a variety of causes.a tool could be transmitted

For example, a tool may cease functioningto a shop steward in real
because it blew a fuse, because the bit broke, ortime.
because the motor seized due to a lack oflubrication. The stoppage could also have beenthe result of another error or problem somewhere
else on the shop floor. Knowing what caused theproblem is key to fixing it.Analytical tools. Decision makers need toTo enhance analytical
evaluate and test various problem-solvingcapabilities, information
approaches and strategies. For example, atechnology-based

decision maker may need to choose betweensimulations could help
allowing a cell to operate at reduced speedfactory managers
(lowering the throughput but also the risk ofunderstand the

damage) or operating it at full speed (increasingconsequences of different
the likelihood that the tool will have to be shutcourses of action.
down entirely for repairs).Dissemination channels. Solutions to problemsTo enable timely
must be disseminated. For example, informationdissemination of solutions

about the appropriate speed choice for the toolto problems, information
described above is needed both by the on-sitetechnology networks can
crew and by the machineÕs manufacturer.be used to provide relevant
text and graphics to allaffected sites.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGfloor operations, and business practices, thereby increasing the ease with which aproduct can be brought to market and reducing costs.¥ Information technology will increase the opportunity for human decision
makers to think about the products and processes of manufacturing in abstract,
higher-level terms without focusing on lower-level and repetitive details, thereby
increasing the speed with which decisions can be made and implemented and
improving the quality of those decisions.  This premise is perhaps the most

controversial of the three.These premises have been articulated and tested before, with varying degreesof success.  What is it that gives rise to the committee
Õs belief that informationtechnology will be the basis of the next paradigm shift in manufacturing and a
source of enhanced productivity?The most straightforward answer is that the world has changed.  The cost-
performance relationship for information technology has improved so much over
the last decade that it now seems feasible to devote many more computational
resources to problem areas that were previously starved for such resources.  More

importantly, social and technological factors relevant to the successful imple-
mentation of IT in manufacturing are now much better understood.  Concerted

attention to these factors will dramatically improve the prospects for using IT
successfully in manufacturing in the future.For example:¥Socially, the culture of manufacturing is, for many good reasons, highlyconservative, whereas IT is an enabler and facilitator of radical change (although
such changes may take place over time).  Moreover, although manufacturing is

hundreds of years old, computers have been available for use in factories for only
about 40 years and thus have not yet been fully integrated into the factory.
(Social dimensions of the resistance to IT are addressed further in Chapter 7.)¥Technologically, early ventures in applying IT to manufacturing reachedtoo far too fast.  In contrast to the Japanese approach that blended IT applications

in manufacturing with existing work forces, the U.S. approach was capital-inten-
sive and tended to downplay operations and maintenance issues.  In addition, the

success of IT in many individual aspects of manufacturing has not been reflected
in the integration of these applications into a smoothly running system, and such
integration has been (and continues to be) quite difficult.  In the absence of

integration, it is difficult or impossible for different computer manufacturing
applications to exchange information, and the result may be as cumbersome as
having no automation at all (Box 1.3 describes a not-atypical experience in todayÕsfactories).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH23Balancing Current Needs and the Development of Future CapabilitiesAt the same time that it acknowledges ITÕs promise, the committee alsorecognizes very clearly that for good and proper reasons, managers of manufac-
turing enterprises are much more concerned about turning out products today
than about improving their operations tomorrow.  In particular, they regard new

technology as beneficial only insofar as it can help them to achieve their tacticalBOX 1.3  Elements of a Nonintegrated Computing Environment
for Manufacturing, Circa 1990ApplicationComputing Environment
Computer numericallyAPT running on closed architectures
controlled machine toolsRobotsMachine-specific languages such as VALII
or AMLDay-by-day scheduling of ordersIBM personal computers running DOS;
applications programmed in BASICProduction planningMore powerful Unix-based workstations;
applications programmed in C++IBM personal computers with DOS and BASIC
Symbolics machines and applications in LISPfor sophisticated constraint-based reasoningComputer-aided product designUnix-based Sun, DEC, or HP workstations;
applications programmed in C.  IRIS Silicon

Graphics machines for viewing of solidmodels.  International Graphics Exchange
Standard applications running on thesesystems are difficult to exchange.Sales, marketing, andApple II-C computers
secretarial functionsPayrollIBM 3000 series running VM/CMS operating
system and COBOLFinancial planningIBM personal computers and Lotus 1-2-3
Result: each computer system is considerably different from its neighbors; eachresponds to local events but is not open and/or cannot communicate well outsideits domain.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGgoals of meeting schedules and generating revenue for next quarterÕs balancesheet.  Thus, it is not surprising that many manufacturing managers, especially

those who have a great deal of practical experience with the day-to-day problems
in manufacturing, make an argument that goes something like this:  ÒWe havereal and immediate problems in U.S. manufacturing today that need to be solved
if we are to compete successfully in the future.  These immediate problems are

the ones that should be given the highest priority for the near future, and research
on advanced information technology whose payoff lies decades in the future, if
ever, is a poor use of todayÕs limited resources.Ó  In the absence of an explication
of the detailed benefits of new technology, in particular information technology,
and the impact of those technologies on the bottom line, a plant manager may
quite reasonably adopt a Òshow me first BEFORE you think of modifying MYfactoryÓ attitude.
3The committee recognizes the existence of substantial tension between theconservative nature of manufacturing as an activity and the radical change im-
plied by IT in the long term.  Clearly, the immediate problems of manufacturing

warrant attention; if U.S. manufacturers do not survive because they are unable to
solve todayÕs immediate problems, all of our investments in technology researchwill go for naught.  Much of what is needed today must be delivered today by

todayÕs suppliers; research (i.e., long-term work) holds promise only for thelonger term.Yet some degree of investment for the longer-term future is warranted, andinvestments made today in IT research for manufacturing may have high payoff
in the future.  Indeed, the committee believes that pursuit of a coherent research

agenda in this area would exploit U.S. strengths in computing and communica-3 Such concerns are buttressed by the history of the first wave of computer-integrated manufactur-ing (CIM).  CIM, a concept advanced in the late 1960s for efficient factory production, encompassed
a number of different visions of manufacturing under computer control and had both proponents and
detractors in various segments of the manufacturing community.  In its first decade or so, the strate-
gic advantage of CIM was seen to be the considerable reduction of Òblue-collar labor costs.Ó  Strate-
gic planners hoped that U.S. products would then be made and assembled as cheaply as those in the
newly industrialized countries where labor costs were relatively small.  The capabilities and implica-
tions of the technology were overstated by the strategic planners of the time, and they did notrecognize the sea change in the nature of business operations as corporations became more
transnational and the idea of simply using cheap labor was already fading.  In this context, both the
benefits and failures of CIM were obscured.In concrete terms, the outcome of the first wave of CIM was mostly the installation of computer-ized machinery and robot arms on the factory floor, often in inappropriate applications or without thenecessary expertise to use these systems.  Much of the initial CIM investment provided a poor return,
and today true computer-integrated manufacturing is far from commonplace in U.S. factories (as
described in Box 1.3).For more discussion of CIM, see Merchant (1971), Bjorke (1979), and Harrington (1984).  For
reference to the increasing transnationality of manufacturing, see Bartlett and Ghoshal (1992).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH25tions and enable the United States to regain a role in setting the world standard inmanufacturing.  Further, since technology is relatively easy to diffuse over na-

tional borders (and competitive advantages due to the possession of a given
technology thus tend to be transient), a continuing role for research on IT related
to manufacturing should be anticipated by policymakers and manufacturing man-
agers.Resolving the tension between taking care of immediate needs and investingin research with longer-term payoffs will require managers to understand the
strategic importance of new technology even as they are enmeshed in their tacti-
cal environment, and technologists to develop new technologies with business
goals in mind.Looking AheadThe committee fully recognizes that IT by itself is not a panacea.  For
example, a study of the auto industry by the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy found that highly automated auto plants achieved only average productivity,
and even though the automation was capable of substantial flexiblity, these plants
produced only two body styles of one product.4  But even in the research domain,
research to fill the gaps in the non-IT-related scientific and engineering knowl-
edge about products and processes to be supported by information technology is
essential if the promise of IT is to be exploited fully.  For example, a deeper basic

understanding about materials and fluid behavior may be needed to support new
fabrication processes or to improve old ones.5  A deeper basic understanding
about fatigue and corrosion may be necessary to support product designers at-
tempting to reduce maintenance requirements.  A deeper basic understanding of

relations between tolerances and function may be key to developing new assem-
bly and shaping processes to be controlled by IT.A critical concern for developers of technology should be identification ofthe decision maker who will decide whether or not to adopt a given information
technology innovation.  Such decision makers are found at nearly all levels in a

companyÕs hierarchy, but they have different concerns depending on where theysit, and they look to new technologies to answer different questions (see Chapter
7, Figure 7.1, which indicates the types of questions that may be asked at various
levels of an organizationÕs hierarchy, the relationships between the various levels4 See Dertouzos (1989).  Similar examples in which the use of information technology does not
correlate with marketplace success have been found in the service industries as well; see CSTB(1994a).  The lesson is clear
Ñcompanies (either manufacturing or service) that use informationtechnology inappropriately are not likely to reap significant advantages from such technology.5 New processes may include laser processing, water-jet cutting, and deposition-based fabrication.Chemical vapor deposition is an example of a process that was introduced only recently but is nowcommon.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGof the hierarchy, and the need for consistency and coherency throughout theenterprise).  While the identification of these basic concerns is not IT research per

se, technology researchers who wish their innovations to be adopted must craft
and present their research in ways that address the needs and business aspirations
of the decision makers in manufacturing.  Without solving problems relevant to

chief executive officers, technology researchers will seldom see their creations
adopted.Finally, in considering ITÕs potential for contributing to improvements inmanufacturing, time line is a concern.  The committee
Õs vision is based on projec-tions of how what is known today in IT and its applications to manufacturing
might plausibly develop in the future.  But forecasting time lines is difficult, and
committee membersÕ views on this issue reflect a spectrum of opinion.  Even
under the most optimistic view, it is not really plausible that most manufacturers,
especially smaller ones, will have achieved this vision by 2010.  However, it may

be that major parts of it will have been achieved by a number of large manufac-
turing concerns, and that smaller firms will be learning how to use new informa-
tion technology (or at least that they will be learning how to conduct their busi-
ness in an IT-rich environment).  Under a more pessimistic view, large-scale

adoption may not happen until much later.The committee emphasizes that its admittedly expansive vision for IT infuture manufacturing should be recognized as just thatÑa visionÑrather than asa definite prediction for the future.  It is a vision driven both by threat (in that the

vast power of information-driven manufacturing is increasingly recognized in
other countries) and opportunity (in that the capabilities of information technol-
ogy are growing at a rapid rate and that IT itself represents an area of U.S.
comparative advantage), and describes the areas that are most likely to be essen-
tial to achieving a competitive (or indeed a leading) position in information-
driven manufacturing.THE POTENTIAL IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYON THE MANUFACTURING ENTERPRISEThe Broad VisionIn a future manufacturing enterprise characterized by ubiquitous and inte-grated computing, IT will be important in every aspect of manufacturing.  Com-

puters will be everywhereÑon factory floors, in products, in offices, in whole-sale and retail outlets, in homes, and on the street.  Computers will be embedded
into products as invisibly as electric motors are today.  Familiarity with personal
computing and use of a national information infrastructure will be widespread,
and the intimidation factor that currently often prevents the consideration of IT
solutions will be greatly reduced.  Manufacturing decision makers will use IT to

make real-time determinations of, for example,Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH27¥How best to respond to customer demand (e.g., corporate officers);¥Which process flow path to follow and when (e.g., area supervisors);¥How to respond to out-of-control systems (e.g., area process engineers);¥What material requirements exist (e.g., equipment operators);¥What optimal inventory levels to maintain (e.g., corporate managers andfactory managers);¥How production activities are performing (e.g., factory managers); and¥What the project and unit cost will be (e.g., corporate managers andfactory managers).In addition, the IT supporting diverse queries will be seamlessly integrated,so that information needed from one part of the enterprise by another part will be
transported with minimal difficulty.  For example, in the manufacturing enter-

prise envisioned by the committee, plans for new processes or products will be
transferred electronically from development into production, significantly reduc-
ing the interval between the design and realization of a process or product.  Simu-

lation models at various levels of detail (from floor operations to strategic plan-
ning) will couple to each other, so that results of one simulation model can serve
as input to another.If this vision of IT-enabled manufacturing comes to pass, future manufactur-ing operations will realize many further and significant improvements in:¥Time to market, through the analysis and use of appropriate Òwhat ifÓscenarios;¥Factory layout, through the use of virtual factory models;¥Capacity and asset utilization, through the use of intelligent schedulersand rapidly reconfigurable factories;¥Yield, through the use of adaptive process control;¥Times for product and process transfer, through the direct transfer ofdesign information to the production process;¥Matching product features and capabilities to customer needs, throughincreased customization and feasibility of economic small-lot production;¥Hands-on training, through the use of realistic models;¥Equipment performance, through use of expert systems and artificial in-telligence technology; and¥Reduction in inventory and working capital, through better schedulingand forecasting algorithms.Improvements in the areas above through the use of IT would represent afundamental paradigm shift from todayÕs manufacturing enterprise, one that mayalready be under way (as suggested by Appendix B).  The following sections

elaborate the committeeÕs vision of how various dimensions of manufacturing(product design, process design, production, and business processes) may beInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGtransformed by information technology; a further discussion of these dimensionsthemselves is found in Chapter 2.Nearer-Term Prospects for ImprovementProduct and Process DesignProduct design has expanded in scope in recent years.  It has been tradition-
ally understood as the collection of geometrical, material, and system specifica-
tions that achieve functional performance as a finished product that meets cus-
tomer perceptions of need; today it also includes attention to manufacturability,
usability, and environmental concerns.  Thus, a designer may well choose a

product design with inferior performance characteristics in certain noncritical
aspects that is much simpler to produce than the alternative.  To a much greater

extent than is true today, 21st-century design will address product design aspects
that are not often associated with traditional design at all, such as designing so
that servicing a product will be easy and error-free or so that a robust final
product can be made from parts obtained from many different sources.  Different

dimensions of product design will thus need to be integrated to an unprecedented
degree.IT will continue to help to improve the quality of designs and reduce the costand time needed to produce them.  In particular, the 21st-century design environ-

ment envisioned by the committee would allow product designers to create a
ÒvirtualÓ product and make extensive computer simulations of its behavior with-out supplying all of its details, and then ÒshowÓ it to the customer for rapid
feedback.  The ability to undertake rapid electronic prototyping of designs would

increase the ease of revising them, resulting in fewer design compromises and
lower costs for making those changes.  Product data would be represented in a

uniform manner and would include information on all variants.  Simulations

would also enable the exploration of all of a productÕs behavior modes, includingnominal behavior and major off-nominal variant behaviors that might affect per-
formance, product quality, environmental quality, manufacturability, or user
safety.  The product design environment would provide computer assistance that
would build on existing design knowledge and even existing designs but that
would also be flexible enough to accommodate design innovation.The designer would be able to specify a product in terms of function andperformance rather than in terms associated directly with the production process
(e.g., shape, tolerances, electrical inputs).  For example, the designer of a motor

would be able to use function-relevant parameters, such as the load capacity and
life of a bearing or the allowed vibration frequencies and minimum fatigue resis-
tance of a shaft.  In addition, he or she would be able to express the desired

functions of the product in a translatable and analyzable format that would permitInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH29decomposing a given design into functions and subfunctions and mapping theseinto engineering assemblies and subassemblies.Whereas todayÕs product designer builds a physical prototype or uses physi-cal construction aids in the design process, tomorrowÕs product designer willcertainly make extensive use of computer-based models.  The construction of a

physical prototype for use in testing a function or developing a tool necessarily
freezes the design at the moment of construction and often leads to a loss of
synchronization between model and product design when the design is altered
after the prototype is built.  An example of a more flexible approach to design is

provided by the Boeing 777 airliner, whose computer-based design was under-
taken by Boeing using a three-dimensional representation of a solid model.  This

application eliminated most paper documents and dramatically reduced design
errors as measured by changes and corrections required to engineering drawings.
Engineers were able to test small parts and whole sections of the fuselage to
determine, long before these components were built, whether they would fit
together properly on the factory floor.  The capability for testing clearances

between subassemblies to ensure human access was especially useful.  Once

conceptualized, changes to the virtual 777 could be realized immediately and
communicated to all individuals interacting with the model, including distant
contractors responsible for building components and subassemblies.Another advantage is that these computer-based models often can enabledifferent aspects of a product to be developed simultaneously.  In the design of

programmable electronic systems, for example, a linked product-and-process
design environment would allow the supporting software to be tested on hard-
ware simulators before the completion of hardware development.  Since software

development is often at least as time-intensive as hardware development, the use
of simulators could cut overall development time by as much as a factor of two.Extensive computational support would enable designers of manufacturingprocesses to explore, trace, and compare the production cost, quality, perfor-
mance, safety, maintenance, and environmental implications of design decisions.
The process designer would be able to specify a manufacturing process unam-
biguously and in ways that would yield information about, for example, its effi-
ciency in advance of its actual deployment.  Information technology would en-

able the process designer to identify the right manufacturing, assembly, and test
processes for creating and verifying the elements of a product and matching them
to specifications for functional behavior.  He or she would also be able to develop

models that could predict the expected results of variations implemented during
design of a process.  Such activities, which might be undertaken concurrently,

could result in fewer errors, fewer repairs, shorter times to market, and lower
cost.  For example, flows of material through a production facility might be

improved by evaluating various factory equipment layout conceptsÑto reducethe distance a product must travel before its completion or the number of hand-
offs between process steps, or to allow people to perform more efficientlyÑor byInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGevaluating different material-handling modes (e.g., whether or not to dedicate anautomated guided vehicle to a particular process).In computationally supported manufacturing, process design models wouldcouple to production line implementations of those simulations.  For example,

code to control tools on the shop floor (e.g., numerically controlled machines,
robots, and transfer systems) would be generated through simulations.  If a

productÕs specifications changed, the process model would be refined by theprocess designer, and such refinements would be reflected in the production line.
When necessary, process designers would be able to modify manufacturing pro-
cesses adaptively, taking advantage of the knowledge available at every step in a
factoryÕs entire manufacturing process in order to improve yield at a subsequentor preceding step.  For example, detailed real-time knowledge of the status of

each piece on the shop floor (both unfinished product and equipment) might
enable managers to optimize equipment use and/or lot movement globally, rather
than locally improving each step but possibly reducing overall factory perfor-
mance.With product design and process design coupled electronically, new pro-cesses or products would go directly from electronic blueprint or simulation to
production; use of the process model as the blueprint for process transfer would
significantly reduce process or product transfer times.The common theme in all these design applications is that the manipulationof information (in the form of design simulations and the like) is likely to be
much cheaper and faster than real experimentation within an operating manufac-
turing facility.  As a result, the design space within which it is feasible to explore

alternatives is much larger, giving designers more options for how to craft a
product that will meet user needs.Shop Floor ProductionIn the 21st century, order-driven production (Box 1.4) will increase com-pared to todayÕs forecast-driven production (i.e., production volume sized inaccordance with a forecast of what the demand for the product is likely to be),
which runs a significant risk of overproduction (with the unsold products incur-
ring carrying costs charged to the producer) or underproduction (in which case
production must be ramped up at great expense on an emergency basis).  Under a

Òbuild-to-orderÓ strategy, production volume is much more closely correlated
with orders, thus reducing the risk of production that does not meet demand and
providing considerable flexibility in changing production priorities.66 Of course, when a customer needs an order filled in less time than it takes to produce a singleitem, Òbuild to orderÓ in a literal sense is not realistic.  Thus, in practice, both forecasts and orders
will influence production.  Nevertheless, a production process can be configured to increase flexibil-ity so that, for example, generic items can be produced in reasonable quantity and then customizedon demand, thus reducing the time between customer order and fulfillment.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH31Factories in the future will continue to use a variety of technologies andprocesses and varying levels of automation.  However, with the help of IT,

fabrication of unique items could be more convenient and less expensive, and
products could be manufactured economically in smaller lot sizes than is charac-
teristic today and with greater ease of production changeover (smaller setup
times).  Scheduling of people, machines, and plants would be based on all aspects

of an enterpriseÕs operations, taking into account sales and market projections aswell as work in process and capital utilization to dynamically schedule operations
for the best profit.  Scheduling would optimize overall factory performance,

rather than the performance of local area functions as it does today.In the 21st-century production environment foreseen by the committee, thenew devices and processes used would result in very little material waste, with
shaping and assembling devices, for example, extending their reach to ever
smaller spatial scales.  Increasingly, the materials used will be synthetics, com-

posites, and ceramics.  If used, robot manipulators would operate on ever-smaller

parts and assemblies.  Information would be embedded in parts and products and

read by material-handling, shaping, assembling, and processing equipment, fur-
ther automating the flow of materials and work in process.  Parts would be self-

identifying not only in the production process but also throughout the life of the
product.  Controllers of material-handling equipment would be more tightly

coupled with machine controllers and orchestrated by higher-level software in
accordance with global plant goals.  New shaping and assembly devices would be
BOX 1.4  Order-driven Production
Order-driven production is rare today, though not nonexistent.  For example,
copy shops that use photocopiers to reproduce sets of university course notes ondemand can be regarded as a kind of order-driven production shop.  With high-

speed laser printers coupled to large storage devices, printing books on demand ispossible; a few such operations exist today, and many more are expected in thefuture.An example of research in this area is found in the textile industry (often citedas a low-technology industry), which is currently undertaking research in virtualreality (VR) with the intent of recovering some of its $25 billion loss yearly due to
clothing inventory markdowns and liquidation.  Specifically, the textile industry, in
cooperation with the federal government, is supporting VR research that will en-able customers to shop for clothing in a virtual environment in which they would
see virtual clothes on virtual images of their own bodies and feel how the clotheswould fit.  When a customer made a choice based on this experience, the order
would be sent to a factory that would make these clothes on demand and then
send them to the customer.  Vendors would benefit from a reduction in the financial
losses associated with product markdown and liquidation, while the customerwould be provided with more choices and a better fit of garment to body.For more discussion of the textiles example, see NRC (1994).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGcapable of high-precision fabrication at unprecedented levels of repeatability.Tool and equipment control strategies would involve all the control techniquesÑclassical, modern, fuzzy logic, and neural network controllersÑin an integratedapproach to control.Production engineering would rely heavily on a reusable base of acquiredproduction knowledge.  Manufacturing production lines would be designed using

modular design and control components interconnected through well-defined
interfaces.  When necessary, production lines would be reconfigured to accom-

modate new generations or types of products, and certain changes to the produc-
tion process would be implemented in a very short time (perhaps minutes or
hours) as external circumstances changed.To meet the need for replacing or upgrading equipment, the production linewould accommodate the tooling and fixturing necessary for adding new parts.
Programs for controlling equipment (e.g., for numerical control) and systems
(e.g., for scheduling and execution) would be generated and modified to accom-
modate changes to product requirements, changes in the production process, and
changes in management objectives (e.g., little or no inventory, rush orders).The components that make up a production line would be structured in amanner that they could be Òplugged and playedÓ together in a modular fashion.
ÒPlug and playÓ would characterize the physical connections for machines (power
and communication), the functional connections for operations, and the tooling
specific to products being produced.  Equipment in a production line would be

easily moved, replaced, modified (upgraded), and enhanced (adding machines),
improving system flexibility and responsiveness.  Functional control modules

such as scheduling procedures and planning procedures would plug directly into
the factory control system directing the operation of shop floor equipment.  Simi-

larly, the modules affecting a product (e.g., tools, fixtures, masks) would be
extendable to accommodate new products.  Changes to a production plan would

be possible with minimal interruption.The 21st-century computationally supported production line would be robustin the face of an uncertain mechanical environment.  Detailed information on

factory and equipment status, based on data from sensors and controllers located
on the shop floor, would be visible to managers and shop floor personnel alike.
Real-time control would enable dynamic rerouting and reconfiguration of work
flows to bypass problem areas in the production facility with minimal disruption;
in worst-case situations, a production facility would exhibit graceful rather than
catastrophic degradation.  The ability of automated shop floor tools to undertake
self-diagnosis and self-correction of routine problems would improve reliability
and reduce the need for people to tend such tools.  The extensive simulation

capabilities of detailed factory models would enable companies to design facili-
ties that incurred minimal operational difficulties and to train new employees in
the use, maintenance, and repair of complex equipment without risking the cessa-
tion of factory operations.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH33Finally, the time needed to fabricate and deliver products would be signifi-cantly improved.  Customized products would be delivered to consumers much

more rapidly than today because of reductions in the time needed to make and
assemble the various components of the product and in the time spent in waiting
for processing by various components.7Business PracticesInformation technology could enable a high degree of integration betweenfuture manufacturing enterprises and their customers and suppliers.  Working

closely with a manufacturer via tie-ins to the manufacturerÕs information sys-tems, for example, suppliers would know when to deliver supplies and would
have blanket authority to deliver them as necessary.  A precedent exists in certain

car manufacturing operations today:  suppliers query the manufacturerÕs produc-tion intentions and deliver their goods to the manufacturerÕs assembly plant inline sequence order, that is, in the order that they will be used.  Information about

needed supplies is thus passed automatically, without the manufacturer having to
place an order explicitly.  Suppliers may even be paid only when the final product

is shipped, rather than when the parts are delivered, thus providing further incen-
tive for just-in-time delivery.  This practice, known as 
Òpay on production,Ó is
increasingly common in the auto industry, because it lowers supply chain carry-
ing costs that have created an artificial focus on inventory and it increases team
play and product quality.In computerized manufacturing, a supplierÕs own fabrication processes wouldeasily accommodate changes required by the manufacturer.  A customer
Õs highlycustomized order for even a very complicated and sophisticated part (for which
there may be many alternative choices) could be entered directly by the customer
into a manufacturerÕs system:  the order would be scheduled, and the customer
would receive immediate acknowledgment and a product delivery date.8  A re-
quest for material replenishment could go directly and electronically from a
manufacturerÕs factory floor to the supplierÕs system.  With protections against
7 A good example is the manufacture of automobiles.  The final assembly of a car takes a couple of
days.  Building the various components takes several days to a week.  But the time from order to

delivery for most American cars is usually at least several weeks.  However, certain Japanese auto
manufacturers now use sales forecasting techniques so sophisticated that most vehicles produced in agiven production batch have a buyer by the time they come off the assembly line.  In addition, the

mix of options (a major variable in both throughput and production time) is roughly standardized tohelp match production batches with customer orders and is kept relatively small to simplify assem-bly.  The result is that the time from order to delivery has been reduced to well under a week for these

firms.8 Some manufacturers have begun to implement or plan such systems, although with lesscustomization of product than that envisioned in this report.  See, for example, the discussion of

MotorolaÕs fusion program for producing pagers in Trobel and Johnson (1993).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGfraud and theft in place, the supplier would deliver the material directly to thefactory floor, where receiving activities are performed.  In short, the entire enter-

prise would be integrated all along the supply chain, from design shops to truck
fleets that deliver the finished products.Hints of this vision of integrated enterprises are available today, as busi-nesses transfer information among related business organizations through elec-
tronic design interchange protocols.  Some design information can be shared

through common CAD systems or through information expressed through the
International Graphics Exchange Standard.  Suppliers to some manufacturers

have been required to send progress reports of supplies in shipment and transit
electronically for many years.  A variety of industry-specific standards for trans-
ferring data electronically have been promulgated in the last 20 years.  An ad-

vanced national information infrastructure such as that proposed by the Clinton
administration would provide a widely accessible vehicle for linking manufactur-
ers, suppliers, and customers to achieve the kind of integration and information
sharing envisioned.Factory decision makersÕ use of modeling would enable them to inquire
about orders, market information, production status, product design, human re-
sources, and financial information from a single unified source.  Advanced mod-

eling and analysis tools would make possible the collection and definition of data,
processes, and associated knowledge at the depth and breadth necessary to sup-
port the simulation of business processes; models would take into account the
form, meaning, and content of relevant data elements and processes.  Dynamic

simulations of an entire business would be possible, enabling decision makers to
evaluate a wide range of Òwhat-ifÓ scenarios for the purpose of strategic and
tactical planning.  These simulations would operate much more rapidly than real
time (simulating several months of factory operations in a few minutes), and so
designers would be able to test a large number of alternatives for improving
factory performance.New Manufacturing StylesIf the nearer-term research challenges posed in this report are met fully andsuccessfully and the anticipated nearer-term advances implemented so as to en-
able the capabilities outlined here, the committee believes that the result will be
substantial improvement for manufacturing in cost, quality, asset utilization, pro-
ductivity, environmental control, and time-to-market performance metrics.
Implementation of these capabilities would also have profound implications for
the workplace that would have to be addressed in a socially responsible manner.
The longer-term concepts of a virtual factory and a programmable or recon-
figurable factory as outlined below would embody IT to such an extent that the
very character of manufacturing would be fundamentally altered.  As presented,
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH35they pose targets and goals for research, whether or not they represent what futurefactories will actually be like.The Virtual FactoryWhen a single factory may cost over a billion dollars (as is the case in thesemiconductor industry), it is evident that manufacturing decision makers need
tools that support good decision making about their design, deployment, and
operation.  However, in the case of manufacturing models, there is usually no

testbed but the factory itself; development of models of manufacturing operations
is very likely to disrupt factory operations while the models are being developed
and tested.  Today, decision makers have found that the use of good computer

models of manufacturing facilities can provide valuable information that might
otherwise have required time-consuming and expensive physical experimenta-
tion.  More sophisticated versions of these simulations
Ñwhat might be calledvirtual factoriesÑcall for a distributed, integrated, computer-based compositemodel of a total manufacturing environment, incorporating all the tasks and
resources necessary to accomplish the operation of designing, producing, and
delivering a product.With virtual factories capable of accurately simulating factory operationsover time scales of months, managers would be able to explore many potential
production configurations and schedules or different control and organizational
schemes at significant savings of cost and time in order to determine how best to
improve performance.9  Since a factory model running in simulation mode would
run thousands of times faster than real factory operations and would likely cost
much less as well, managers would have a rapid, nondisruptive methodology for
testing various manufacturing strategies.  Improvements suggested by real opera-

tions could be tested without risk in the simulation.  Simulations could also assist

in training tool operators and floor managers, who would be able to use factory
models in simulation mode much as pilots use simulators to gain experience in
flying real airplanes, especially under stressful or unusual conditions.Computer-based factory models might also be coupled to real factories inwhat could be called ÒcontrolÓ mode.  In control mode, the factory model would
actually control and run the operation of the real factory through manipulation of
the objects in the virtual factory.  Operating procedures and scheduling protocols

would be validated in the virtual factory and then applied in or transferred to the9 Factory operation model development and testing are very different from process model develop-ment and testing in the sense that the disruption of an entire factory can be catastrophic for a firmÕsproductivity.  It would of course be possible to build a new factory that would carry the burden of
experimentation.  But factories are capital-intensive, and few companies are in a position to risk
large amounts of money on time-consuming, expensive, or risky experimentation.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGreal production facility.  Control mode would enable the direct electronic transfer
of modularized capabilities from computer simulation to production line.Coupled to appropriate computer-based reasoning and decision-support tools,a virtual factory operating in control mode would be capable of a significant
amount of self-diagnosis.  Driven by data from the real factory, the virtual factory

would be able to analyze the performance of the entire factory continuously to
determine the potential for optimizing operations to reduce costs, reduce produc-
tion time, improve quality, or reuse materials.10  For example, the virtual factorywould be able to use the data collected by a factory monitoring system, analyze
potential and actual failures, and identify the cause of a problem.  Such a system
assumes the availability of a knowledge base for every piece of equipment in the
factory that, given certain monitored data, can be used in conjunction with a
diagnostic system and reasoning and decision-support tools to identify the source
of a problem.Whether information is derived from a model run in simulation mode orcontrol mode, results from good models can be examined from various user
perspectives, including those of factory managers, product planners, and process
equipment operators, in order to provide solutions to various types of problems
that manufacturing personnel with different job tasks might encounter.  Modeling

and simulation are likely to become a basic tool used at all levels within the
manufacturing environment, from senior management to equipment operator.The Programmable or Reconfigurable FactoryA programmable or reconfigurable factory is one in which most or all of theinformation necessary for producing a product is embodied in a knowledge base
and the associated programs, such that the factory can take in the information and
produce the product with minimal human intervention.  In such a factory, capital

would substitute for labor both on the shop floor (with robots or other automated
equipment undertaking many assembly and fabrication processes) and in real-
time factory management (with computer-based decision-making functions oper-
ating on intellectual rather than physical inputs).  Such a factory would be ca-

pable of a significant degree of Òlights-outÓ operation, that is, operation with
limited human involvement.  Programmable or reconfigurable factories would

also enhance managerial capability to cope with accidents and malfunctions on
the work floor as work flow could be rerouted to bypass problem areas.10 Simple versions of self-improving factories have been demonstrated in semiconductor andchemical plants, where neural networks and/or adaptive control have been used to monitor and adjust
parameters to optimize operations.  Although such plants differ in nature and character from those
for assembling discrete products such as automobiles or airplanes, it may be possible to developanalogous improvements.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH37Programmable factories expand the concept of the flexible manufacturingsystem, which is intended to be a set of machines and controllers that work
cooperatively to manufacture similar parts in a product family in relatively small
lot sizes but at unit costs and with qualities characteristic of mass production.  But

thus far, most such economically successful systems have produced parts with
rather small variations in style and have exhibited limited software, little sensor
feedback, and, still, relatively large lot sizes.It is clear that a programmable factory would require software capable ofoperating on the entire range of product and process information.  It would also

require generic materials that could be used for different products made in the
factory, generic tools and fixtures, programmable machine tools, and generic
sensors.  While not everything could be fabricated from generic materials, it

might be possible to substantially reduce the number of different types of materi-
als and tools needed to produce a diversity of parts.  For example, it has been

estimated that in a particular factory, 2,000 tools that were being used could be
reduced to fewer than 50.  In another case, 500 different types of steel could be

replaced by 50 different types of steel.  In a third case, 10 different types of 8-bit
microprocessors could be replaced by a single 16-bit microprocessor.  If more

generic materials and tools could be used in production, high-volume purchases
of these items could drive down costs.In a programmable or reconfigurable factory, different products would beproduced by changing software.  Different software instructions would direct tool

and machine controllers to perform different operations and to deliver different
items to different work cells in different sequences.  Although a single factory

almost certainly could not produce computers and cars on different days, a highly
programmable factory, in conjunction with new and more flexible fabrication
processes, could produce cars in one week and trucks in the next week; the
Toyota Motor Company does this in Taiwan today.  Even without new fabrica-

tion processes, a highly programmable factory might be able to produce comput-
ers one day and defense electronics the next.  Such a factory would depend on

production facilities configured in such a way that a new production operation
could be set up relatively rapidly.  The ultimate goal is a paradigm known as 
Òsellone, make one,Ó as it is known in Japan.
In certain restricted domains, low-lead-time ÒreprogrammingÓ of a factory to
produce different products is possible today.  The manufacturing facilities for

books, very large scale integrated chips, and petroleum products produce many
different products (different book titles, different chips, different types of fuel
and lubrication) simply on the basis of a software change.  Of course, the term

ÒsoftwareÓ in this context refers to the particular text or masks that differentiate
one book or chip from another, but the principle is the sameÑonly intellectualinputs or changes are necessary to produce a different product, while the physical
facilities of production remain much the same.  But for other products, changeover

times remain significant.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGA programmable factory is also necessary for the economic manufacture ofhighly customized products.  An example from today is the 
Òon-demandÓ produc-
tion of soft-cover textbooks in which chapters can be selected by a teacher based
on his or her individual teaching needs.  With increased product customization,

customers would be able to obtain catalog items with the features, characteristics,
and aesthetics they desired, at prices they could afford (probably comparable to
the prices for mass-produced goods).  The material and manufacturing cost per

unit of producing a product likely would not be significantly different for a
production run of 100 units or of 100,000 units in a single batch.  Smaller lot sizes

would also have major benefits with respect to quality control.  When defects in

a production process are caught early (as is the case when small lot sizes are
produced), the amount of rework is minimized and fixes to the production pro-
cess can be implemented more rapidly.Note that high degrees of customization create additional stresses on sched-uling.  Since customization requires only small quantities of specialized materi-

als, Òjust-in-timeÓ scheduling either works properly or fails by idling the produc-
tion machinery; the option of building inventory as a hedge against missed
delivery times simply does not exist, since maintaining excess inventory is then a
matter of purchasing unnecessary components rather than purchasing compo-
nents that will ultimately be used.The Networked FactoryIn concept, a networked factory is one in which suppliers (both internal andexternal) and customers are connected electronically to a manufacturer (e.g., on
the National Information Infrastructure).  Manufacturers have been tied to suppli-

ers and customers by telephone, mail, telex, and fax for years; the primary advan-
tage of electronically networked connections would be the speed with which
information could be exchanged and processed, sometimes automatically by in-
telligent agents that could respond to certain routine requests.An electronically networked factory (hereafter a networked factory) woulddemonstrate significantly reduced transaction times as information technology
reduced the delays of paper-based information transfer; information technology
would facilitate instantaneous acknowledgment, scheduling of deliveries, and
guaranteed service times.  Many of the factors contributing to delays in the design

and production processes would be significantly reduced within a networked
factory.  Reducing delay would contribute to reducing the time to market for new

or improved products.  A particularly important improvement would be a reduc-

tion of the time it takes a production facility to initiate the first step needed to
respond to an order, since it is this time that often dominates the overall time
required to fill an order.Enabled through the National Information Infrastructure, networked facto-ries would increase the options available to product and process designers.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH39TodayÕs designers are strongly constrained by the process capabilities of manu-facturersÑproduct designers do not design products that their factories cannotmake, and process designers do not create processes that their factories cannot
implement.  Indeed, even approaches to design regarded today as sophisticated

(e.g., design for manufacturability, design for assembly) are necessarily limited
by preexisting production processes and facilities.  When a single firm owns the

means of production, such approaches make sense.  But if constraints on owner-

ship are relaxed (and process elements consequently can be linked on a regional,
national, or even international basis), designers can be freed to focus primarily on
the expressed needs of the customer without worrying about how best to use a
single plant for which many costs have already been incurred.  Designers using a

networked factory would be able to ÒoutsourceÓ various production processes
more easily and to coordinate their operation.Of all the different modern concepts in manufacturing, the idea of a net-worked enterprise including a networked factory is perhaps the most widely
accepted and adopted; in some circles, the term Òagile manufacturingÓ is also
used.  Further, the evolving National Information Infrastructure is expected to

facilitate networking of all sorts.  Chapter 6 discusses this connection in greater

detail.MicrofactoriesA microfactory is a production facility whose output capacity can be scaledup by the replication of identical facilities.  Since microfactories would not de-

pend on economies of scale for economic viability, they would draw strongly on
the technologies of programmable or reconfigurable factories as they attempted
to produce small-scale output at unit costs comparable to or only slightly higher
than those for mass-produced items.  If microfactories prove to be feasible, a

single, large, centralized manufacturing facility could be replaced by a large
number of replicated, modular microfactories that could be geographically dis-
tributed and located close to customers.For producing quantities of identical items, traditional factories orientedtoward mass production will probably remain superior to microfactories, because
anything that could be done to improve the production process in a microfactory
could also be done in a traditional factory.  On the other hand, today
Õs mass-production factories are capital-intensive construction projects that are them-
selves custom-built.  If a microfactory could itself be mass produced in quantities

large enough to reduce the cost of an individual microfactory, it might be possible
to amortize the cost of designing the microfactory over many such (identical)
facilities.  Even today, some steel micromills have drastically reduced the capital

cost of steel production.  In addition, microfactories might incur lower product

transportation costs (as the result of placing microfactories near customers), lowerInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGinventory costs (as the result of production on demand), or lower labor costs (asthe result of using locally available labor).Irrespective of cost issues, however, microfactories might well provide ad-vantages in other situations.  For example, microfactories might provide a way

for firms to insert local content into manufactured products, perhaps through
local final assemblyÑa capability that could be desirable for political purposes(e.g., as a dimension of international trade relationships).  A second example of a

microfactory could be a mobile fabrication facility (e.g., a microfactory located
on a large naval ship that produces replacement parts for the battle group with
which it sails); in such a scenario, economic concerns might be secondary to the
capability for a rapid response.  A third example is that microfactories of a sort do

exist today, although they make business sense for reasons other than lower unit
production costs.  Microbreweries for beer and street-corner copy shops are two

examples of microfactories in which production costs are higher than those of
larger facilities; nevertheless, such microfactories fill niches because they pro-
vide higher quality or greater convenience.  The primary challenge remaining for

microfactories is one of economics.GETTING FROM HERE TO THEREÑTHE NEED FOR BALANCE AND A CONSIDERED APPROACHThe various new manufacturing capabilities described above are tantalizingand appeal to many current notions of the progress possible in manufacturing.
But for this vision to be realized, it will be necessary first to balance the respon-
sibilities of factory managers and manufacturing decision makers to turn out
quality products at low cost in a timely manner today against the desirability of
planning to secure the potentially large improvements offered by judicious and
innovative use of current and future information technology.Even if these tensions are resolved, however, the full implications of suc-cessfully implementing IT are not known, and neither the committee nor the
manufacturing community at large has thought through the many possible ef-
fects.  To illustrate, success in some of the areas discussed above raises the

following questions:¥If products are available on a fully customized basis, what happens toservice, repair, and maintenance?  Technicians may be faced with an extraordi-

nary learning task if they are to be competent at repairing thousands of custom-
ized variations, although such a task might be mitigated by electronic information
carried aboard the product itself.  In locations far removed from production

facilities, cannibalization of one unit to obtain spare parts for another is a time-
honored maintenance practice that may no longer be feasible.  Even today, docu-

mentation of new products for maintenance and repair technicians is an enormous
problemÑhow will documentation be provided for an even larger number ofInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH41products?  Will information technology provide solutions to this problem, or will
new approaches to product design reduce the need for voluminous documenta-
tion?¥What are the limits (if any) to desires for novelty and customization?Customers may not all want entirely customized products.  Consider, for ex-

ample, automobiles whose control systems (e.g., steering wheels, clutches) are
entirely different; such differences might even prove detrimental to public safety.
Cost pressures may limit the variety that consumers are willing to purchase.
Customers may also resist products that demand that they learn new habits and
operating procedures.  Finally, customers may not even know what they want

with the precision needed to specify a customized product.¥If automation replaces multitudes of manufacturing workers, what be-comes of the displaced workers?  Will they become managers?  Technicians?

Who will retrain them?  For what will they be retrained?  How will manufactur-

ing workers in the new regime respond to being directed by automated overseers?¥If manufacturing operations are dispersed geographically, what becomesof team and corporate loyalties that are often the result of physical proximity and
informal day-to-day social contact through work?  What will happen to geo-

graphically based brand-name and corporate loyalties?¥What degree of information automation is ÒrightÓ?  In the case of physical
automation, trying to automate many factories entirely proved to be a poor choice;
improvements in productivity were obtained at the expense of flexibility, and it
turned out that flexibility was a much more important characteristic.  This may

also be so in information management; what degree of automated decision mak-
ing is appropriate?  This is a very subjective decision, differing for different

industries.¥How will research results, such as new fabrication processes, be con-verted into economical and reliable factory equipment?  The same question ap-

plies to the conversion of new design algorithms into easy-to-learn CAD soft-
ware.  The industries that supply these vital infrastructure elements are short of

technical expertise, financially weak, and subject to huge fluctuations in demand.¥How will the sophisticated ideas outlined in the committeeÕs vision offuture manufacturing be transferred to small businesses and lower-tier suppliers?
Large businesses depend crucially on the lower tiers, but many businesses in
these lower tiers may not be able to compete successfully without new technolo-
gies or assistance in adopting these technologies.These questions, and many others, are largely outside the scope of this report.But their identification, articulation, and eventual resolution are an integral part
of moving toward a vision of IT-enhanced 21st-century manufacturing.Whatever oneÕs view, it is clear that a number of major technological andsociological barriers must be overcome before ITÕs potential to revolutionizemanufacturing can be widely accepted and achieved.  More rapid progress in
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGovercoming these barriers will increase the likelihood of earlier acceptance andachievement.  The nature of these challenges and the research needed to over-

come them are the subjects of the next several chapters.THE RESEARCH AGENDATechnology ResearchIn formulating a research agenda, the committee was faced with the realiza-tion that manufacturing is fundamentally a complex activity, with many interac-
tions among its various components.  In the committee
Õs view, this realizationreflects the nature of manufacturing as Òan indivisible, monolithic activity, in-credibly diverse and complex in its fine detail . . . [whose] many parts are inextri-
cably interdependent and interconnected, so that no part may be safely separated
from the rest and treated in isolation, without an adverse impact on the remainder
and thus on the wholeÓ (Harrington, 1984).  Thus, it is fruitless to seek the
identification of specific Òsilver bulletsÓ upon which all other progress in the field
depends.  That said, however, the committee has identified several general themes

for technology research that would advance the capabilities of information tech-
nology to serve manufacturing needs; these themes include product and process
design, shop floor control, modeling and simulation (Òvirtual factoryÓ) technol-ogy, and enterprise integration as it affects factory operations and business prac-
tices.The sections below summarize a research agenda that is discussed in detail inChapters 3 through 6.  The largest part of the research recommended in this report

is aimed at developing various IT-based tools to support advanced manufactur-
ing.Product and Process DesignProduct design and process design depend heavily on human judgment.Research is needed both to develop information tools that can help human de-
signers make good decisions in their design work and to increase understanding
of the design process itself.  Enabling the creation of better tools and facilitating

the design process could, for example, make it easier to generate a requirements
specification that meets customer needs or to design a product or a process ÒfromscratchÓ and/or through the reuse of existing and validated designs.  Although
better tools and techniques are needed in all fields, product and process design for
mechanical components and assemblies is especially important.The committee believes that a research agenda for product design (especiallyfor the design of mechanical products) should build to the extent possible on the
lessons learned in the design of electronic products such as integrated circuit
chips.  For example, the design of electronics today is based on having, at each
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH43stage in the design process, design abstractions that contain only the detail rel-evant to that stage.  Using these abstractions, the product designer can postpone

decisions about details and focus on higher-order questions about function, leav-
ing the detail to the subsequent stages in which lower-level issues can be re-
solved.  Designers of electronic products also have an extensive set of predefined

and prevalidated ÒpartsÓ that can be used as building blocks in product design;
altering the parameters of these predefined parts allows some customizing of the
product being designed.  Such capabilities also need to be made available to

designers of mechanical products.Although mechanical products differ qualitatively from electronic products(e.g., mechanical products are three-dimensional, and interactions among their
components are more analytically intractable), making their mechanical design as
easy as the design of electronic products today is a reasonable asymptotic goal to
work toward.  In addition, tools are needed that will enable the identification of

trade-offs between cost and dimensions of performance such as reliability, power
consumption, and speed; between cost and design choices; between alternate
space allocations; or in functional decomposition, subassembly definition, three-
dimensional geometric reasoning, and make-or-buy decisions.In the domain of process design, tools for describing processes are criticalfor the design of individual products, the design and operation of factories, and
the development of modeling and simulation technology.  Formal descriptions

are necessary if processes are to be represented in sufficient detail and with
enough specificity to be adequately complete and unambiguous; such formalisms
would allow designers to describe factory processes (involving both machines
and people), design activities, and decision processes, among others.  Languages

for describing processes must facilitate checking for correctness and complete-
ness and must be able to express variant as well as nominal process behavior.New tools for describing and representing processes could also be used toenhance product design, so that by simulation and emulation the best process
could be matched to the product design (and vice versa) for maximum economic
advantage (or to satisfy whatever criteriaÑsuch as quality or time to deliveryÑare important for the particular case).  Used in this way, simulation and emulation

could facilitate Òdesign for manufacturabilityÓ and 
Òdesign for assembly,Ó which
should also encompass design for rapid testing and diagnosis, fast maintenance
and repair, quality control, and material handling, as well as design for modeling
more efficient factory processes and operations.Shop Floor ControlBy automating processes, extending the uses of sensors, and improvingscheduling, information technology can play a vital role in improving the flow of
material and the routine control functions of machine tools, robots, automated
guided vehicles, and many other basic machines on the factory floor.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGResearch is needed to advance the level of process automation, includinggreater ease of interconnection of factory equipment and more automated re-
sponses to problems.  The current thrust today in systems development is toward

open systems that allow equipment from different manufacturers to be Òmixedand matchedÓ as needed.  Achievement of an open equipment controller architec-
ture that would enable all factory and shop floor components to share the same
programming environment, communication facilities, and other computer re-
sources would contribute to the interconnection of factory equipment (as well as
to enterprise integration).  Advanced manufacturing languages that would be

more flexible than existing languages for programming unit processes (such as
APT and Compac for machining) would support the operation of accessory de-
vices in conjunction with a particular process and be more closely coupled to
product data generated by CAD/CAM systems (to facilitate direct transfer of
products from blueprint to production).Research is needed on advanced sensor systems as well.  Sensors provide
real-time feedback about the operation of a process during manufacturing (e.g.,
unpredicted part-tool interactions).  Historically, sensors have served only as

production monitors.  Increasingly, they are becoming active components of

production systems, integral to either a process or a finished product.  Standard-

ized sensor architectures must be developed so that sensors and actuators can be
plugged into a common control system with only minor, automatic reconfigura-
tion.  Sensors connected through such architectures would be linked directly into

databases for dynamic updates usable by machine controllers.  Standardized

sensor architectures will require a uniform method of characterizing sensors and
actuators suitable for automation, applicable to a wide range of devices.  Data

fusion techniques for correlating inputs from multiple sensors would help over-
come the difficulties of sensing in a relatively ÒdirtyÓ environment.  Intelligent
sensors would be able to process shop floor data to higher levels of abstraction to
determine their significance to manufacturing decisions.Effective real-time, dynamic scheduling of factory operations on the shopfloor remains a major problem but has great potential for improving factory
performance.  Dynamic scheduling is desirable because management priorities

for production must be balanced moment to moment against circumstances pre-
vailing in a plant and in the manufacturerÕs supply chain (e.g., sudden changes inconditions generated by drifts in machine capability, material shortages, un-
planned equipment downtime, delays in arrival of necessary components).  Dy-

namic scheduling would determine what should be done next by any particular
piece of equipment at any particular moment based on current conditions through-
out the factory.  Research is needed to develop real-time scheduling tools that

would provide capabilities for integrating scheduling and control reactively (e.g.,
tools that would make use of adaptive scheduling techniques based on the sever-
ity of the contingency at hand and the time available to adjust the schedule and/orInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH45scheduling techniques that could exploit windows of opportunity occurring fortu-itously).Also needed are information tools and techniques to ensure graceful degra-dation of plant operations in the event of local problems.  Factory managers and

operations teams will require effective means to support overall situation assess-
ment, both within a factory (e.g., knowing when certain machines are inoperable,
knowing the location of various parts) and outside it (e.g., knowing that a deliv-
ery will be delayed).  They will also require tools that integrate multiple dimen-

sions in which managers must make decisions, including decisions about product
release, reordering, sequencing and batching, safety stock and safety lead-time,
use of overtime, and order promising.Autonomous agent-based architectures are a potential alternative to top-downscheduling.  Autonomous agents (implemented as software objects or collections

of objects, perhaps represented by physical robotic agents) could be attractive for
manufacturing applications in the areas of planning, monitoring, and control.
Important research problems connected with agent-based architectures include
the level of autonomy that agents in various locations should have and how
collections of agents would maintain stability when given potentially contradic-
tory goals.  The deployment of agents might well be risky until these issues are

addressed in detail.Modeling and SimulationTo realize a virtual factory that can faithfully reflect the operation of a realone in all relevant dimensions, it will be necessary to represent real manufactur-
ing operations at different levels of abstraction.  All objects in a real factory,

whether they are pieces of equipment, product lots, human resources, process
descriptions, data and information packets, or facilities, must have direct counter-
parts in the virtual factory; indeed, the actual production facility in which raw
materials are transformed into physical products is itself one level of abstraction
in a comprehensive virtual factory model.  The boundaries of the virtual model

must be flexible, capable of incorporating activities outside the factory or focus-
ing only on entities within the factory structure as necessary for analytical pur-
poses.Central to simulation technology is research on modeling frameworks thatcan link the wide variety of models representing activities from all parts of
manufacturing, from design through orders to multicountry manufacturing and
distribution to customer delivery; a large number of models will be needed to
simulate realistically even a modest factory.  The models will be distributed in

time and space; research will be required to understand how to link these essential
pieces in a timely manner.  Work is needed not only on general modeling tech-

niques but also on fast methods of tailoring a specific model to local conditions.
Hierarchical simulation models built from well-tested fundamental equipmentInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGblocks will be critical to the success of factory modeling.  Similarly, procedures
are needed that allow for the parallel processing of these hierarchical models so
that very rapid (faster than real-time) simulation times can be achieved.A second dimension of simulation technology is how to account for thestochastic nature of events on the factory floor.  Given the multitude of unex-

pected events that can affect factory operations (e.g., tool breakdown, late supply
shipments, personnel absences) as well as decisions influencing operations (e.g.,
which machine is to be changed, what personnel are to be used), no single
simulation run will be definitive.  Rather, tools are needed that can test a given

configuration or plan in thousands of probabilistically determined runs.A complete simulation that could be used for everything from analysis tocontrol for even a modest factory is out of reach today.  However, a first step

would be the comprehensive simulation of an individual production line.  For

such a task, appropriately detailed models of individual tools are needed that can
then be combined to provide overall realism.  Equipment-level simulation models

have been developed and used to analyze equipment-level characteristics, but the
simulation of a production line would test the ability of such models to act in
concert.Validation of simulation models will be essential.  Since a simulation is good
only to the extent that it provides an accurate representation of reality, justified
and well-grounded confidence in the model is critical for use and implementa-
tion.  Simulation models can always be tweaked and otherwise forced to fit

empirical data, but the purpose of simulation is to learn something reliable about
a hypothetical factory operation for which no empirical data exist.  Managers and

decision makers will need high levels of assurance that a simulationÕs predictionof a new factory faithfully reflects what would actually occur, even taking into
account the random events that affect todayÕs manufacturing systems so ad-versely.  Well-validated simulations would enable the creation of a demonstra-

tion platform that could compare results of a real factory system before the
system ever operates.  Tools to automate the process of sensitivity analysis for

simulations would be particularly helpful in coping with the stochastic factory
environment.Ultimately, the modeling and simulation capabilities resulting from the re-search outlined here should be able to support configuring and constructing a real
factory for high-level performance (on multiple dimensions), as well as planning
how best to operate it once it has been constructed.  A concrete demonstration of

these capabilities would be the creation of a platform capable of comparing the
results of real factory operations with the results of simulated factory operations
using information technology applications such as those discussed in this report.For modeling and simulation to serve manufacturing needs, two broad areasof research stand out for special attention:  the development of information tech-
nology to handle simulation models in a useful and timely manner, and capture of
the manufacturing knowledge that must be reflected in the models.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VISION AND RECOMMENDED AREAS OF RESEARCH47Enterprise Integration and Business PracticesResearch is needed to extend and enhance the information infrastructuresupporting manufacturing enterprises, including both the internal infrastructure
used within a factory (perhaps a dispersed one) and the external infrastructure
that increasingly links an enterprise to its suppliers, partners, and customers.  The

use of networks by all kinds of personnel and of equipment to exchange all kinds
of data (text, numeric, graphic, and video) calls for high bandwidth; greater
dependability and security; greater support for real-time communication, moni-
toring, and control; and better interoperability (through architectures, standards,
and interfaces) for component systems and networks of different types.  Achiev-
ing ease of interconnection is essential; attaching equipment and subsystems to a
factory information system should be as easy as plugging household appliances
into outlets, at least in principle.  Beyond better network-related facilities, there is

a need for better technology for the exchange of information, information ser-
vices to support integration of applications, and standard representations, proto-
cols, libraries, and query languages.In addition, enterprise integration requires research and development relat-ing to the interconnection of applications.  Indeed, much of today
Õs manufactur-ing information technology can be characterized as islands of automation that are
unable to communicate with each other due to incompatibilities in their represen-
tation of largely similar information.  Enabling intercommunication will require

the development of appropriate ways of explicitly representing information re-
lated to products, fabrication processes, and business processes, as well as how
each element relates to itself and to other elements.  These new representation

schemes will themselves demand a deep understanding of the underlying infor-
mation, an understanding that is sorely lacking in many of the domains that relate
to manufacturing.Research is also needed on organizing principles and architectures for con-necting different network-based applications into a seamless environment.  Such
connection is necessary, for example, to link flexible manufacturing cells to the
plant scheduling function and to link the scheduling function to the enterprise
order, delivery, and financial systems.  Enterprise integration also implies a need

for research to enable the automatic interpretation of the type of transaction being
executed, the routing of the message to the right location for processing, and the
processing that must occur when the message for the transaction reaches the
correct system.  Integration of individual enterprises into the marketplace in the

information age will require security and authentication features that guarantee
the integrity of electronic transactions.Non-Technology IssuesExpanding the scope of what is achievable by information technology is onlyone dimension of realizing a 21st-century vision of manufacturing.  It is equally
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGimportant to understand how manufacturing enterprises can actually make use ofthe technology.  Even today, much useful technology remains unused.  Innova-

tors in manufacturing must ensure that human, institutional, and societal factors
are aligned in such a way that information technology can be deployed meaning-
fully.  This is a difficult but essential task, since even great technology that goes

unused is not particularly beneficial to anyone.Data, information, and decisions need to be communicated accurately acrossthe breadth and depth of manufacturing organizations.  Many mechanisms can

contribute to enhancing communication, including sabbatical programs for in-
dustrialists and academics in each otherÕs territory, teaching factories, and ad-vanced technology demonstrations that illustrate how the use of information
technology can benefit factory performance.Considerable research in social science will be necessary to facilitate thelarge-scale introduction of information technology into manufacturing.  In par-

ticular, fully exploiting new technologies generally requires new social struc-
tures.  Innovators will have to confront issues such as the division of labor

between human and computer actors, the extent and content of communications
between those actors, and how best to organize teams of human and computer
resources.Matters related to education and training will be central to 21st-centurymanufacturing.  Given an environment of increasingly rapid change, continual

upgrading of skills and intellectual tools will be necessary at all levels of the
corporate hierarchy.  ÒJust-in-time learning,Ó that is, learning things as it be-
comes necessary to know them, may assume added importance.Finally, although businesses depend increasingly on their intellectual andinformation assets, generally accepted accounting principles that businesses use
to audit their finances and operations are derived from a business philosophy in
which capital expenditures (i.e., expenditures that relate to the long-term value of
a company) are associated with buildings and pieces of equipment.  Research is

needed to develop valuation schemes that appropriately account for the contribu-
tion of knowledge and core competencies to manufacturing and enterprise values.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.492Manufacturing:Context, Content, and HistoryTHE ECONOMICS OF MANUFACTURINGThe economics of manufacturing is driven by the desire to produce salablefinished products at as low a cost as possible while still maintaining acceptable
standards of quality, functionality, and timeliness.  Figure 2.1 describes in broad

strokes the relationship between unit cost and production volume for three para-
digms of production:  manual, mass, and flexible.  Flexible production has been

the focus of recent efforts to apply information technology (IT) to manufacturing.¥Manual production.  In manual production, the cost of producing an item
is to first order independent of the production volume, since the dominant cost of
production is the workerÕs time in producing the item.¥Mass production.  In mass production, a substantial amount of capital is
invested in a production line.  However, once the facility has been built, the

incremental cost of producing an additional unit is that of materials and labor,
which is small compared to the initial cost of the facility.  When the production

facility is fully utilized, unit cost is minimized.  However, such facilities by

assumption produce a single product, require long lead times to deploy, and tie up
large amounts of capital.¥Flexible production.  Flexible production is still a goal rather than a
paradigm.  If successful, flexible production lowers both the capital and the time
required to deploy a factory for a new product.  Indeed, for certain types of

products (e.g., integrated circuit chips, books) a ÒnewÓ production facility isInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGobtained from an ÒoldÓ facility simply by making changes to the software that
controls the production processes.As Figure 2.1 suggests, manual production is superior to other types ofproduction for those cases in which a highly customized product is needed in
small volume and for which the nonmanual production of the product in a factory
would require an expensive facility.  When sufficiently large numbers of identi-

cal products are needed, mass production is generally superior.  But the flexible

production paradigm seems the most economical for intermediate quantities of
moderately customized products that are needed in a timely manner.THE NATURE OF MANUFACTURINGManufacturing can be divided into two typesÑdiscrete and continuous.  Con-
tinuous manufacturing refers to the production of substances or materials (e.g.,
the manufacture of chemical products).  In continuous manufacturing, plant op-

erations are reasonably represented by the well-understood mathematical formal-
ism of differential equations.  However, discrete manufacturing (e.g., the manu-

facturing of cars, airplanes, and other assembled products) is altogether different.
Discrete manufacturing cannot be well represented by any known formalism.Volume of production per yearUnit costFIGURE 2.1  Unit cost versus production volume per year.  Solid line, manual produc-
tion; dashed line, mass production; dotted line, flexible production.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MANUFACTURING:  CONTEXT, CONTENT, AND HISTORY
51For example, there is today no design formalism that automatically allows only acertain class of objects to be attached to another object (so that a handle but not a
fork can be attached to a cup), although work on feature-based and constraint-
based design tools is attempting to address this problem.  The result is that

predicting the operation of a discrete manufacturing plant is quite difficult and
may be tractable only through the use of simulation models.  The focus of this

report is primarily discrete manufacturing.Discrete manufacturing involves making discrete objects and is often basedon actions such as shaping and assembly.  The final product intended for the end
user may be a desktop computer, a car, or a chair.  But except in the simplest

instances, the factory does not convert raw materials (e.g., sand, iron ore, wool)
into a final product in one step.  Instead, the final product is most often fabricated

from components.1  Each component is often itself the result of an assembly of
subcomponents, and the number of steps between elemental raw materials and
final product may be large indeed.  Each component or subcomponent may be

produced in-house or obtained from another supplier.  Thus, in a sense, the 
ÒfinalproductÓ of component suppliers may well be components for an assembler of
end-user products.  Another type of final product is created through the deposi-

tion of materials, in which a product is created by the selective layer-by-layer
deposition of material on some substrate:  both books and integrated circuit chips

are created in this manner.  Deposition-based production is also often used to

create prototypes or product shells.It is helpful to abstract manufacturing into four basic elements of an ideal-ized process:  product design, process design, shop floor production, and business

practices:¥Product design normally begins with a combined effort by people who
create new technology and people who meet customers to find out what custom-
ers need or want and what technology is available or feasible to meet those needs;
this aspect of product design is often called conceptual design.  In some cases,

demand ÒpullsÓ and (less often) technology 
Òpushes.Ó  What emerges is a high-
level product model that usually contains a nontechnical statement of perfor-
mance (e.g., provide instant communication with a distant computer) together
with some quantitative goals (e.g., weigh less than 100 grams, communicate with
a computer 300 meters distant).Once a productÕs functionality is determined at this high level of abstraction,detailed design is undertaken to convert requirements into successively more
detailed designs that anticipate or include, at each stage of the design process, the1 Fabrication is used here in a somewhat loose sense to denote both the mechanical connection ofelements (assembly) or the conditioning of a component by the removal or treatment of some mate-rial, such as drilling a hole (shaping) or heat-treating (conditioning) a component.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGimplications for manufacturing methods, sales techniques, customer interactions,reliability and cost targets, field repair, safety, and environmental impact.  As the

product concept is refined, a variety of specifics may be added to the model, such
as geometric details, materials or electrical specifications, and tolerances.  Styl-

ists, designers, and engineers make sketches, layouts, system diagrams, flow
charts, and physical models as they try to define physically a specific product that
will meet the stated requirements.  Components and materials may be considered

and rejected (because, for example, they weigh too much) several times before a
promising solution is found.  Cost, performance, and reliability must be predicted

with increasing accuracy, as must potential manufacturing or use problems.Conceptual design and detailed design interact.  While it is clearly absurd toundertake detailed design before a designer has any idea of what the product is to
do, feedback from detailed design may well influence the next iteration of the
conceptual design.A key element of design is verification.  Verification activities test portions
of a product design with prototypes or computational simulations, and test key
portions of the overall fabrication process to ensure that cost, functionality, safety,
and reliability requirements are met.  Computer simulations allow the exploration

of large numbers of test cases, but only actual physical testing can account for
factors that cannot be adequately simulated; such factors range from small details
(e.g., fatigue cracks) to major omissions (e.g., fundamental design flaws).  Veri-

fication generates test results that can be used to improve product and process
performance or quality.The output from the product design activity is a model that describes theproduct with sufficient specificity and lack of ambiguity that it can be produced
with a high degree of conformance to its specifications.¥Process design refers to the determination of an appropriate sequence of
individual fabrication and assembly steps for converting raw materials and/or
parts into a finished product.  Process design is driven by a product
Õs specifica-tions and the processes available to produce the product.  Process designers must

find or create equipment and process plans (perhaps to be executed by others
outside the factory) that will make and assemble parts into working products.2Process designers must ensure that each process step can be performed economi-
cally, accurately, and at the necessary speed.  They must also ensure that the

collection of steps, when executed, will result in a smoothly running factory.  The

output of this stage of manufacturing is a set of process designs that are compat-
ible with the product design.2 The extent to which a process designer must develop a new production process for a new productdepends strongly on the nature of the product being produced.  As a rule, mechanical items require agreater amount of customized process design than do electronic items such as integrated circuitchips, for which manufacturing is mostly pattern-insensitive (see also Chapter 3, footnote 3).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MANUFACTURING:  CONTEXT, CONTENT, AND HISTORY
53¥Integrated product and process design.  Increasingly, product and process
design are linked in an integrated effort.  Although the steps above are described
as though they take place sequentially, an integrated product and process design
effort calls for them to be undertaken concurrently.  Product design and process

design interact through small feedback loops (whereby a change to a detailed
product design may be made to simplify the process of making the product) and
through large feedback loops (whereby feedback from customers may identify
product design errors or ways in which process or product design can be im-
proved).  Such feedback loops are essential for uncovering incorrect designs or

supporting data, incorrect assumptions about customers and their needs, incom-
plete specifications to suppliers, and inadequate tracking of performance in people
or machines.¥Production implements the processes specified by the process designer.
A qualified production facility ensures that these processes are capable of pro-
ducing a product in sufficient quantity and of accceptable quality in a timely
manner and within budget as often as needed.  Moreover, qualification demands

both technical assurances (e.g., that six-sigma defect rates3 will be met for final
products) and nontechnical assurances (e.g., that a supplier organization has suf-
ficient financial staying power to guarantee a supply for a certain long period of
time).  Often working with the process designer, the production engineer makes

decisions such as whether to make or buy a given part or process, what factors
qualify a supplier, and how to manage engineering changes.  In general, a produc-

tion facility must provide for the receipt and acknowledgment of orders, the
acquisition of materials, the performance of shop floor operations,4 and the gen-
eration of the information needed to support continuous improvement.A significant amount of real-time planning and scheduling is necessary tosupervise those activities taking place on the shop floor.  In addition, the produc-

tion environment itself is complex and dynamic:  machines break, resources such

as parts or people are not always available, processing capability varies, commu-
nication falters, people with unique skills get sick or leave the company, and
customer demands change.  Consequently, the production facility must adapt by

detecting changes, modifying intermediate goals, making trade-offs among con-
flicting goals, resolving constraints, and executing actions in a timely fashion.
The production function also includes planning for machine requirements and
resource capacity, systems management, and control.  Production engineers must

consider plant design, as well as identify inconsistencies and anomalies in the
work contributed by product and process designers.3 Six-sigma defect rates correspond to a defect rate below 3 in 1 million.4 Equipment on the shop floor for discrete products performs two types of action:  individual
machines or work cells fabricate or assemble partially finished parts or subassemblies, and transfersystems move the output to the next machine or cell.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURING¥Business practices are the aspects of manufacturing that go beyond the
production activities occurring on the shop floor (the Òtouch laborÓ activities) and
their real-time supervision.  Business practices include marketing, designing and
providing production facilities and equipment, managing materials and resources,
procurement, contracts administration, financial accounting, and order taking.
External suppliers must be found and their material and supply streams integrated
into manufacturing operations for equipment or product components or materials
that are not built or produced in-house.  Planners must muster the capital to

provide the necessary capacity to meet the anticipated demand for a product.
Thus, manufacturing businesses care about the cost, quality, and schedule of all
relevant processes, not just those related to what is traditionally associated with
production (e.g., shop floor scheduling, machine utilization and control, and so
on).The steps within each element are not independent.  For example, within
product design, the specification of an objectÕs geometry may be related to itsfunctionality.  Within process design, the particulars of how iron ore is converted

to steel may affect how the steel is machined or shaped later.  Within production,

the placement of a particular piece of fabrication equipment may affect the speed
with which a product flows through a facility.  Rates of equipment utilization can

be kept higher (tending to reduce costs) by a willingness to accept higher levels of
inventory (tending to increase costs).  Within business practices, suppliers must

be chosen carefully to ensure that they deliver on time supplies that meet the
required performance specifications.  Orders must be processed accurately and

converted quickly into work orders, schedules, materials purchases, and person-
nel assignments.So also are the various elements of manufacturing interdependent (see coverillustration).  Product design and business practices intersect in the market for

products, the sources of finance, and the suppliers of components and equipment.
Product design and process design appropriately linked constitute design for
manufacturability,5 while process design realized successfully in production is
manifested as process excellence.  Production capabilities significantly influence

what product designers can create (although Box 2.1 illustrates another influence
on product design).  Finally, enabling and driving production tasks and business

practices is the appropriate use of physical, human, and financial resources.  The
manufacturing philosophy of concurrent engineering is based on the interaction
of all these elements; the manufacturing ÒwheelÓ depicted on the cover of this
report is intended to suggest the integration of manufacturing activities both5 Indeed, todayÕs product designers must concern themselves with a wide range of concerns thatdid not affect those of yesterday; these include product designs that facilitate manufacturability,
assembly, repair, maintenance, recyclability, affordability, and so on.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MANUFACTURING:  CONTEXT, CONTENT, AND HISTORY
55BOX 2.1  The Relationship Between Product Design
and Implementing TechnologyA design engineerÕs choices about product design are necessarily constrainedby the technologies available to implement those designs.  Of course, implement-
ing technologies include shaping and cutting tools and their capabilities for remov-ing precisely controlled amounts of material.  But a product also embodies technol-
ogies (e.g., the materials used in its construction, the technologies used to control
its operation).  When these change, the engineerÕs design options changeÑit is
clearly a different design matter to build a glider out of wood rather than metal orplastic composites.The technologies that control the operation and behavior of a final product arealso crucial.  In recent years, design options have been expanded by increasing
capabilities to substitute electronic components for mechanical ones.  Watchmak-
ing is a good example.  Fifty years ago, time-keeping accuracy was a direct func-
tion of the mechanical sophistication of a watch and the skill with which its compo-nents were fabricated, and high accuracy came only at great cost.  Today,

electronic chips and liquid crystal displays enable comparably accurate timekeep-ing at a tenth or a hundredth the cost of watches 50 years ago.  Similarly, tradition-
al mechanical fuel distribution in automobiles has been replaced by microproces-
sor-driven electronic fuel injection and ignitions, which have led to lower emissions,better fuel economy, lower maintenance, and lower-cost manufacturing.An extreme case is illustrated in production processes that are based on thedeposition and removal of material; both integrated circuit chips and books areproduced through such processes.  In contrast to a more traditional production
paradigm in which raw materials are fashioned into parts and then assembled intoproducts, fabrication by material deposition requires many fewer intermediatesteps that are qualitatively distinctÑrepetition of the same process (with different
parameters) is sufficient to manufacture the product.  Those designing products to
be produced in such a manner can generally operate with much more freedom intheir work than those designing within a more traditional paradigm in which the
fabrication of intermediate components constrains the design options.Another example is the use of sensors incorporated into finished products.  It is
expected that sensors will be embedded into aircraft wing skins (for dynamic anal-
ysis and control of the aircraft), engine shafts (for torque readings), engine diecastings (for thermal and strain information), structure members (for load and cor-rosion information), and tubing (for information on pressure, temperature, or elec-
tromagnetic radiation).  Sensor-loaded products may be able to indicate where
they are, how they are being used, when they have been damaged, or when theyfail to meet a specified parameter.  They may be able to monitor their environmen-

tal impact and signal for containment or destruction.  Sensors may even enable a
product to undergo Òdynamic remanufacturingÓ even as it is being used.  Alloys
with ÒmemoryÓ are a crude example of a sensor-loaded product; Nitanol is an alloy
that ÒremembersÓ its original shape when it is subjected to temperatures in excessof a certain critical value, and a deformed Nitanol structure will tend to revert to itsoriginal configuration upon heating.  A more active example is provided by recent

work at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center on active control of structural ele-ments.  Work there has demonstrated that by using a sensor and a computer to
sense and compensate for initial deflections in a support column subject to buck-
ling stresses, the strength of the column can be increased by a factor of 4 with anegligible increase in weight.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGamong the four basic elements of manufacturing (the four spokes of the wheel)and across these elements (between the spokes).  In contrast to traditional product

development, which involved little communication between the various elements
of manufacturing, concurrent engineering emphasizes improved communication
and early consideration of ÒdownstreamÓ issues such as the relationship of prod-uct repairability by the end user to the ease of assembling the product.  Concur-

rent engineering stresses more or less simultaneous consideration of product and
process design, customer needs, and business practices in order to speed the
development process and avoid costly errors or redesigns.THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT OF MANUFACTURINGChange is ever present in manufacturing.  New technologies brought to the
marketplace in the form of products and capabilities become part of the platform
that manufacturers use to create the next generation of products.  New economic
conditions, new knowledge about how to organize manufacturing effort, new
consumer preferences, and new manufacturing techniques constantly alter the
manufacturing front.  In a few decades, manufacturing has undergone a major

change with respect to the environment in which it operates, the methods through
which it conducts business, and the technologies that support it.Early Paradigm ChangesManufacturing has undergone many paradigm shifts from the Bronze andIron Ages to todayÕs technology, but the change has been especially apparent inthe last few hundred years, affecting the way manufacturing was performed, the
processes used, the products made, and the economic power of the locale in
which manufacturing was taking place.6  These paradigm shifts have ranged from
Eli WhitneyÕs invention of interchangeable parts to the invention of numericallycontrolled machine tools.  In each case the paradigm shift has resulted in an

increase in productivity of about a factor of 3 beyond the old method (Figure 2.2).In the earliest paradigm, the transformation from raw material or subassem-blies into a more valuable final product was carried out by skilled artisans and
craftspersons, people who practiced under expert supervision until they achieved
proficiency.  These experts performed the entire task of transformation, from raw

material to final assembly and test, mostly by hand.  An area
Õs economic wealthdepended on the skills of local artisans and craftspersons, and world fame ac-
crued to specific areas that manufactured specific goods.  London, Imari, Leeds,

Birmingham, and other artisan centers achieved world renown.6 A more comprehensive, engineering-oriented examination of manufacturing epochs can be foundin a table on the evolution of manufacturing in Jaikumar (1988).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MANUFACTURING:  CONTEXT, CONTENT, AND HISTORY
57During the Industrial Revolution, when steam power became readily avail-able, economic wealth shifted to locations that had inexpensive access to power
sources such as coal, oil, and hydroelectric power; to raw materials such as iron,
aluminum, and copper; or to low-cost transportation via rivers or seaports.  Eco-

nomic wealth was determined largely by the capital equipment available to trans-
form raw materials into finished goods.  Pittsburgh, Gary, the Ruhr Valley, and

other smokestack areas became centers of the new manufacturing capabilities.The latter part of the Industrial Revolution introduced mass production meth-odology, changing the nature of work from a Òdo it allÓ process to a specialization
process.  Specialists now performed repetitive tasks in one specific activity,

substantially decreasing the cost of the finished product.  Interchangeability of

parts became critical, but knowledge about how the entire product came together
decreased.  Detroit, Wolfsberg, Osaka, and other cities became centers of mass

production.One effect of these paradigm shifts, as shown in Figure 2.3, is that employ-ment in the United States in the manufacturing sector has dropped drastically
even as the value of goods shipped has remained relatively constant as a percent-
age of gross national product.The next major paradigm shift occurred after capital, manufacturing technol-ogy, and access to raw materials became widely available and no longer repre-
sented competitive advantages; U.S. manufacturers faced greater, worldwide06421492180018311900195019701987
8EnglishM/CToolAmericanTaylorismSPCNCCIMIT?Productivity1991FIGURE 2.2  Productivity follows paradigm shifts.  The solid line in this figure from
Jaikumar (1988) illustrates how each paradigm shift has resulted in greater manufacturingproductivity.  The dotted line was added by the committee to suggest that the increasing

use of information technology (IT) to integrate manufacturing activities may have animpact comparable to those of previous changes in manufacturing.  SPC, statistical pro-
cess control; NC, numerical control; CIM, computer-integrated manufacturing.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGcompetition.  Various approaches to reducing costs and improving delivery were
undertaken, with significant attention being paid to industrial engineering.
Knowledge became important, as did quality control, time studies of manufactur-
ing processes, flexible organization, skilled workers, and so on.  The availability
of an educated work force became a driver of economic wealth.  Silicon Valley,

Los Angeles, Seattle, Tokyo, Route 128, and others became the new centers of
excellence.Recent Changes and Their EffectsFrom the U.S. perspective, perhaps the single most profound change in themanufacturing environment in the recent past has been the emergence of a com-
petitive worldwide market in sophisticated manufactured products as other na-
tions have capitalized on advantages not available to the United States (e.g.,19501960197019801990
40353025
2015Manufacturing Jobsas a % of Total JobsManufacturing Outputas % of GDPPercentageYearFIGURE 2.3  Manufacturing over time
Ñrelationship between U.S. manufacturing jobsand manufacturing output, 1950 to 1990.  GDP, gross domestic product.  Courtesy of
Bureau of Labor Statistics.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MANUFACTURING:  CONTEXT, CONTENT, AND HISTORY
59inexpensive yet highly educated labor, cheap capital).  In the early stages of this
evolution, quality disciplines and process control methodologies became com-
petitive weapons.  Japan, with its national quality programs and intense focus on
quality, was the first country to use this strategy widely, but others have followed
suit.  The global pursuit of quality has evolved to the point that quality, in itself,

no longer confers a significant advantage:  it is simply taken as a 
ÒgivenÓ by
consumers everywhere.Product quality, more rapid delivery, better asset control and utilization, andthe ability to execute more complex manufacturing tasks and build increasingly
complex products have come to characterize excellent manufacturers.  Manufac-

turers are now linked directly to their suppliers and customers.  Many retailers

collect worldwide sales data every day and modify their suppliersÕ schedules in
response.  Products are designed to suit regional styles and needs, even if they are

made in other regions.  International payments are made in a variety of currencies

as materials are purchased, labor is obtained, ships are laden, and products are
transhipped.  These business and marketing issues are not usually associated with

the more technical concerns of manufacturing, but in fact they are central to its
success and enlarge the very definition of manufacturing.  Most importantly, they

are very information-intensive.  Without information-driven links to financial

markets, logistics services, and market knowledge, manufacturing businesses
would operate in a vacuum or seek blindly to force their output on unwilling
customers and ultimately fail.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURING603Integrated Product and Process DesignINTRODUCTIONInformation age manufacturing begins with information age design.  Design-
ing both a product and the processes by which it is produced involves understand-
ing what the product is to do and how the product will do those things, converting
the requirements for the productÕs behavior into engineering specifications, and
producing plans that marshal the materials, equipment, and people needed to
make and deliver the products.  Even apart from the pressures for shorter time to
market for new products that stress current design paradigms, new design chal-

lenges are generated by new product trends (e.g., shrinking feature size, decreas-
ing tolerances, or a growing numbers of parts) and by new manufacturing pro-
cesses (that designers must learn to exploit).As a result, the amount of knowledge and data relevant to product andprocess design is rapidly becoming more than a single individual can compre-
hend.  A further complicating factor is that an integrated product and process

design (IPPD) effort must usually be coordinated among a number of engineering
teams with different specialities and from different companies, since it is rare for
a single company to have all the skills, technologies, and financial resources to
design in-house all of the components needed.  Managing this coordination task

represents a major opportunity for information technology (IT) to have a positive
impact.As described in Chapter 1, a comprehensive IPPD system would includeintegration of performance specifications, conceptual design, detailed design,
manufacture, and assembly, together with the ability to simulate actual use, fieldInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN61repair, upgrade, and disposal.  Such a comprehensive system will not be possible
for many years.However, an important first step toward this vision can be achieved byjoining detailed design with manufacturing and assembly.  To accomplish this

requires a new level of information structuring and integration.  Feature-based

design is the best way currently known to capture and integrate the necessary
information that links the geometry of parts with their functions, fabrication, and
assembly.  Present computer-aided design (CAD)
1 systems support creation of
geometry only.  Apart from stress and thermal analyses of parts and certain types

of kinematic analyses, most design analyses must be done manually because
there is no way to obtain the necessary information from the circles and lines

stored in the CAD system.An IPPD system that realizes this first step toward a more comprehensivesystem will consist of three elements:  a database, a set of algorithms, and user

interfaces.  The database will be structured to capture the information about the

design in the form of geometry plus features (places of interest on each part,
together with information on what role they play in the productÕs function and
how to make and assemble the features in relation to each other).  The algorithms

will take the information they need from this database to simulate function,
determine optimal assembly sequences, estimate fabrication or assembly cost, or
perform design-for-assembly analyses, for example.  The user interfaces will

make it easier for the designer to create a design using features and apply the
algorithms to study and perfect the design.Prototype software that does some of these things exists now.  This software
can be a basis on which to build a new kind of computer-assisted design that
integrates technical, business, and economic issues relevant to design.  It can

support analyses of cost and function, as well as the study of families of products
that share parts or subassemblies.  Such software has been demonstrated for the

design of certain complex electro-mechanical items.Another IT-enabled connection between design and manufacturing is the useof stereolithography as a visualization aid for designers and as the basis for rapid
generation of prototype molds and dies for the production of mechanical parts.  In

an experiment conducted by a major automobile manufacturer, vendor bids based
on a drawing and a stereolithographed model were lower than bids based on a
drawing alone; this result was explained by the fabricatorÕs greater ability to
visualize the complexities of the item in question and thus to more accurately
determine the costs of its fabrication.1 Over the years, the acronym CAD has evolved in meaning.  CAD initially stood for Òcomputer-
aided draftingÓ; however, perhaps because information technology achieved greater penetration intothe world of design engineers, it has come to mean Òcomputer-aided design,Ó of which one part isdrafting.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGOnce a core design system is in trial use, it can be extended up and down thedesign process to include concept design and field use considerations.  The infor-

mation hooks in the data structures will be there to integrate with functional
simulations, repair environments, and other aspects of product design.  This

evolution of the design system will be fueled by experience with its core imple-
mentation; feedback from users will determine what new capabilities it needs.DESIGN PARADIGMSElectronic DesignOf all the different types of design for discrete manufacturing, the design ofvery large scale integrated (VLSI) circuits (described in greater detail in Box 3.1)
is today the most sophisticated.  Thus, it is reasonable to suggest that the VLSI
BOX 3.1  An Example of Information Technology-driven
Integrated Product and Process DesignIn the semiconductor industry, electronic computer-aided design (CAD), alsocalled electronic design automation, is a good illustration of how information tech-
nology can support the integrated product and process design process.  Today, a
designer of a chip using commercially available CAD tools would undertake thefollowing steps:¥Conceptual design.  Customer requirements are determined and converted
into design goals (e.g., instruction set, power consumption, and chip size and
speed).  Designers choose an underlying technology based on these goals.  In
addition, an associated ÒframeworkÓ orchestrates the operation of various other
design tools, thus enforcing some of the methodology (e.g., cannot proceed to
step x before step 
y is complete).
¥Detailed design.  In detailed design, the conceptual design is reduced to
logic elements that take in, convert, and put out logical values.  A designer deter-

mines the basic architecture of the chip (how it will be partitioned into functionalunits) and then writes a description of each functional unit using a hardware designlanguage such as VHSIC Hardware Design Language (VHDL).  Detailed design

involves making trade-offs among power, speed, and size; tools for detailed de-sign address automated logic design, test vector generation, formal verification toensure that the gate-level view of the chip matches the VHDL description, early
timing analysis, and the spatial arrangement of various components. Tools arealso available to perform a variety of detailed design tasks, such as static timinganalysis, partitioning, layout, routing, wiring, and circuit-level timing; results from
these tasks may impel the designer to alter the VHDL description.  Unless a chip is
to be fully customized (perhaps for reasons of maximizing speed of operation orminimizing power consumption or size), libraries are used to provide logic compo-
nents to be integrated into the new chip.  Detailed design results in a set of chip
masks that drives the production process.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN63design paradigm might suggest directions for improving the IPPD process inother manufacturing domains.  An examination of VLSI design suggests that its

successes are based on certain key attributes, including:¥Appropriate design abstractions.  The amount of detail needed in each
step of electronic design is appropriate for the work to be performed at that step,
thus allowing, for example, the three-dimensional characteristics of a chip to be
virtually ignored until the final step of the detailed design process.  Central to

these design abstractions are languages that describe electronic products at many
levels of abstraction (e.g., Verilog HDL) and the ability to use these descriptions
in simulation, in design-space exploration, and in automation of a large part of a
productÕs detailed design.  Further, design tools can operate at different levels of
abstraction and still obtain feedback from lower levels in the abstraction hierar-
chy; such tools enable an iterative refinement of the chip design that starts with¥Simulation and verification.  The detailed chip design must be tested to
determine correctness and the extent to which the design meets functional re-quirements.  Functional simulation ensures that the chip, as represented through
the VHDL description, actually meets customer requirements for logic.  Physicalsimulation, orders of magnitude slower than functional simulation, takes place atthe gate or transistor level to ensure that timing and other layout-dependent issuesare handled appropriately.  Physical tests are performed on the chip that may

reveal flaws in the simulator used to design the chip, flaws in the fabrication pro-cess, or design flaws that were initially unnoticed by the designer.The design stages and simulation tests are repeated until results suggest thatthe overall chip design is adequate.  Process design generally need not be under-
taken to create a fabrication process for a particular chip, since chip designers
design only products that a given factory can fabricate; process design is neededto plan the factory and the fabrication technologies the factory will use to produceelectronic chips of near-arbitrary design within one product or process technology
family.The design of a semiconductor technology requires similar steps.  What results
is a set of design rules for the technology and high-level chip masks (used for
etching the chipÕs features onto the semiconductor substrate) and usually a set oftools and library functions that the designer can use in implementing the logicaland physical design of a chip built with this technology.  These library functions

consist largely of Boolean functions, circuit components such as latches, registers,register files, and memories, and design rules that define how they can be con-nected together in a logic network.  Each library cell has a geometric view, a func-

tional view (e.g., a three-input NAND gate) for use in logic synthesis, a behavioralview for use in high-level simulation, a fault view for use in testing, and a timingview for use in timing and delay analyses.  Cell libraries may contain families of

same-function circuits with different timing, power consumption, test characteris-tics, and geometry.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGhigh-level estimates and continues to the manufactured chips.  Today, high-level
chip specifications allow design alternatives to be explored almost at once, lead-
ing to early detection of conceptual-level errors and pruning of unprofitable
paths.  The early design can be refined and made more specificÑdata collected

from this level can be back-annotated and used by higher-level tools.2¥Appropriately parameterized ÒpartsÓ that can be used in the design pro-cess.  Chips with new designs often make considerable use of logic functions that
have been implemented before, for example, Boolean functions, latches, drivers,
and receivers and terminators.  Libraries of these basic functions (called library

cells) and assemblies of these cells (called macros) that implement more sophis-
ticated functions enable a designer to use prevalidated designs (perhaps with the
specification of a few parameters) when appropriate, with the result that these
functions are more likely to be integrated into a new chip correctly and in less
time than if they are designed from scratch.  (On the other hand, since connecting

predesigned building blocks almost always does not result in optimal chip
perfomance, chip designers may choose to forego the advantages of libraries to
improve various dimensions of chip performance.)¥The ability of the designer to ignore most off-nominal behavior and sideeffects in the design process.  In practice, the behavior of transistors is influenced
very strongly by their context.  For example, a logic gate generally has different

speed and power characteristics depending on where it is used.  However, the

design rules associated with library cells and macros and the tools that enforce
adherence to these rules enable a designer to treat library components as parts that

can be connected without concern for issues such as back-loading.¥A close relationship between the fabrication processes and the extent towhich the actual product matches the original design.  If a designer adheres to the
set of chip design rules3 appropriate for a given semiconductor technology, a
properly controlled fabrication process will yield the desired product and desired
product behavior (even if individual chips are different at some level).  ÒControlÓ

usually includes scrupulous attention to impurities in materials, surrounding2 A specific example of this iterative design process is the use of logic synthesis and early(prephysical design) timing.  Statistical methods are used to time the logic before it is placed and
wired, and automated logic design systems (logic synthesis) can use these data to tune the logic
design to meet timing requirements.  After physical design, the timing is refined and made more
accurate because more precise information about wire lengths and routes is present.  The logic can be
annotated with the exact times and be brought back to logic synthesis for readjustment of the logic
design based on the new information.3 The fabrication of digital chips uses what are essentially fixed manufacturing processes that areconfigured by patterns (plates and masks) derived directly by algorithms from the chip specifica-
tions.  For this reason, chip fabrication is sometimes called a pattern-insensitive manufacturing
process.  The role of design rules is to restrict the patterns to those that will be faithfully honored by
the fixed production process.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN65gases, and process fluids and is pursued to ensure that the process itself remainsstable and thus able to honor any design obeying the design rules.While the chip design process in actual practice generally requires moremanual intervention than the idealized description above would suggest, most
experience in electronic design suggests that automated design tools have dra-
matically increased the complexity of chips that can be fabricated and have
reduced the time needed to deliver designs of constant complexity.4Application to Mechanical DesignMechanical design poses myriad different problems, and the extent to whichthe electronic design paradigm can be applied to mechanical design is a matter of
some debate.  Digital logic can be considered as a special class of product whose

design and fabrication problems have proven amenable (with the expenditure of
considerable R&D resources) to the application of information technology.  By

contrast, mechanical items represent a wholly different class of products for
which there is currently no formal representation of function and there is no
direct algorithm-dominated way for reducing a functional description to a physi-
cal design; whether this is fundamentally true or merely a limitation on current
knowledge is as yet unknown.Most importantly, the science and engineering underlying models of me-chanical products and the processes to manufacture them are not nearly as well

understood as those for electronic products.  Mechanical designs are character-

ized by complex and large multimedia energy interactions between a limited
number of elements and by changes in element behavior over time.  The informa-

tion needed to describe multiple behaviors of mechanical systems is difficult to
express in a single format or language, and there are few tools for representing or4 This is not to say that electronic design does not have limitations.  MooreÕs Law states that the
number of transistors on a state-of-the-art chip will double about every 12 months.  However, the
design capability of engineers is not increasing with time nearly as fast as the number of transistors.
Using todayÕs design tools, an expert electronic designer engaged in fully customized design canreasonably hope to complete the necessary design work on a few hundred transistors in a single dayof work; such work includes the detailed design, debugging, and documentation needed for a com-
mercial product.  For example, the Pentium processor (order of magnitude 5 million transistors) tookabout 100 engineers 2 years to develop, a rate that corresponds to approximately 250 transistors perday per engineer.  The resulting gap between the complexity of a chip and the design capability of

individual engineers must be filled by the use of additional engineers.  Over the long run, two
approaches for filling the design gap seem plausible:  better tools to increase the design capability ofindividual engineers, and the reuse of existing and validated designs to reduce the amount of work
that must be undertaken from scratch.  Some designers today claim the ability to lay out hundreds of
thousands of transistors (tens of thousands of gates) per designer-year by using high-level designparadigms with tools and programmable chips.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGBOX 3.2  Aspects of the Mechanical Design Process
Three basic elements of mechanical design are the following:1.  Conceptual design.  The design of mechanical systems often calls for the
management of significant energy flows, the consideration of complex three-di-
mensional geometry, and the understanding of relationships between geometryand energy.  The 
Òunderlying technologyÓ in which a mechanical system will be
implemented is often not naturally specified by the product requirements, and the
space of design goals is much more multidimensional than in the case of verylarge scale integrated (VLSI) systems.2.  Detailed design.  For mechanical items, detailed design is generally inde-
pendent of conceptual design, since no formal methods exist for linking conceptsor functions to detailed geometry except in perhaps a few special cases.  In most
instances, detailed design of mechanical systems that are even marginally effi-
cient in their use of space, weight, or energy generally requires the custom cre-ation of integrated combinations of three-dimensional geometry rather than piec-ing together predesigned and tested library building blocks.  Using standard parts

or designs for parts used for other products is not easy because geometries differgreatly even for the ÒsameÓ item, and there is no way to catalog them systematical-
ly.  The few standard library or catalog items that are available are generally not

main function carriers but instead are fasteners, bearings, motors, valves, andother similar items.  Difficulty in mechanical design often centers on creative geo-
metric reasoning, management of multiple behaviors, mitigation of unavoidable
side effects, and anticipation of a variety of failure modes.  (In some cases, a
mechanical design is an evolutionary outgrowth of a past design.  In these cases
(such as automotive suspensions) progress is being made in establishing design
templates that capture in parametric or rule form the traditional parts and relation-ships among parts that every good example of the genre must contain.  Design
then consists of packaging the given elements, using existing simulations to con-
firm basic behaviors.)3.  Verification.  Computer simulation tools can predict nominal behavior at the
testing mechanical designs that are comparable in power to those available for theanalogous electronic design task.  A similar point applies to the modeling of

multiple and simultaneous high-level energy interactions.  Compared to the prob-

lems encountered by the VLSI circuit designer, the problems that challenge the
mechanical designer, described in Box 3.2, suggest important research questions
for better IT support of the design effort.  These challenges are the subject of the
remainder of this chapter.NEEDS AND RESEARCH FOR MECHANICAL DESIGNAs noted above, it is not clear that the paradigm of electronic design can beapplied to mechanical design, the area that the committee believes poses the
greatest need today.   Nevertheless, the successes of todayÕs electronic design

paradigm suggest research areas to improve mechanical design.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN67Specifically, an important goal is the development of appropriate abstrac-tions at every stage of the design process and tools that manipulate these abstrac-
tions.  Abstraction is not the same at each phase of a design, and resolution of

implementation details is deferred in the design process until such details are
really needed.  The use of such abstractions reduces work because existing repre-

sentations can be reused, and different representations can be related through
their common pieces.  Key to developing these abstractions is the exploitation of

hierarchical composability (i.e., the construction of complex standards or infor-
mation models from simpler ones).  Researchers should seek appropriate abstrac-

tions for mechanical products and develop tools to support design in terms of
those abstractions.In electronic design, many sophisticated tools have been developed to sup-port physical aspects of design, while fewer tools exist for aspects of conceptual
design such as requirement gathering or architectural decision making.  This
system level if only one or two main modes of behavior are simulated at once andonly in the case of sufficiently simple mechanical systems.  Since side effects andoff-nominal behaviors often cannot be adequately modeled and usually cannot bedesigned out, either extensive, time-consuming, and costly prototyping and field
testing are required, or the designer must design the system very conservatively tomitigate the consequences of these side effects to an adequate degree over theexpected life of the system.Process design is integral to the design of individual mechanical systems.  One
reason is that for many mechanical parts, there is no way to automatically convert
product geometry and other specifications to a fabrication process such as a se-quence of machining steps.  Designing fixtures, for example, is a major problem.
Moreover, most mechanical fabrication processes are neither pattern-insensitive
nor precisely controllable; even when the commands to a given process are re-peated identically, the output of the process (as implemented on an actual produc-tion line) is different each time, and the differences may well matter.  A command

to drill a hole 0.500 inches in diameter may be provided, but the resulting hole maybe 0.499 inches in one case and 0.502 inches in a second case.  In general,
elimination of these differences is either too difficult or too expensive.  Thus, pro-

cess design involves the choice of an economical process whose output compris-es mostly acceptable (though different) parts.  In most cases, there are no simula-
tions that can predict the range of variations in nominally identical outcomes that a
given mechanical process might generate.  This range, usually called 
ÒprocesscapabilityÓ when appropriately normalized, is often estimated by experienced peo-
ple.  (Such 
Òtolerance-likeÓ problems also affect chip fabrication:  for example, a
chip that emerges from the fabrication process with line widths that are too large ortoo small may run more slowly or not at all.  Such issues affect yield rates dramat-
ically.  The difference is that for electronic fabrication, the process that determines

yield is independent of the pattern on the chip to a considerable degree.)The above three steps may have to be repeated until a functional and manufac-turable design in achieved.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGdisparity suggests that it is far easier to collect, characterize, and represent dataabout ÒthingsÓ than about ideas and decisions.  Nevertheless, the payoff for

automated support of activities such as requirement gathering, corporate decision
making, and overall product architecture is so high that research directed at these
targets is also worth undertaking.The committee believes that concentrating on the areas described in the restof this chapter will yield the most significant benefits to the IPPD process in the
short to medium term.  Other areas in the IPPD process not described in this

chapter (mostly in the conceptual design area) will be advanced in the short to
medium term by better communication capabilities and by better and additional
access to data.The committee notes also that success in improving design is likely to yieldparticular benefits to small manufacturers.  To a considerable degree, tools that

support product and process design can be categorized as Òmostly softwareÓ; that
is, they require low capital investment to obtain.  Moreover, the increasing power

of computational hardware (and its dropping cost) will make these tools more
accessible to manufacturing firms with small capital budgets.  To capitalize on

this enabling trend, it is necessary to design these tools and their interfaces so that
small businesses with limited technical depth can use them readily.  A growing

information infrastructure (Chapter 6) will link these small firms with each other
and with larger firms.  The emergence of standard data formats and interoperable

tools will facilitate the spread of advanced capabilities.Table 3.1 lists several areas for research in product and process design.  In
general, the research proposed by the committee focuses on design-space explo-
ration, creating (parameterized) geometry, characterizing tolerances, predicting
failure modes, increasing robustness, and facilitating reuse of components and
designs.  In addition, major issues of scale-up and complexity remain to be

addressed explicitly as an integral part of any research done in these areas.  Ex-

plaining these research foci is the subject of the remainder of this chapter.TABLE 3.1 Research to Advance Product and Process DesignSubject AreaExample of Research Needed
Multiview design descriptionsDesign by function
Relation of geometry to functionFunctional simulationParametric designCapture of nominal and variantA mathematics of variation for
behavior of products andperformance modeling

processes in one modelDescriptions of product function and
variants directly related to descriptionsof geometric or material variationsInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN69TABLE 3.1 ContinuedSubject AreaExample of Research Needed
Multipurpose data and modelTechniques for relating models at
representationsdifferent levels of abstraction
Logic-based representationsProtocols, formats, and representationsfor data  interchange among models
Design methods and tools forDecomposition methods to break product
groups of parts and systemsconcepts into subsystems
Subassembly performance models andinterface descriptions for joining
subassemblies to each otherAssembly planningTrade-off analysis (e.g., cost and design)Process description languagesSet of process primitives (building blocks) from
and modelswhich process models can be built
Languages with syntax checking forcorrectness and completeness of processdescriptionsResource description modelsAccommodation of spatial and temporaldimensions of processesNovel design considerationsEasy, error-free configuration control at the
selling or servicing stageManufacturing of a robust final product fromparts obtained from different sourcesProduct-process data modelData descriptions for many physical processes
and entities in a unified formDescriptions of design interactions, analyses,and process steps integrated with productgeometry and function descriptionsDecision aidsData visualization
Database searching using geometric features,performance criteria, or process descriptionsIntelligent advisorsGeometric reasoningVisualization tools

Knowledge and informationSystems that capture corporate memory and
managementknowledge
Systems that support corporate learningTechniques for handling data legacy issuesSystems that record design history and rationaleInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGResearch for Product DescriptionCommunication among engineering professionals has always relied on mod-elsÑsketches, drawings, analytic models of behavior, or many other symbolic
representations of knowledge related to products.  However, what distinguishes

data or information models from arbitrary documentation, such as simple reports
or drawings, is the addition of formalization.5  This formalization is motivated by
the need for unambiguous communication between collaborators and/or our de-
sire to use and interoperate among a growing set of computer-based application
tools.  Specifically, a data model is expressed in some data description language.

A language specification defines the form and meaning (syntax and semantics) of
entities in the language.  The initial graphics exchange specification (IGES;

IGES, 1993), for instance, specifies the language of IGES data files by specifyingtheir syntactic form and relating the entities in the data files to known geometric
entities.Traditionally, the specifications of data description languages such as IGEShave been written in a natural language such as English, and a human being must
use that description to build a software parser/recognizer for the data description
language.  The semantics of the elements of the language remain expressed solely

in English.  More recent efforts such as PDES/STEP (product data exchange

using the standard for the exchange of product model data; ISO, 1994) provide a
more formal language, EXPRESS, for use as a data description language in
which data models are described.  EXPRESS allows the modeler to capture some

of the semantics of the data by explicitly recognizing relationships between data
elements along with the cardinality of such relationships and by capturing con-
straints between data elements.  Box 3.3 describes two approaches to knowledge
representation.  Appropriate formalisms also support the generation of agreement

on queries about data; application tool development; language translation; and
services such as change notification, management of information dependencies,
and matching of information producers and consumers.A highly general expressive capability is needed to support the exchange of5 The term ÒformalizationÓ is used in this chapter in the sense of Òa greater degree of rigor, clarity,and explicitness that would be necessary for computer-based representation, manipulation, and analy-sis.Ó  However, the extent to which it should include matters such as formal proofs of completeness
or correctness is subject to some debate within the community, with some advocating much higher
degrees of mathematical formalization than others.  Those who believe in high degrees of math-
ematical formalization tend to be logic theorists.  The advantage of logic-based approaches is that
they are neat and clean and amenable to the power of formal logic and mathematics.  On the other

hand, it is not necessary to embrace this degree of formalization in an attempt to get away frommodels specified in English and a few drawings.  Indeed, the need to cope with the uncertainty of the
manufacturing environment and with spatial and temporal relationships (for example) requires that a
formal logic be modified in a way that reduces the ÒneatnessÓ of the formalism and its ease of use asa base language for representing interesting phenomena.  The result may be a more ÒscruffyÓ ap-
proach to the problem.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN71BOX 3.3  Knowledge Representation Foundations
Different computer-aided tools for working in different domains may requiredifferent data models for a given product.  Nevertheless, since such models gener-

ally contain much common structure that can be exploited to reduce the work increating new models and to provide the basis for generic tools that operate onrepresentations of knowledge, it is inappropriate to create separate, top-to-bottom
standards for each domain of interest.The first requirement is a basic framework that provides building blocks suffi-cient to our diverse forms and uses of product knowledge.  Once these building

blocks are in place, it is possible to develop standards for domain-specific applica-tions.  Two approaches to developing the base building blocks appear promising:
¥Information modeling languages, such as the EXPRESS language that is
used to state the PDES/STEP standards, which provide a capability to specifymachine-readable definitions of shared data.  EXPRESS allows a designer to de-

scribe object classes with attributes and inheritance, which offers limited formalsemantics for the data (i.e., for database operations). The PDES/STEP effort hasencouraged the development of tools that can operate on the EXPRESS language
specifications to provide capabilities such as graphical display of data structuresand generation of code to support tool creation or database implementations.¥Knowledge-representation languages, such as the Knowledge InterchangeFormat (KIF).  Knowledge representation languages are based on the concept of a
Òshared ontology,Ó which is simply an agreed-upon set of terms and meanings that
enable two parties to exchange knowledge for some purposes in some domain.  In

practice, it is a dictionary of classes, relations, functions, and object constants,along with their definitions in human-readable text and machine-interpretable sen-tences.  This approach offers enormous flexibility, including the taxonomic capabil-

ities of object-oriented and frame-based approaches, and the ability to constructaxiomatic theories.  Consider, for example, the following query posed by an ana-
lyst working on a product design:  ÒI added the following assumptions to theory Z. . . and took the following quantities as given . . . .  I then arrived at the following
conclusion (part X will fail).  Do you support my conclusion?
ÓBecause they are rooted in first-order logic, the knowledge representation on-tologies are more expressive and hence more flexible than EXPRESS-basedSTEP standards.  Conversely, the STEP standards provide much more direct sup-

port to developers of computer-aided applications through application protocolsand other mechanisms provided in the standards.  Translation facilities between
EXPRESS- and KIF-based constructs allow complementary use of both formal-
isms.engineering knowledge, specifically the ability to exchange a conceptualizationthat specifies the objects that are presumed to exist in some area of interest, as
well as the relationships that hold among them (Genesereth and Nilsson, 1987).

For example, for two parties to discuss models of dynamical behavior, they must
first agree on the use of terms such as generalized coordinates, position, and
velocity, and they must understand the laws on which the models rely (e.g.,
NewtonÕs laws, LagrangeÕs equations, or KaneÕs equations).  At the same time,
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGBOX 3.4  Domain-specific Libraries
In creating domain-specific libraries of representations, a balance must bestruck between short-term needs (dictated by existing tools) and possible futureuses of the knowledge.  Tool designers must also accept the reality that both the

tools and their context for use will be changing continuously as technology andorganizations evolve.Any specific modeling choice constitutes a compromise between a variety ofcompeting interestsÑthe chief trade-off being between specific or short-termneeds and generality.  For example, a controls design department and a dynamic
analysis department in an organization may regularly exchange models of a satel-
liteÕs dynamic behavior.  But the information models appropriate to their needs
may require a simple model that accounts for only a single degree of vibrationalfreedom or a complex model based on partial differential equations.  At a mini-

mum, it is necessary to identify the intersecting knowledge in the two views thatallows a more formal bridging of the gaps between their different views of theworld.Standardization, or the practice of conforming to a particular representation, isan important part of sharing knowledge efficiently.  Standardizing at the level of
knowledge representation greatly reduces the overhead costs associated with
translation and the construction of information models.  However, the need for
large numbers of domain-specific information models suggests a very flexible ap-proach to standardization.  Unlike choosing between syntactic variants such as

IGES and DXF,* there is much more to distinguishing among different representa-tions of a behavior theory like kinematics.  In kinematics, a variety of formalisms
exist that can model the same behavior (e.g., quaternions, matrix exponentials,
screws, Euler parameters, Euler angles).  Even particular representations of screw
theory could differ significantly in their completeness and in the manner by whichbasic entities are defined.  Individual information models, then, will be evaluated by

potential users in much the same way that designers evaluate the choice of motorsfor a particular device.  Models will come in many shapes and sizes with varying
capabilities; some will be good, some bad.  A wide variety of competing represen-
tations is expected and even desirable.*Design eXchange Format, a proprietary interchange standard controlled by AUTOCAD, SanRaphael, Calif.6 Additional discussion of these examples can be found in MSB (1988), pp. 17-19.  It recommends
research on product and process design, including data structures for describing products in terms of
conceptual design, functional features, dimensions and tolerances, manufacturable features, and soforth, and methods that allow such structures to be interfaced with other computer-integrated manu-facturing components, such as knowledge-based systems.general-purpose approaches, while inherently flexible, are intrinsically clumsy touse precisely because they do not provide specialization to individual domains of
interest.  Domain-specific approaches may be more efficient for use in those

individual domains and may be more expressive for them (Box 3.4).Examples of the research needed for product description to support designefforts include:6Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN73¥ Design descriptions that allow multiple views of a product (geometry,
engineering parameters, functional requirements and behaviors, and rela-
tionships among these domains).  Data models should be capable of repre-

senting the product or component from many different views at different
stages of design, manufacture, and use.  The product designer should be able

to view its geometry, tolerances, assembly problems, and repair scenarios;
the techniques of feature-based design and parametric design hold particular
promise (Box 3.5).  The current PDES/STEP effort does address some of

these issues; for example, an addition to the STEP Application Protocol
called Configuration Controlled Design will contain both the geometry of a
product and information on the revision, release, and effectiveness associ-
ated with producing this product.  Nevertheless, no adequate data model

exists, nor are there adequate methods for supporting these activities.¥ Model formulations or simulations that are capable of describing the mainoff-nominal behaviors, or variants, as well as the nominal behavior of a
product.7  For many products, more effort goes into anticipating and mitigat-
ing a wide range of off-nominal behavior (e.g., testing aircraft for fatigue and
crack resistance, determining if layers in a microprocessor will peel apart
under temperature extremes) than into determining how to meet the main
functional requirements.  (See Box 3.6.)
¥ Better understanding of relationships between different representationsand models.  Because of the interdisciplinary nature of collaborative product
design, relationships between different representations are important.  Ques-

tions such as how to relate a model in someone elseÕs view of the world to a
model in oneÕs own view are ubiquitous.  Determining relationships between

models (e.g., between models of different levels or types of abstraction) will
remain a difficult problem for some time, but a farsighted approach to knowl-
edge representation can greatly enhance computational support through the
exchange of information among different applications.  Logic-based repre-

sentations may help in this area in the future, although there is debate on the
point; further exploration is needed.¥ Formats and representations that enable data exchange among differentdesign tools.  While different computer-aided tools for design are based on
different data models, much of the content of these models is overlapping.
As more computational support for design comes on-line, engineers will rely7 A 1991 NRC report recommends research on tolerance analysis, tolerance representations, toler-ance-performance relationships, and tolerance standards and measurement methods.  See MSB
(1991), pp. 56-57.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGBOX 3.5  Feature-based Design
A feature-based data model is a way of describing a design that contains moreinformation than just geometry.  In a computer model, a circle may represent a

hole, but it is not a hole.  However, feature-based data could include text data
saying that it is a hole and giving the diameter and tolerances, plus numericalcontrol instructions for how to drill it.  The 
ÒholeÓ is then called a feature, which in
fact is a data object that contains instructions for how to draw itself on the comput-er screen and how to drive a machine tool to drill it.  Features can describe ma-
chined areas, or they can describe areas where a measurement will be taken
(Òmeasurement featuresÓ) or where one part will be joined to another (ÒassemblyfeaturesÓ).   Features are thus able to hold a great deal more information than a
purely geometric model can.  In principle, features can contain design intent as

well as details about how to make and use the feature.  For example, a pocket to
hold a precision ball bearing would require tighter tolerances and a finer surfacefinish than a hole through which oil is squirted.  Feature-based models may also

reduce storage requirements, because compact functional descriptions could bestored and voluminous geometric descriptions could be generated from the func-tional descriptions when needed.Feature-based design also supports higher-level product data models and de-scriptions of configurations.  A simple model of configurations may include rela-
tionships among subparts and attributes.  Such a model can be used to create a

more specialized theory of configuration design that includes connections betweenparts, special part subclasses, predefined lists of available parts, and so on.  The
idea is to create multiple layers of representation that mimic the multiple levels of
abstraction at which we view things.  This approach has two benefits:  work is
reduced through reuse of existing representations, and different representationscan be related through their common pieces.Several STEP projects provide for specification of simple form features, forexample, through and blind holes, although the taxonomy is far from complete.  In
addition, new work has just been initiated in providing a parametric representation
within STEP, an ability that is necessary to support more extensive use of formfeatures.  Ford Motor Company is actively working on a research project called
Rapid Response Manufacturing that makes extensive use of form features.  Out-

put from this project is expected to drive development of the STEP standard in thisarea.  This program is being conducted jointly with General Motors, Texas Instru-
ments, United Technologies Corporation, and Allied Signal.increasingly on information models to help bridge the gap betweenmultidisciplinary users of diverse tools; exchangeable geometric models are
thus a particularly pressing need.  Success in developing exchangeable repre-

sentations of performance, geometry, and process requirements is a prerequi-
site for their use in design tools and by practitioners in the allied domains of
process equipment design and shop floor planning and operations, as well as
by designers in other companies or in other technical domains.¥ Tools that facilitate understanding the relationship between cost and de-Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN75BOX 3.6  Limitations of Tolerance Analysis
The inherent variability in the shape of manufactured parts imposes major lim-itations on the performance of products assembled from those parts.  To reduce

the impact of such limitations, designers traditionally impose tolerances on theseparts.  However, too little is known at present about the relationships between
unwanted variations in shape and product performance to permit rational assign-
ment of tolerances except in a few special cases such as optical systems andjournal bearings.  In most cases, tolerances are assigned on the basis of experi-
ence or the capability of available manufacturing systems.  Two fundamental toler-

ance problems are tolerance analysis (i.e., identifying which dimensional varia-tions contribute most to a final error) and tolerance allocation (i.e., choosing thebest way to distribute inevitable tolerances among several potential contributing
sources during design so that the desired level of final error is achieved at mini-mum cost).  Today, most tolerance analyses are simple one-dimensional fit stud-
ies.  More complex multidimensional studies are done less often and employ Mon-

te Carlo methods.  These methods are difficult to use because there is no
automated way to apply them to a computer model of the geometry.  They also
suffer from combinatorial and scale-up barriers.  Research is needed to extend

engineering models and then link them to geometry and geometric variations.sign choices.  Design tools for electronic devices typically do not provide
information about fabrication cost, because the cost of fabricating a given
chip is approximately independent of what is put on it.8  But this is not true
for mechanical design, in which design choices may have a significant im-
pact on the cost of making the final product.  Designers need to be able to

keep such high-level trade-offs constantly in mind through the use of better
design tools.  Many papers have been written on this subject, and some such

tools exist (e.g., Hewlett-PackardÕs Sheet Metal Design Advisor).More generally, product data models will have to include information thatgoes beyond simple geometry.  These models should also relate high-level func-
tion, assembly processes, possible interactions between product and user, the
productÕs structure and geometry, a schema for describing component parts, and
the productÕs behavior, manufacture, maintenance, and ultimate disposal or recy-
clingÑin principle, any information that could describe a product.  Moreover, the

information contained in a product data model may represent a single instance of
the product, a set of possible instances, or even a set of possible descriptions.8 One qualification is necessary.  While chip fabrication is generally pattern-insensitive, the yield
(i.e., the fraction of chips that are usable after the fabrication process is complete) is a direct functionof the feature sizes and material gaps chosen:  wider lines and wider gaps between lines generally
result in a higher yield, which in turn reduces the unit costs of chips that may be sold.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGBOX 3.7  Using Design as a Strategic Tool
Nippondenso Co. Ltd. (NDCL) manufactures automotive components.  Its or-
der mix is highly variable and unpredictable, and thus a primary challenge forNDCL has been to develop a factory environment in which it can produce a near-
arbitrary mix of product variants.  This type of flexible manufacturing has often
been attacked as a problem involving factory floor operations, but NDCL has de-fined and solved it primarily as a problem of design.In particular, NDCLÕs design approach is based on what can be called a com-binatoric method (Figure 3.1).  Product variety is created by selecting among sev-eral versions of each part in a product.  Each product is designed so that the

physical and functional interfaces between parts are the same for all versions ofeach part.  The result is that any combination of versions of parts can be assem-
bled into a working unit.  The interfaces between the parts and the assembly equip-

ment are similarly standardized so that differences between versions of parts aretransparent to the equipment.NDCL achieves its flexibility goals by using fairly ordinary parts and then em-ploying unusual logistical methods to assemble them into different variants.  The
schedule for fabrication of parts is not based on the details of what kinds of itemsare ordered, but instead follows broad statistical patterns of orders.  It is the as-

sembly process that addresses the detailed stream of orders.  Because assemblyis so much faster than fabrication and because NDCLÕs assembly machines canbe switched from model to model so quickly, model mix can be addressed much
more easily and economically during assembly than during fabrication.Close coordination of top management objectives, product design, and produc-tion technology is required to carry out this approach.  As a result, it can be said

that NDCL has taken concurrent engineering well beyond the goal of improvingfabrication or assembly.  Instead, NDCL has learned how to use design to achieve
the essentially strategic goal of meeting the demands of its customers.Thus, in addition to serving the traditional role of providing neutral data formatsfor computer-aided application tools, models must support a host of activities for
managing and exchanging information.Research for Process DescriptionTools for process description have application to the design and operation offactories; in addition, they are the basis for experiments with and evaluation of
control and organizational changes before actual systems are installed.  Process

descriptions will also be used to enhance product design, so that by simulation the
best process can be matched to the product design (and vice versa) for maximum
economic advantage (or to satisfy whatever criteriaÑsuch as quality or time to
deliveryÑare important for the particular case).  Box 3.7 describes a rich and

productive interaction among process design, product design, and what happens
on the shop floor.The primary need in process description is formalization, which is necessaryInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN77for representing processes in sufficient detail and with enough specificity to makethe process description adequately complete and unambiguous.9  Such formal-
isms allow designers to describe, enforce, and simulate processes, including fac-9 Of course, at the root of a good process description is a good scientific and engineering under-standing of the specific process involvedÑthe best tools to formalize process description are nothelpful if the knowledge base they are used to formalize is shaky and uncertain.  Indeed, many

fabrication processes in use today are incompletely understood and only partially characterized.Still, as important and crucial as such understanding may be, a research agenda for process character-ization is outside the scope of this report.FIGURE 3.1  A panel meter (left) and the combinatoric strategy (right).  Each zigzag lineon the right represents a valid type of meter, which is assembled by following the path
from top to bottom.  ÒSDÓ stands for standardized design, an effort that reduced the
number of variants of each part as shown.  The production rate is 32,000 per shift.  A
ÒcatalogÓ of only 16 parts is sufficient to support production of 288 different kinds of
meter.  If all the 288 possible paths at the right were drawn, one would see that each part
is a member of many possible types of meters.  Thus to first order most parts will be usedregardless of the pattern of the order stream, so that there is little inventory risk in making
the 16 kinds of parts.  If each different meter type were created by a few parts that were
special to that type, a shift in the order pattern would require a large and awkward shift inthe schedules for fabricating parts, which could not be accomplished as quickly as the
switching of an assembly machine.  Also, feeding the hundreds of different kinds of partsneeded to support so many varieties of meter would be very awkward.  These are some of
the reasons that variety can be achieved more easily during assembly than during fabrica-
tion.  Courtesy of Nippondenso.
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGtory processes (involving both machines and people), design activities, and deci-sion processes.Research needs in the area of process description include:¥ A language for expressing process descriptions that facilitates checking forcorrectness and completeness and the capability to express not only nominal
process behavior but also variant behavior.  Such a language must also be
translatable across technical domains.¥ Process model representation schemes (both aggregate and detailed) andon-line data collection.  Data included in such schemes should describe
logistic, fabrication, material-handling, inspection, assembly, and test pro-
cesses and should give information on the characteristics, capabilities, and
costs of various production and assembly methods.  Data should be captured

as a product is being produced so that the process can be improved.¥ Specific process models that reflect all relevant spatial and temporal trans-formations.  Such models are critical for the local control and planning of
manufacturing operations and will draw on knowledge about the kinematic
capabilities of individual pieces of equipment and other process limitations,
processing capabilities of the equipment, and tool and fixturing capabilities
associated with the equipment.  Ultimately, these models should contain the
detail necessary for dynamic control of the individual operations as well as
the information required to simulate the operation of the manufacturing sys-
tem, indicate the effects of perturbing the operational parameters as well as
the effects of complex interactions among processes, and be generalizable
across a wide range of production environments by appropriate parameter-
ization.¥ Algorithms and tools to solve process problems.  For example, one such
problem is the determination of efficient assembly sequences; an inappropri-
ate assembly sequence may result in the need for a tool to reorient the item
being assembled many more times than necessary, thus increasing the time
needed for assembly and the likelihood of breakage.  Such factors are to a

considerable degree irrelevant to the design of the product itself but have a
significant influence on the cost of making the product.  Other important

process problems include the determination of efficient equipment layouts
on a factory floor, equipment selection (matching equipment capability to
process needs), make-buy decisions, and determination of how best to cut
and shape materials to minimize waste.¥ Dynamic models for describing resources available over time to the manu-Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN79facturing system.10  Such models will be used in both the design and the
operational control of manufacturing systems.  Common representations and

descriptions of resources are necessary to enable development of transfer-
able (from planning to analysis to control) models and analysis.  Despite the
importance of resource management, little research and effort have been
devoted to creating generic representations of resources.11  As a result, spe-
cific resource characteristics must be recreated each time a modeling activity
is undertaken.  Resources include those related to fabrication (e.g., tooling,

machines, available controller features) and their interconnection, as well as
system resources such as corporate information or knowledge and informa-
tion such as company or external standards.Research for Tools to Support Integrated Product and Process Design
Computer tools that directly aid the management of the IPPD process itselfwould be helpful to managers.  Today, such tools are limited primarily to commu-

nication aids or ÒgroupwareÓ for helping people post notices and share informa-
tion.  Means of describing and managing the design process need to be devel-

oped.  Few tools exist for creating, monitoring, and guiding the design process

itself, except for familiar project management tools like PERT.  (PERT is largely

a schedule and resource management tool.)  Scheduling aids beyond PERT are

required to help in determining effective task sequences, setting up information
flows, establishing schedules and milestones, identifying people, assigning work
to them, routing information to them, and linking them to colleagues elsewhere.

Existing tools do not help to identify information flows or facilitate them.A single design decision may have several simultaneous impacts, some ofwhich may be beneficial and others adverse.  The design environment should

support techniques to express comparisons and trade-offs vividly so that a de-
signer can assess the impact of a wide range of design decisions on a productÕs
cost, time to produce, or quality.  Tools are needed that focus on the identification
10 See MSB (1988), pp. 11-13.  It recommends research on a number of specific resource manage-
ment modeling methods, for example, modeling methods based on knowledge-based systems, ob-ject-oriented systems, and Petri nets; methods that are sufficiently fast and efficient that resource
problems are tractable while plants are being designed and built, as well as being operated; methodsfor correcting models, based on comparisons of predicted and measured performance; and manyother methods.11 A notable exception is IDEFx, an evolving language developed for the Air Force in the Inte-grated Information for Concurrent Engineering program that does identify information flows withinthe process and is used to support the reengineering of business processes through process modeling
and simulation.  The first version, IDEF0, was developed under the Integrated Computer-Aided
Manufacturing program and was used primarily for modeling of individual activities within pro-cesses; IDEF0 is today a Federal Information Processing Standard.  See Moore (1994), p. 49.
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGof design trade-offs between cost, performance, and reliability; alternate spaceallocations; functional decomposition; subassembly definition; three-dimensional
geometric reasoning; and make-or-buy decisions.To produce such tools, research is needed on decision tools that draw on theproduct-process data model and performance simulations of the product being
designed, as well as process models and various data on costs and tolerances of
different processes.  These decision tools will sort data and models on the basis of

criteria supplied by the designer to aid in making comparisons between alternate
designs and processes.In addition, improvements to simulation and rapid prototyping tools shouldbe brought to bear on the problems of viewing physical parts, ÒvisualizingÓ
complex relationships (certainly between physical parts, but also between more
abstract relationships such as design requirements and their costs), and presenting
design alternatives to customers and to designers.  This category also includes

methods or tools to handle groups of parts such as assemblies, subsystems, prod-
uct families, made-to-order configurations, and selected combinations of parts
that create different product models by virtue of which parts are selected.  (Box

3.7 describes such an application.)Research is needed on design methods and computer tools adapted for thedesign and creation of groups of parts or systems, in addition to individual parts.
Such methods and tools will enable the designer to divide a product into subas-
semblies, design optimal in-process test strategies during assembly, and identify
assembly sequences that minimize cost, tolerance errors, material handling, and
part damage during assembly.  Also, the methods and tools will include standard

design modules and methods that facilitate optimization of part or all of a product
for cost and quality.  Such optimization requires a deep understanding of specific

components and features of the product.12Finally, it would be highly desirable to have tools that would allow productdesign and process design to proceed more in parallel.  These tools would enable

product designers to work with some degree of incomplete information about the
process designerÕs work, and vice versa.  Successful development of such tools

would contribute greatly to the reduction of needed design time.Research Areas Not Specific to ManufacturingGeometric ReasoningA generic intellectual activity required by mechanical design is geometricreasoning.  A major difference between VLSI design and mechanical design is
12 Because such understanding is often proprietary to component suppliers, research in this andsimilar areas of collaborative design must consider nontechnical issues such as intellectual propertyrights and intercompany data exchange.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN81the degree to which three-dimensional geometric reasoning is fundamental toeven the simplest mechanical designs; VLSI design is based on two-dimensional
(2-D) analysis (or at worst, 2 1/2 dimensional analysisÑthe use of stacked 2-D
layers).  Three factors make three-dimensional (3-D) reasoning more complex:

3-D design is more likely to involve moving parts or flows; 3-D design may
involve interconnections and tolerance relationships between 2-D domains; and
3-D designs can be visualized only in cross sections, perspective, and exploded
views.  Research is needed on building robust geometric modelers.  Many of the

Òboundary representationÓ modelers in use today are not robust:  interactions

between the algorithms they use and finite-precision arithmetic offered by the
computer result in certain modeling operations that yield incorrect results.  Truly

robust algorithms to correct such problems remain a challenging research prob-
lem.  Ultimately, the design environment should support improved visualization

tools or other design aids that will help make geometric reasoning faster and
efficiently achievable by a broader range of people.  In addition, tools that under-

take geometric reasoning automatically (i.e., without relying on a skilled human)
may be able to replace human designers for certain purposes.Knowledge and Information ManagementBasic to design are many issues of data management and of data themselves.The future design environment will include a number of data management meth-
ods and tools.  For example, the design environment will have to handle data

legacy issues, such as converting data from one CAD system to another and
preserving old data for decades or more so that they can still be read, edited, and
processed.  Today, such data are either lost, kept on paper, or accessed in a

limited way by old hardware kept on hand for the purpose.13A second data management issue is that the design environment will have toinclude ways to capture corporate memory and knowledge so that successors of
current designers can tell what knowledge was used, what competitive methods
were used, what errors were made, and on what factors success was based.  The

ability to record design history and rationale is of particular importance.  Every

design is a historical web of decisions that grow out of each other and depend on
each other.  Revision, whether for correcting an error, absorbing a new outside

circumstance, or improving manufacturability, requires unraveling the web to a
certain degree.  The design selected, the web of decisions leading to it, and Òroads

not takenÓ indicate the corporate state of belief at the time the decisions were
made and thus form a historic context.13 Siewiorek (1992) posed the following research questions that must be resolved before concur-rent design and rapid prototyping become integrated into industrial practice:  How can design and
manufacturing information be reused in future products? and, How can the compatibility of newincremental information with all the previously acquired information be ensured?Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGSPECIFIC RESEARCH QUESTIONSA variety of specific research questions are motivated by discussions earlierin this chapter.  In accordance with the charge of the study, the focus of these

research questions is largely information technology and associated disciplines
such as mathematics.  If the underyling science and engineering aspects of manu-

facturing are well understood, IT can help immeasurably in exploiting such
knowledge and information, but by itself IT is not a substitute for that knowledge.¥ How should the data contained in a product data model be organized toaccommodate their huge size and complexity and the many disciplines that
need access to them?¥ How much of that information is physical and how much is ÒrelationalÓ?How much can be captured in traditional geometry and how much is
nongeometric or not focused on one item but shared or spread among many

items, or even not attached to specific items?¥ To what extent can a product description for mechanical items be convertedautomatically into a production plan, that is, a sequence of fabrication steps
that transform raw materials into a final product?¥ Can a general process description language be developed that would beboth man- and machine-intelligible, permitting processes to be described
more precisely than is possible now?¥ How can CAD tools be used at different stages of the design process?  Can
high-order abstractions be used as a starting point for encapsulating product
and process facts and knowledge, geometry, requirements, tolerances, and
other product characteristics, providing a link between product function,
geometry, and processes?  Can Òmeta-featuresÓ be defined that will encapsu-

late groups of features, creating a feature hierarchy?  If not, how can the scale

of real designs be encompassed using features or any other means of captur-
ing and combining detailed design data, geometry, and intent?¥ Features are often very process-dependent, and the fabrication of parts mayrequire the application of multiple processes, each of which uses a different
set of features to address the same part.  Attaching features to descriptions of

parts may prove impractical due to the differing feature sets for the same
part.  Feature-based product description may prove unproductive.  In this

event, to what extent is it feasible to design process models that interact with
separate product models to generate appropriate product models?Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTEGRATED PRODUCT AND PROCESS DESIGN83¥ How can the human interfaces of CAD systems be improved so that morecomplex shapes, assemblies, and other multidimensional problems can be
handled more easily?¥ What new process analysis tools can be developed, especially to handlecomplex problems like assembly, model mix manufacture, and tolerances?¥ How can the reliability of new product or process designs be better pre-dicted, including trade-offs between cost and reliability?¥ What new languages or data structures can be developed to better describeproduct requirements, such as performance, reliability, shapes, interconnec-
tions, interfaces, and tolerances?¥ Similarly, what new languages or data structures can be developed to betterdescribe process requirements, such as performance, cost, reliability, ease of
diagnosis and repair, material handling, ease of use, and ease of modifica-
tion?¥ What new data logging and correlation methods can be devised that wouldhelp the process of continuous improvement, such as finding multiple occur-
rences of the same type of machine failure or deducing what is the best
sequence for testing a broken system to diagnose its problems?Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURING844Shop Floor ProductionINTRODUCTIONSeveral generic tasks characterize production, the process through whichparts and materials are transformed into final products.  These tasks include,

among others, the receipt and acknowledgment of orders, the acquisition of ma-
terials, the performance of shop floor operations, and the generation of informa-
tion needed to support continuous improvement.  Together, these tasks (when

properly done) constitute a qualified production process.  Qualifying a produc-

tion process is a demanding and important task that requires people trained and
physically qualified for a given job, machines and process instruments that can be
guaranteed to operate within specifications, production capacity that can match
the order demand, and the availability of production capacity in the desired time
frames.The information-processing view of a production facility is in essence thesame as that for an individual work cell within the facility.  Both factories and

work cells process orders and turn out products.  For a factory, the order usually

comes from a customer outside the factory; for a work cell, the order comes from
inside the factory.  For a factory, the product delivered is a final product that can
be sold to an external customer; for a work cell, the product delivered is a
partially finished product that goes on to the next work cell, which regards it as a
part or a raw material for that next cell.  The demands made by factories on

suppliers for components are the same as the demands made by an individual
process to be carried out by a work cell.This chapter focuses on those aspects of production related to the schedulingInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION85of specific factory activities, control of the activities and the operation of ma-chines on the shop floor, and mechanisms for providing rapid feedback that
becomes the basis for near-real-time adjustments in various production activities.
Table 4.1 summarizes information technology (IT)-related research needed to
advance shop floor and production systems.SCHEDULING FACTORY ACTIVITIESCentralized ControlThe dominant issues in production planning today are achieving major re-ductions in manufacturing lead time and major improvements in honoring prom-
ised completion times.  Better scheduling and planning might well help to reduce

the total time required for converting raw materials and parts to finished products.TodayÕs dominant scheduling paradigms are based on material requirementsplanning (MRP) and manufacturing resources planning (MRP-II), although other
approaches are used from time to time.   MRP and MRP-II were developed in the

1970s and 1980s.  Originally developed to handle planning purchases of parts

required for the products to be manufactured, MRP assumes a plant of infinite
capacity.  MRP-II goes beyond MRP to take into account inventory, labor, actual

machine availability and capacity, routing capabilities, shipping, and purchasing.
MRP-II generates a master production schedule that serves as the driver or trigger
of shop floor activities.By design, the characteristic time scale of scheduling (in MRP jargon, theÒbucketÓ) based on MRP and MRP-II is days or weeks, perhaps even months;
depending on the implementation, MRP and MRP-II may or may not be the basis
for Òto-the-minuteÓ or Òwork-toÓ timetables for equipment use and material flows.
Under any circumstances, however, arranging for the moment-to-moment control
of factory operations is the job of the shift supervisor.  For the shift supervisor,

situational awareness is at a premium.  He or she must draw on information

provided by workers on the previous shift (reflecting matters to which he or she
must attend on this shift) and sensors and worker reports of what is happening on
the shop floor during this shift (e.g., the condition of various tools, how various
processes are operating, who has reported for work, what materials are available),
as well as directives from senior management concerning overall objectives.
From these sources, the shift supervisor must develop a local plan of operation
for the next 8 hours.In principle, the real-time factory controllers of today operate by periodicallyreceiving a list of jobs that must be completed if the MRP-based scheduling plan
is to be followed.  For each production job, a process plan is retrieved from a

database.  Such a plan involves the identification of routings of particular work in

progress to specific process cells, scheduling of all activities at both the cell and
workstation levels, coordinating those activities across the equipment, monitor-Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGTABLE 4.1  Research to Advance Shop Floor and Production Systems
Subject AreaExample of Research Needed
Equipment controllersArchitecture and technology for shop floor equipment and
data interfacesOpen architecture for control systemsAppropriate operating systems, languages, data structures,and knowledge basesHuman-machine interfaces to permit people to interacteffectively in a modern manufacturing environmentDesign for repairability and the ability to work aroundequipment crashes, including diagnostic softwareBetter real-time control
Wireless communicationSensorsStandardized interface connections
Manufacturing control architectureDynamic (real-time) schedulingDynamic shop floor models with high-speed recomputing
time and the ability to handle numerous variablesReal-time planning and scheduling tools for the flexiblefactory and the distributed factoryTechniques to ensure graceful degradation of productionoperations in the event of local problemsTools to facilitate situation assessment and scheduling bythe factory manager and operations teamMultilevel understanding of large-scale systems
Means for identifying the relevant measures andquantifying the relative performance of alternative systemsTools to support the brokering of priorities and obligationsamong cooperating entities, based on minimizing overall
transportation, material handling, inventory, capital, andlabor costsIntelligent routing systemsIdentification of appropriate interfaces among product
design, product engineering, manufacturing engineering,and factory floor procedures as they emerge in computer-
augmented work groupsInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION87Intelligent routing systemsDemonstration of the resilience of intelligent routing
(continued)systems with respect to the vagaries of factory conditions
Smart parts (automatic routing)Practical open standards for recording and communicating
data among parts, assemblies, subsystems, and theirnetwork of makers and maintainersMechanisms for cost-effective embedding of informationand for ensuring access throughout the life of a partModeling ofWays to efficiently manage large amounts of related data
manufacturing systemsspread over many machines and locations
Ways of specifying complex data relationshipsWays of ensuring interoperability of design process toolsBetter ways of encoding and decoding data
Improved data retrieval methods, including humaninterfacesRapidly reconfigurableDevelopment of agility in the face of rapid change in a
production systemsnumber of important product or process variables
Investigation of the feasibility of developing a reasonablyuniversal product configuration language and methodologyAssessment of the feasibility of using programminglanguages to represent manufacturing operations in thesame sense that design languages represent designsDevelopment of systems that simulate the operation of agiven manufacturing configuration under a variety ofconditions to optimize configurationResource description modelsDevelopment of schemata and models to represent
manufacturing resources and their interconnectionKnowledge bases forDevelopment of a robust and flexible system that can
new process methodsmodel efficiently nearly any process that may be
developedTABLE 4.1  Continued
Subject AreaExample of Research Needed
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGing activities, and job tracking.  The real-time control system then determines the
sequence of activities necessary to execute that process plan.  Once determined,

the sequence of activities is passed down a control hierarchy that is often orga-
nized around equipment (e.g., numerical control machining centers, robot sys-
tems, automated ground vehicles, or any other computer-controlled manufactur-
ing equipment and related tooling resources), workstations of interrelated
equipment, and cells of interrelated workstations.In practice, the activities on the shop floor in most MRP or MRP-II installa-tions are orchestrated by an informal, manual, chaotic process that tries to adhere
to the assumptions on which a given MRP scheduling plan is based.  Such plans

are difficult to change when unforeseen contingencies occur (e.g., delays, mate-
rial defects, unexpected machine downtime).  Thus, in an attempt to avoid dis-

rupting the schedule, factory managers expend considerable effort in solving
real-time shop floor problems, for example, by arranging for priority delivery of
parts at added expense.  Nevertheless, considerable replanning and rescheduling

are necessary when managers are unable to fix these problems, a not-infrequent
occurrence in a manufacturing enterprise.Effective real-time control of a factory depends on scheduling that remainsclose to optimal (relative to some performance measure(s)) over a realistic range
of uncertainties and over time.  With such scheduling, priorities from moment to
moment can be balanced against circumstances prevailing in the plant and in the
manufacturerÕs supply chain.  Such circumstances might include sudden changes
in conditions generated by drifting machine capability, material shortages, worker
absenteeism, unplanned downtime, tool breakage, and the arrival of unexpected
rush items.  Today, managing such sudden changes often requires costly crisis

intervention.  An effective real-time schedule must be flexible enough to absorb

minor perturbations in the system and require many fewer ÒreschedulingsÓ when
something goes wrong.  Real-time dynamic scheduling with this kind of flexibil-

ity would be able to reflect the external priorities of the manufacturing enterprise.
Dynamic scheduling would increase the overall utilization of material, labor, and
equipment by improving the whole system and modifying the operations at each
cell, thus reaching levels unattainable with the best of present methods; for ex-
ample, dynamic schedulers would account for interactions among receiving, ma-
terial handling, and cell schedules and propagation of changes.A dynamic scheduler would continually track the status of jobs, cells, tool-ing, and resource availability.  Through network communications, each cell would

have access to information pertinent to the shop floor.  What should be done next

by any particular cell at any particular moment would thus be determinable at that
cell and would be based on current conditions throughout the factory.A follow-on to MRP/MRP-II technology would provide tools for productionplanning, scheduling, and control with:¥The ability to build and maintain high-quality finite capacity schedulesInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION89(both aggregate and resource-based) that realistically account for the major con-straints and preferences characterizing the production environment at hand;¥Integration of adaptive planning, scheduling, and control capabilities, thus
making it possible to quickly revise a production plan or schedule to account for
a wide range of contingencies and making it possible to drive automated equip-
ment in real time and to make trade-offs of local goals in favor of higher-level
ones;¥The ability to effectively integrate improvements in a wide range of pro-duction planning and scheduling decisions within a given manufacturing site as
well as across the supply chain;¥Support for powerful interactive capabilities making it possible for theuser to incrementally manipulate the production schedule at multiple levels of
detail and to explore Òwhat ifÓ scenarios in overall factory planning as well as
scheduling on the shop floor, and  helping the user to identify possible inefficien-

cies in the production schedule and determine ways to correct these inefficiencies
(e.g., adding overtime, shifting personnel around, buying new equipment, modi-
fying raw material reordering policies, and so on);¥Reconfigurable and/or reusable software, making it easy to customizethese techniques for a wide variety of manufacturing environments;¥Support for integration with other important functionalities (e.g.,  process
planning, factory layout, accounting, preventive maintenance, and so on);¥Capabilities to deal with the stochastic and sometimes reentrant nature ofshop floor events.  Within the MRP/MRP-II paradigm, inputs are deterministic

estimates of the times for various shop floor operations that are obtained by time
and motion studies.  However, in reality, the timing of events is probablistic

rather than deterministic, and the distributions of service times and of interarrival
times, far from being deterministic, look like nonstationary exponential probabil-
ity density functions with long tails.1  Manufacturing operations may also be
reentrant, in the sense that the same equipment is often used for performing
several different steps at different times during a production process (e.g., photo-
lithography in semiconductor manufacturing).  Such nonlinearities introduce

added difficulties for the development of new scheduling paradigms; and¥Backwards compatibility with MRP/MRP-II technology.  While tech-
nologists often believe that a clean break with current technology will enable
newer technologies to avoid their most basic problems, as a matter of practicality,
few manufacturers will be willing to abandon familiar though perhaps flawed
systems in favor of new technologies not proven in the factory.  Whether this

means that the follow-on to MRP/MRP-II will be an entirely new paradigm for1 Personal communication:  Charles Hoover, professor of electrical and mechanical engineering,
director of the Manufacturing Engineering Program at Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, New York;July 1994.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGtechnology with translators that bridge the gap to legacy systems or an evolution-ary improvement to MRP-II is an open question.To support effective scheduling, research is needed in the following areas:
¥ Dynamic shop floor models with fast run times and the ability to handlenumerous variables.  Factors that affect production scheduling include the
following:¥ Are the appropriate resources available at the right time?  (Such re-
sources include people, tooling, jigs, fixtures, or other special product or
process needs.)
¥ Is the equipment up and running?
¥ What is the next scheduled downtime?  Will people be there to handlethis?
¥ Is the 
ÒdownstreamÓ process ready to handle the output?
¥ What is the status of any inventory buffers?
¥ Can a particular lot be fabricated using factory resources other than the
one for which it is planned?  If so, how?
All these and other variables have to be entered into the factory model andscheduling system in order for the results to have any benefit.   The model

could include agents that would take requests from customers (i.e., other
agents that are ÒfedÓ information provided by these agents), decompose
those requests into information requirements, and then request that informa-
tion from its suppliers (i.e., still other agents that feed information to these
agents).  As suppliers respond with estimates of their capability, the agents in

question make realistic forecasts of their ability to respond.  Once the re-

quested information is in hand, the agents pass status reports to customers.¥ Real-time planning and scheduling tools for the flexible factory and thedistributed factory.  Such tools would also provide capabilities for integrat-
ing scheduling and control reactively (e.g., they would make use of adaptive
scheduling techniques based on the severity of the contingency at hand and
the time available to repair the schedule and/or scheduling techniques that
could exploit windows of opportunity that occur fortuitously) and for propa-
gating of schedule changes throughout the system.¥ Techniques to ensure graceful degradation in the event of local problems.Many production operations today are brittle, in that a problem in one crucial
location can halt an entire production line.  More desirable would be a real-

time scheduler that could detect cell problems as they occur and reroute work
flows around them while the cell in question was being repaired.  If such

dynamic rerouting were possible, factory output would be damaged only toInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION91the extent that one cellÕs contribution to the overall process was no longeravailable, rather than producing the functional equivalent of losing the con-
tribution of many cells to overall output.  Dynamic rerouting would also

enable the production of varying items.  Research in this area would address

diagnosis of plan failures, plan repair, and planner modification, as well as
analysis of material handling.¥ Tools to facilitate situation assessment and scheduling by the factory man-ager and operations team.  For the immediate future, management of shop
floor operations will be under direct human supervision.  Human decisions

makers will need such tools if they are to perform their jobs effectively.
Tools in this area should also provide techniques for analyzing interactive
planning and scheduling.  Better techniques would help to develop tools to

monitor and analyze the operation of an enterprise and identify bottlenecks
and opportunities.  One important aspect of this problem is avoiding sub-

optimization by understanding the impact of alternative goals at each work-
station and downstream consequences of changes made.  In addition, since

such tools are likely to be able to produce scheduling-relevant information in
voluminous quantities, good visualization and other human-computer inter-
faces will be necessary as well.¥ Tools to support the brokering of priorities and obligations among cooper-ating entities, based on minimizing overall transportation, material handling,
inventory, capital, and labor costs.  Such tools must also integrate multiple

dimensions in which managers must make decisions, including release deci-
sions (e.g., when to release jobs and orders to the shop floor), reordering
decisions (e.g., when to reorder raw materials and/or components, how much,
and from whom), sequencing and batching decisions (e.g., grouping orders
for similar parts to reduce setup costs), safety stock and safety lead-time
decisions (e.g., increasing lead times as a hedge against various sources of
uncertainty), overtime or order-promising decisions (e.g., promising deliv-
ery dates to potential customers), coordination decisions (e.g., using distrib-
uted scheduling and control within a given plant as well as across the supply
chain), and material-handling decisions (e.g., when to add capacity or when
to change the strategy of the material-handling system).¥ Development of new techniques for optimizing production planning andscheduling.  Traditionally closer to operations research (OR), several suc-
cessful optimization techniques are better characterized as a mix of tech-
niques drawn from artificial intelligence and OR.2  Learning can conceivably
2 For example, certain scheduling techniques developed at Carnegie Mellon University are basedon constraint satisfaction techniques developed in the artificial intelligence literature and also com-bine various OR-like optimization subroutines.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGbe used at all levels to enhance the performance of these tools (e.g. to en-hance the performance of schedule-optimization techniques, help determine
strategies for selecting among multiple reactive control policies, learn im-
portant user preferences to facilitate interactive planning and scheduling,
learn to identify specific types of inefficiencies in the production schedule,
and learn effective coordination strategies with suppliers and subcontrac-
tors).  A related research problem involves the development of optimization

techniques that lend themselves to efficient implementation on parallel hard-
ware.Decentralized ControlAn alternative to top-down scheduling of production activities is a decentral-ized organizational structure in which activities are initiated on the shop floor
itself, without regard for a master factory scheduler.  Since it is not known with

confidence whether a top-down or a bottom-up approach to initiating and per-
forming production activities is more likely to result in success, it is reasonable to
investigate both approaches.  At least two aspects of decentralized control seem

worth exploring, autonomous agents and work and logistics flow.Autonomous AgentsThe use of autonomous agents may offer some potential as a means to handlecomplex dynamic environments.  Implemented as software objects or collections

of objects (perhaps representing physical robotic agents),3 they may provide
solutions for manufacturing problems in the areas of planning, monitoring, and
control.  Agents may be able to take responsibility for shutting down a machine,

starting up a program, or sending a message to another agent.  Because such

agents automate control and interaction functions, they can eliminate activities
otherwise performed by people and allow for simpler organizational structures,
which in turn can simplify requirements for software development and mainte-
nance.If autonomous agents are to be successful, better architectures for manufac-turing systems involving distributed intelligence will need to be developed.
Agents should model real-world behaviors, enable encapsulation, promote flex-
ible distribution of control versus centralized control, capture the inherently3 The committee recognizes that the precise definition of an agent is a topic of debate in thecommunity.  (A significant amount of time was spent engaged in this debate in the AAAI Special

Interest Group for Manufacturing (SIGMAN) workshops of 1992 and 1993, and the IJCAI SIGMANworkshop of 1993.)  Another definition of an agent is that it is an actor with certain cognitive
characteristics, such as motivation and intent.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION93nondeterministic concurrent nature of the environment, and model the neededlevel of knowledge or behavioral detail at any instance in time.A critical consideration for sensible agent behavior is level of autonomy.The practical deployment of agents in manufacturing requires that they behave
sensibly, incorporating an understanding of both global and local goals.  The

issue of agent autonomy is very relevant to planning, monitoring, and controlling
agent behaviors.  The purpose of planning behaviors is to develop and plan steps
of action.  Monitoring behaviors involves evaluating the environment external to

agents.  Controlling behaviors encompasses modifying behavior or data.  The

extent of autonomy can range from local autonomy, which requires that agents be
capable of initiating their own thread of execution, to consensus (negotiation)
autonomy, with each agent adhering to a set of rules or constraints governing how
consensus is achieved and ultimately how agents behave, to command-driven
autonomy, with agents restricted to simply executing some given request (com-
mand) without the benefit of queries or Òfact findingÓ about the state of the global
world (state of agents external to a given agent).Research is needed to develop tools to find information (such as autonomousagents), tools to distribute information, and stable sets of rules for interacting
agents (rules for agent behavior).  With regard to development of autonomous

agents, the following research topics appear important:¥ Architectures supporting dynamic distribution of intelligence among au-tonomous agents for planning, monitoring, and control as well as dynamic
levels of autonomy.¥ System stability.  For sensible decision-making capabilities, autonomous
agents must understand how to resolve conflicting goals.  Instabilities may

arise when multiple agents interact, although collections of agents may also
demonstrate emergent characteristics, that is, modes of stable (and desirable)
behavior that arise from the complexity of their interaction.  Strategies for

resolving conflicting goals may need to be developed.¥ Better representations of spatial and temporal dimensions relevant to shopfloor operations, rather than simple declarative knowledge.
¥ Representations supporting multiple perspectives of data and knowledge.Simulation, analysis, and design tools need to use product information.  Yet

each of these applications of the data has a different perspective on the
product data.  These data must be consistent and persistent, and translators

often fall short.To date, no autonomous agent built has demonstrated sophisticated behavior.Even a task such as searching the Internet for the e-mail address of a particularInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGindividual remains out of reach, although many researchers argue that an agentwith this particular kind of capability will soon be available.  If the potential of

agent technology is to be broadly believed, a convincing demonstration must be
created.4Work and Logistics FlowA complementary approach to achieving decentralized control is the use ofan intelligent routing system that can route a partially finished product to the next
available manufacturing cell or station capable of performing the work needed in
the next step.  In such a system, each manufacturing cell knows the operations

that it has been certified to perform and bids on work to signal its availability
when it is free.  Cells communicate their status to intelligent parts carriers through

a communications network.  Work flow is thus controlled in a bottom-up manner.
One approach to an intelligent routing system presents acceptable methods(or routes), including one determined to be the best according to specified criteria
(e.g., minimum cost, maximum speed, and/or maximum quality).  All acceptable

methods become functional alternate routings.  Whenever an engineering change

occurs, the routing is downloaded to all cells that have been authorized by the
engineering change to bid for work on the part.Another major aspect of shop floor management is coordinating the flow ofvarious components to appropriate locations on the shop floor.  Today, the trans-

port of parts to these locations is performed by intelligent parts carriers.  These

carriers are in essence automatically guided vehicles that carry parts to any avail-
able workstation or to the preferred workstation (selected, for example, on the
basis of its having the shortest queue).  The carriers expedite the progress of parts

through the plant.Such carriers are most useful in a single facility.  However, when products
require production that crosses building or enterprise borders, Òsmart partsÓ will
carry the information necessary to supply production instructions and history.  (A

simple illustration of a smart part is one that signals its location within a factory
as it is moved about, perhaps through the use of bar codes or attached radio
transmitters.)  As manufacturing operations are carried out, instructions embed-

ded in the part can be deleted or marked to indicate completion.  Smart parts can
also monitor and indicate their own performance.  Thus maintenance requests can

be triggered if the part senses its own performance to be substandard.  Planned

maintenance regimens may also be recorded within the part, automatically trig-
gering requests for maintenance.To realize intelligent routing systems, research is needed to identify appro-4 Even if no single agent will be able to demonstrate sophisticated behavior, the possibility re-mains that a collection of agents may be able to do so.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION95priate interfaces among product design, product engineering, manufacturing en-gineering, and factory floor procedures carried out in computer-augmented work
groups, including human-computer interfaces.  The immediate research focus

should be on demonstrating the resilience of the intelligent routing system with
respect to the vagaries of factory conditions.For smart parts, research is needed to identify practical, open standards forrecording and communicating data among parts, assemblies, subsystems, produc-
tion equipment, and maintenance equipment.  Research is also needed into cost-

effective mechanisms for embedding the information and for ensuring access
throughout the life of the part.CONTROLLING INDIVIDUAL FACTORY ACTIVITIESProduction (e.g., material modification, assembly, testing, recycling, or in-formation processing) takes place in a factory.  The factory environment is inher-

ently messy and highly unpredictable:  dust obscures lenses, objects fall in the

wrong place, and metal-working lathes jam.  In this uncertain environment, a

factory control system determines the operational production efficiencies that
influence greatly how responsive a system can be to customer orders and how
much a product costs.  Since all business, engineering, and integration activities

come to fruition with the production of an item, the factory control system must
therefore Òhook toÓ all of the other business and engineering activities as well asto those on the shop floor itself.Information technology has the potential of taming the future productionenvironment by making it more flexible, efficient, and responsive.  For example,

information technology enables the increased automation of traditional produc-
tion techniques, as well as new techniques such as stereolithography and material
deposition.  In addition, many of the individual technologies and components of

unattended machine tools and other fabrication and assembly equipment already
exist as experimental devices in the laboratory or as commercial products, and in
Japan, several Òlights-outÓ factories (factories that operate with limited human
involvement) have existed for several years.However, a fully integrated computer-based factory control system that isflexible and robust is still very much a goal rather than a reality.  Major unsolved

research problems remain, including those discussed later in this chapter.  More-
over, vendors and technology suppliers have chosen in many cases not to build on
previous work, instead opting to develop and use their own proprietary standards
and interfaces, while in other instances, companies have developed their own
standards.  Today, even so 
ÒminorÓ a characteristic as the amount of data that
must be passed between two points in a factory can slow down control systems to
the point that they are no longer functional.  In some instances, even products by
the same vendor are incompatible with each other.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGEquipment ControllersThe purpose of an equipment controller is to effect a timely change in thestate of the piece of equipment being controlled.  State changes effected too early

or too late can cause system instabilities and even failure.  Controllers are used in

many aspects of shop floor operations; factories employ mill drive controllers,
cutter controllers, controllers for variable-speed pumps, crane controllers, con-
trollers for large AC/DC rectifiers, controllers for material-handling systems, and
automated guided vehicle controllers.  For simplicity, the discussion below fo-

cuses on tool controllers, although many of the issues discussed also arise for
controllers of other types of equipment.A tool controller translates human directions into specific actions taken bythe material-working end of the equipment.  The simplest controller is the classi-

cal proportional integral-derivative (PID) controller, which uses the basic time
constants of analog electrical circuits to control timing.  In recent years, these

analog controllers have been supplanted by computer-based digital controllers,
because digital controllers are not subject to drift or other calibration inaccuracies
and because the simple analog controllers are not adequate to drive more com-
plex assemblies of tools.TodayÕs computer numerical controllers (CNCs) are generally adequate forservo control of motion axes and control of specific discrete devices, but they do
not adhere to industry-wide standards for intercommunication.  As a result their

programming flexibility and ability to communicate with external computers and
devices are limited:¥Standard configurations cannot accommodate nonmachining devices suchas work-holding accessories, force sensors, vision sensors, and other subsidiary
devices.¥CNC design concepts are excessively conservative, especially with re-spect to their hardware interfaces.  For example, current CNC communications

are effected mainly through slow serial lines (RS-232 and other similar inter-
faces), or through reading and sending files without the capability for real-time
control.¥The user interface in many of todayÕs controllers is essentially a push-button operatorÕs panel (the new touch-sensitive screens are essentially the same)that does not take advantage of the rich information environment.¥Programming is performed through a cryptic controller-specific G-codelanguage, which is not practical for nontrivial programs and necessitates a spe-
cial, installation-dependent post-processor to translate from higher-level parts
and tool programming languages such as APT.55 In principle, G-codes are the subject of a standard (EIA RS-274) and are not supposed to varyfrom controller to controller.  But different implementations of the standard for different controllers
lead to incompatibilities between the G-codes for them.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION97The challenge in designing a controller is providing the appropriate com-puter environment for the integration and implementation of a complex machine
tool environment that applies these individual technologies.  This challenge can-
not be met with current controller technology.  Future machine control technol-

ogy should be characterized by two central themes:1.  A self-sustaining work environment.  A self-sustaining machine, for any
kind of processing operation, will be serviced in its immediate vicinity by a
dexterous manipulator or other automatic loading device, dedicated to the con-
tinuous needs of the process, such as material supply and unloading.  Instructions

for the machine (e.g., cutting path) will be generated directly from parts specified
by CAD/CAM design.  A variety of on-machine sensors will provide vision,

touch, force, and temperature senses, with the task of recognizing unexpected
events, performing in-cycle inspection, and adjusting the production parameters.2.  An open system for real-time control and communication.  An open
system is one in which the control or communications product developed by a
third party also adheres to the standard on which the open system is based; a good
paradigm for open machine control and communications architectures is repre-
sented by the standards that characterize UNIX and TCP/IP.  Machinery control-

lers for unit processing such as MOSAIC (Box 4.1) aim to promote this atmo-
sphere.  If successful, the U.S. machine industry will grow as market opportunities

are expanded for sensor companies, diagnostic software developers, and all ancil-
lary product suppliers.The following research and development areas should be addressed in order toachieve the vision of 21st-century control of factory equipment:¥ An open architecture for machine controllers.  An open architecture would
provide a more efficient and Òuser-friendlyÓ environment for operation and
programming, the ability to integrate various devices with a machineÕs con-struction and operation, and the ability to communicate more tightly with
CAD/CAM systems and factory-wide operational management systems.  An

open architecture ensures that all components share the same high-level
operating system, programming environment, communication facilities, and
other computer resources.  It accommodates the installation of new devices

and sensors as a part of the machine-specific configuration.  Controller archi-

tectures and software must also support communication with ÒupstreamÓfunctions (including computer-aided process planning and computer-aided
design) and ÒdownstreamÓ functions (including those that drive and process
sensor data).  Also, such an architecture has to be compatible with a range of

very different factory characteristics (fixed versus variable product flow,
static versus rapidly changing product mix, shared versus assigned tooling
resources, and so on).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURING¥ Advanced manufacturing languages for unit process programming.  While
existing languages (such as APT and Compac for machining) must be sup-
ported, a more flexible language is needed.  It should include provisions not
only for real-time control, but also for the operation of accessory devices in
conjunction with the machining process, a more direct connection to CAD/
CAM systems, and a flexible interface for user applications.  Such a lan-

guage might also provide controllers with information defining the work
being performed, rather than simply specifying the motion of a point through
space (as is the case for most current languages).BOX 4.1  An Example of an Open Architecture
for Machine ControllersThe MOSAIC project of the late 1980s (Greenfeld et al., 1989) was one of thefirst attempts at establishing an open architecture for machine control.  MOSAIC

provides all of the expected functionality of a conventional ÒclosedÓ computer nu-merically controlled (CNC) machine tool.  That is, the parts-programmer of a CNCmachine tool can interact with the MOSAIC system from any automatic program
for machine tools (APT)-like, CAD/CAM terminal with the result that the files gen-erated through this interaction are postprocessed into machine-level commandsthat provide exactly the same functionality as G&M codes.However, MOSAIC adds a computer operating system that serves as a uniformplatform on which CNC applications can build, specifically, a real-time version ofUNIX.  The architecture of this operating system allows a set of independent appli-

cation programs to be developed.  This set of application programs can be devel-
oped by any third party and brought into the MOSAIC controller for use by the localprograms or system developers.By contrast, a closed architecture constrains local programmers to work withthe predefined set of G&M codes that are supplied with the machinery companyÕsvendor-specific controller (Fanuc, Mazak, and Cincinnati-Milacron are todayÕs
most-often-seen controllers).  Recently, some of these vendors have also claimed
an ÒopenÓ system; but close examination usually shows that the ÒopennessÓ is onlyin relation to their own expanded library functions, written in local formats.  They

will not be ÒopenÓ to any arbitrary third-party software developers able, say, tosupply new routines for new sensors coming onto the market.In general, machines that plug into an open system must be equipped with ageneral-purpose computer environment and bus structure that in a ÒlocalÓ sensewill control the axes of motion and the various sensor-based devices and will man-
age programs and data locally.  However, to be part of a ÒbroadÓ intelligent envi-
ronment, the machinery must use communications and networks that are univer-sally accepted in the computer culture.  The machine should be adaptable to the

changing environment and tasks, and thus, modular, in terms of its controllerÕscomputer configuration, and in terms of the mechanical construction.MOSAIC is suggestive of what an open architecture controller might be.  Nev-
ertheless, any commercially viable product would have to deal with interactionsbetween the large number of controller features required in such products.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION99¥ Appropriate data and knowledge structures.  Different needs and differentlocal working environments require different data and knowledge structures
and different ways of managing these structures.  For example:
¥ Special real-time database systems are required for real-time acquisi-
tion and control of data, since conventional database systems do not
have the responsiveness necessary to support rapid acquisition of data.
For example, data may need to be time-stamped, so that events can be
synchronized at a later time in a conventional computing environment.
In addition, databases for ostensibly different purposes must often couple
to each other:  databases related to equipment maintenance are different

from databases that support lot-scheduling needs, but since schedulers
need to know the status of equipment, the equipment maintenance data-
base must be linked to the scheduler.
¥ Expert systems today tend to be rigid in the sense that they are not
readily interoperable with another knowledge base derived from the
expertise of a different expert.  Research is needed to find ways to

reconcile knowledge bases derived from different experts on the same
subject.  In addition, knowledge-based technology must be developed

that is responsive enough to be used with real-time systems.
¥ Databases that pass and manage information about events and activi-
ties on the shop floor are needed to inform design engineers as well as
shop floor workers handling successive shifts.  Design engineers may

not understand very well what is actually happening on the shop floor;
expert system shells have been useful for presenting operators with
theoretical best practices and capturing their immediate reactions, which
are then routed instantly to engineers along with other information that
explicitly defines the context of an operatorÕs remark.  For shop
floorworkers, special databases are needed that will track on the fly

newly discovered and ad hoc information (e.g., flaws discovered on the
midnight shift) for use in the next shift.
¥ Databases and knowledge representations that enable decision makersto distinguish between unusual system behavior that nevertheless re-
flects ÒreasonableÓ or 
ÒappropriateÓ behavior and unusual system be-
havior that reflects some kind of failure.  As factory managers become

privy to larger amounts of information, such questions will arise more
frequently.¥ Validation of models underlying controller designs, for example, a control-ler based on an expert system that interprets sensor input.  The relationship
between different inputs and different rules in an expert system needs to be
well understood if operators are to have confidence in the operation of the
controller.  Thus, reliable techniques are needed to demonstrate the validity

of the underlying expert system model.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURING¥ The human-computer interface (HCI).  Given the complexity of a factory
Õsinformation environment, an effective factory HCI must provide displays
that will provide a human being with the appropriate level of detail for his or
her needs (which may change as more is learned about a given situation).
Desirable features for a factory HCI include:¥ A direct, easy-to-use interface into product design databases so that
product specifications can be easily reviewed on the plant floor;
¥ Support for unusual input/output options necessitated by the factory
environment.  For example, an operator with both hands full may need

to interact by voice, or an information display may need to be viewed at
a distance, or a very concise set of keystrokes may be needed to save
time in user input; and
¥ Tools that enable the end user to tailor the interface for individual
needs and to standardize the interface across multiple machines.  The

varying HCIs of differing equipment currently present significant ob-
stacles to training employees and attaining quality in manufacturing.¥ Design of shop floor equipment for repairability and the ability to workaround equipment Òcrashes,Ó including diagnostic software.  Factories are
fragile environments; small changes can cause large disruptions in work
flow.  Such disruptions can be very expensive; 1 hour of shutdown can cost

upwards of several hundred thousand dollars.  Thus, problems and disrup-

tions must be diagnosed quickly, and fixes implemented promptly.  Quick

fixes may be applied to bring crashed equipment up, even as more permanent
remedies are studied and adopted.   Many capabilities related to prompt

diagnosis and repair will be achieved by using sophisticated software, data-
bases, expert systems, and networks.  The requirement will be speed and

accuracy; a quick but poor solution may be more costly than a slower but
more correct one.  Study of the trade-offs between the time for and the

completeness of solutions is a worthy area for manufacturing research, as is
the designing of work flows in factories so that there are no single points of
failure.  (Today, such failure points include network servers, central data-

bases, and cell controllers.)¥ The nature of real-time requirements.  Factories operate in real time, and a
controller that issues a command too soon or too late may cause inadvertent
damage.  But real-time computing and control are extraordinarily complex

and demanding.  Thus, several areas require attention:
¥ The role of time in various control situations.  Delay times owing to
computer operation cannot be predicted on the basis of simple formulas
as they are in the case of analog circuits; rather, they are currently a
matter of best guess and experiment.  Even then, they are subject to

considerable statistical variation.  Research in this area should seek to
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION101establish the characteristics of the time distribution that will lead tosuccessful control, characterized by the distribution of response times,
especially the mean and average times and the worst-time behavior.
¥ Mathematical formalisms for real-time control.  Developing appropri-
ate formalisms for representing and controlling devices is key to the
development of good real-time systems.  Today, classical control theory

is the dominant formalism used in real-time control, although modern
control theory, state space analysis, fuzzy logic, and neural networks
have made inroads to some degree.  Controllers of the future are likely to

involve all the control techniquesÑclassical, modern, fuzzy logic, andneural networksÑin an integrated approach to control.¥ The development of a real-time operating system for manufacturing,suitable for the very high speed control required for unit processing
operations.  Current general-purpose operating systems do not provide

the response time essential for maintaining the speed, accuracy, and
safety features needed in future machinery.  A real-time operating sys-

tem for manufacturing should be compatible with industry-standard op-
erating systems such as UNIX or MS-DOS with respect to high-level
management, file-system operations, communications, and programming

environments.  Capabilities for network-based coordination with other

tools running on the same real-time operating system will also be neces-
sary for the integration of equipment controlled by separate controllers.¥ Wireless communications.  Since computing will be used throughout the
manufacturing environment, and it is impossible to predict beforehand where
these interactions will occur, wireless communications will probably be re-
quired.  Wireless communications will make factory reconfiguration easier,

faster, and cheaperÑas the locations of equipment need not be tied to com-munications portalsÑand will be useful in supervision, maintenance, han-dling of materials, and other activities in which personnel cannot be tied to
fixed workstations.  But the trade-offs associated with wireless communica-
tions in a factory environment are complex, for example:¥ Trade-offs between the capital costs of fixed building wiring with very
high bandwidth versus the facility costs of wireless transmitters and
receivers that operate within a very restrictive bandwidth;
¥ Trade-offs among broadcast power, geographical coverage, and multi-
station interference; and
¥ The potential hostility of the factory environment to such communica-
tions (e.g., wireless communications in the presence of radiation-sensi-
tive equipment).Research will be needed to support a rational decision-making process withrespect to these trade-offs.  Research will also be needed in the area of the
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGtransmission and reception of complex and varied signals in a sensitiveenvironment.  Other relevant research (and standardization) would address

such issues as maximizing the use of the limited electromagnetic spectrum
and spread-spectrum-type wireless communications using trellis-type
encodings to ensure maximum security, reliability, and noninterference with
sensitive manufacturing equipment.Beyond research, standards (for components, configurations, interconnec-tions, and control software) and related assistance (e.g., from Sematech activity
for semiconductor manufacturing) are needed to ensure consistency and inter-
operability of implementations, to coordinate and standardize open systems con-
cepts in control systems, and to motivate system and equipment suppliers to use
these mechanisms in their equipment.Additional dimensions of equipment controllers are discussed later in thischapter under ÒFacilitating Continuous ImprovementÓ for reasons that are made
clear in that section.SensorsTo ensure the optimum performance of production processes, it is necessaryto have information on what those processes are actually doing in real time and
how those processes are affecting equipment, tooling, work zones, material han-
dling, and workpiece material.  Knowledge databases and predictive models of a
process and its components provide a baseline of Òin-advanceÓ information, but if
routine deviations are greater than can be tolerated for production within toler-
ances, sensors are needed to augment this baseline information for process moni-
toring and feedback to controllers.In existing systems, estimates of the impact of sensing systems on processperformance indicate as much as a sixfold increase in effective operation speed
(Eversheim, 1991).  Add to that the increased yield due to prevention of defective

workpieces and the impact is more impressive.  Moreover, sensors can also

support worker safety, prevention of damage to a machine, prevention of rejected
workpieces, prevention of idle time on the machine, better interfacing of transfer
mechanisms with equipment, and optimal use of resources.The increasing demands of unit processes have encouraged the developmentof systems using a variety of sensors.  Examples of devices and processes into

which sensors will be incorporated include extrusion dies for control of tempera-
ture and metal flow and surface finish; turning tools, for thermal control to
provide maximum life and load; and continuous processes, for transmitting pro-
cess parameters.  Sensors will interface so closely with processes that compli-

cated external interpretation of data will no longer be necessary.  Future sensors

will provide diagnostics (as many do today) as well as fault tolerance and in some
cases self-healing capability.  Sensors will provide salable sample rates for analy-
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION103sis of process variation, summary-level information, and statistical descriptionsof process parameters.Sensors can play an important role in many aspects of production, including:
¥Quality control.  Many quality control schemes rely on pre- and post-
process inspectionÑthat is, catching a mistake before a component enters anindividual unit process (when nothing is happening) or when it exits from the
subprocess (when the unit process is completed).  Extension of quality control to

in-process inspection, so that problems can be caught in Òreal timeÓ and perhaps
corrected before much additional processing, is even more dependent on sensor
performance and the availability of advanced sensors.¥Workpiece placement.  Machining tools depend on information about
tolerances, orientation, material characteristics, and assembly sequence.  Sensors

are needed to assess these characteristics before the partially finished assembly or
part is worked on.¥Use of intelligent processing equipment.  A unit process could do more or
less to a part being fabricated (e.g., heat it more, remove less metal) depending on
how the particular part being worked on responded to its treatment.  A piece of

equipment with location sensors could signal its location as it was moved around
on the shop floor.¥High-precision fabrication.  High-precision fabrication is characterized
by very stringent tolerances on form, dimension, or surface features in the pres-
ence of a number of material, tooling, and environmental variables.  As a produc-

tion tool shapes material for a finished (or intermediate) product, the reaction of
the material to the tool has an influence on what the tool should do next.  For

example, a machine that unexpectedly encounters more resistance than antici-
pated to a given cut may need subsequently to exert more force, and a sensor is
needed to close the feedback loop to the toolÕs controller so that the necessaryorders may be given.¥Use of tools.  A sensor-loaded tool moving along with the process could
provide information on product and process specification compliance and loca-
tion.  The new active sensors will change the way products are transported,

tracked, monitored, and maintained at every stage of their existenceÑfrom cre-ation to recycling to disposal.  Researchers have developed miniature vibration

sensors and accelerometers that, if appropriately built into a machine structure
(like the resin concrete structures now in use as machine tool structures), could
provide in situ sensing capability for control of machine stability and deflection.Sensors are key elements in the other enabling technologies of process con-trol and process precision and metrology.  A vast array of sensors are commer-

cially available or under development in research laboratories; these sensors
support unit processes through an extensive array of sensor technologies rangingInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGfrom optical, infrared techniques to high-frequency ultrasonic and acoustic emis-sion.6  Sensor innovation will be necessary in the future, because many character-
istics of machining processes today (e.g., very low power consumption) tend to
reduce the effectiveness of, or render useless altogether, a large number of tradi-
tional sensing methodologies based on force, torque, motor current, or power
measurement.  Examples of more novel sensors include acoustic sensors to moni-

tor and improve tool performance and surface finish or to monitor the relative
location of parts in a finished product; photoelectronic and ultrasonic sensors that
enable intelligent processing equipment to position and set functions; and bar
code and radio frequency sensors that identify and report on the status and loca-
tion of parts.  In many cases, it is likely that relevant sensor technology will have

been first developed for application in other fields.The first major contribution of information technologies to sensors was theidea of digitized output, which removed analog variation from the outputs.  Later,

self-calibration and error detection were added to allow self-diagnostics to assure
that the information from the sensor was not detrimental to the process control.
Sensors for the future production environment pose a number of challenging
information technology research questions:¥ Standardization.  Today
Õs sensors (and actuators) require customized driv-ers for their operation, greatly increasing the cost of an otherwise inexpen-
sive sensor or actuator. Architectures and interface standards are needed so
that users can select from a catalog of sensors and actuators, each with a
certain limited set of parameters specified in the catalog, and plug those
selected into a common control system with only minor, automatic configu-
ration.  When such architectures and standards are in place, sensors should

be able to feed data directly into a process control system.  Sensors con-

nected through such architectures would be linked directly into databases for
dynamic updates usable by machine controllers.¥ Sensor characterization.  An appropriate characterization would describe a
sensor or actuator at various levels of abstraction (e.g., as an abstract physi-
cal process, as an electrical device producing an output, as a ÒsmartÓ device
with a certain amount of preprocessing capability, including accuracy cor-
rections, zero-offset correction, and perhaps self-calibrating and self-scaling
functions).  The method of characterization should be applicable to a wide

range of devices, including sensors from simple thermocouples up to image
systems, and actuators from simple on-off switches to multiaxis robots.¥ Sensor fusion.  Many sensing techniques are not individually reliable
6 An excellent review of these sensors as related to machining is provided in Shiraishi (1988;1989a,b).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION105enough for process monitoring over the normal range of process operation.Multiple sensors that are collectively effective over the entire operating range
may be enablers for effective real-time process monitoring if questions of
integration can be resolved.  To be effective, a multisensor approach requires

more attention to feature extraction, information integration, and decision
making in real time.¥ Sensors with on-board intelligence.  With on-board intelligence, the collec-
tion of data might be collapsed into a statistical distribution (for routine data)
and specific reports of exceptions to the distribution, thereby reducing band-
width requirements for reporting sensor data.  On-board intelligence might

enable a sensor to recognize physical features of a machined part (e.g., color,
size, shape) to detect the presence or absence of a component or characteris-
tic of a part.  Intelligent sensors also might include capabilities for signal

conditioning and processing (reducing the impact of uncertainty in sensor
data), and perhaps models relating measured values to monitoring and con-
trol variables and strategies for using the information gathered.FACILITATING CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENTWhen applied to the shop floor, continuous improvement refers to the con-tinual monitoring of shop floor practice and how that practice is reflected in the
products that result.  Whereas traditional shop floor environments emphasize the
desirability of procedures that are consistent and hence unchanging, continuous
improvement suggests instead the incremental evolution of procedures to make
products of ever-higher quality and timeliness.  Products are monitored for time-

liness and for quality at every stage in production; the resulting information is
passed back to process operators with enough detail to suggest corrective actions
that may need to be taken to improve the process on the next round.  Process

operators implement certain changes and then see if their changes have had the
desired effect.  If so, such changes are recorded as annotations to the then-current

operating procedures to effect the improvement.  In this manner, continuous

improvement relies on standardization of practice, resulting in an empirically
relevant point of comparison against which to measure change in practice, rather
than standardization (and hence invariance) of procedure.At the heart of continuous shop floor improvement is the idea of operator-centered control systems that enable operators to take a wide range of actions that
may be necessary to improve production quality or speed.  Research is needed on

several dimensions of operator-centered control systems:¥ Capture of most recent agreements.  Annotations to standard operating
procedures can be described as the most recent agreements (i.e., details of
understanding reached on the last shift) between operators and the mostInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGrecent version of those operating procedures.  Such agreements must be
passed on to subsequent shifts if the knowledge is not to be lost.  When

captured, these agreements should specify the nature of the changes in oper-
ating procedures indicated, the rationale for these changes, the changes in
output to be expected, and the circumstances under which these changes are
to be implemented.  A particularly promising approach is the use of expert

system shells that allow informed agreements to be captured on the spot
using the operatorÕs expertise.¥ Effective diagnostic capability.  A tool should be able to report its state of
health:  where the process it implements is weak, what problems are impend-

ing, and when action will need to be taken.¥ Communication with other shop floor systems.  This connection would
provide, for example, scheduling that reflects the most recent priorities so
that the most important jobs could be done first.  A connection to the mate-

rial-handling system that feeds the tool would inform the operator of unex-
pected delays in the arrival of materials and permit, for example, mainte-
nance to be performed in that unexpected free time.  Information about the

toolÕs output would be available to workstations downstream.¥ User-configurable interface.  A display (control panel) should be dynami-
cally modifiable in accordance with user preferences and needs.  Once a

change called for by a new agreement has been implemented, the user should
be able to modify the interface to reflect that change.¥ Administrative control.  Operator-centered tools should account automati-
cally for operator time and attendance, labor distribution, production counts
and rates, quality levels, and similar administrative data.  Greater accuracy

and precision in obtaining these statistics should be possible.All of these elements are aspects of the equipment controller.  But they are
discussed separately from the earlier discussion of equipment controllers in this
chapter to underscore their importance in capturing information generated at the
back end of the production cycle.CONTROLLING AND MANAGING PRODUCT CONFIGURATIONManufacturers often produce variants of a given product.  For example, Intel
Corporation produces microprocessor chips that are Òupwardly compatibleÓ in
variants known as the 386, 486, and Pentium series.  Each model also has variants

(e.g., those with math coprocessors versus those without, those with power-
management features versus those without, and so on).  Production operations
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION107that can shift easily and rapidly from producing one variant to another would givemanufacturers a needed degree of flexibility in their management.Flexible production of this sort is likely to depend on the implementation oftwo ideas of different time scales.  The first is that of a single production facility
whose internal operations can be modified substantially by software-based
changes to machine controllers and schedulers.7  The second notion is that of a
manufacturing operation that can draw globally dispersed units providing spe-
cialized expertise and unite them temporarily to carry out a specific production
task (e.g., to produce a specific product or product line) and then disband them
when the task has been completed.To effectively control and manage product configuration, research is neededto manage product variations and to check the validity of proposed configura-
tions.  At present, companies develop product-specific systems or may use artifi-

cial intelligence techniques (also often product-specific themselves) to deal with
configuration control.  In addition, configuration control and management re-

quire a universal product configuration language and methodology that can be
used by both marketing and manufacturing personnel to develop valid product
configurations.SPECIFIC RESEARCH QUESTIONSAs in Chapter 3, a variety of research questions are motivated by discussionsearlier in this chapter.  But the caveat posed in Chapter 1 also applies here:

research to fill the gaps in the scientific and engineering knowledge about shop
floor processes to be supported by information technology is essential if the
promise if IT is to be exploited fully.  For example, a deeper basic understanding

about the physics of part-tool interactions or the physics and chemistry that might
underlie possible faults in a process will be necessary if IT is to control tools or to
help diagnose faults in a production line.  As always, IT can help immeasurably

in exploiting knowledge and information that people have, but by itself it is not a
substitute for that knowledge and information.¥ How extensive should any factory system be?  One hierarchical system
7 Even an idea as simple as changing the order in which variations of a product are manufacturedcan have significant effects on productivity.  For example, an AT&T manufacturing plant was re-
sponsible for the production of 80 PBX (private telephone exchange) systems each week in a wide
range of sizes with many different options.  The order of manufacture was determined by the se-
quence in which orders for these systems were received; this pattern resulted in a large and undesir-able variation in flow rates of work through the plant as the result of the many different feature sets
needed.  By rearranging and thereby improving the manufacturing sequence of these 80 systems, a
significant improvement in throughput times from the lines feeding final assembly was achievedwith no additional equipment purchases.  See Luss et al. (1990), pp. 99-109.
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGwith many embedded applications for specific purposes, or a set of distrib-uted applications with few interactions?¥ How complex may the user interaction systems be before the complexity
overwhelms the user?¥ How are new systems introduced into a factory that contains many older or
even obsolete legacy systems?  How can an existing, obsolete system be

replaced with minimum factory disruption?¥ How are decision-making systems transferred into decision-making roles?
¥ What level(s) of abstraction are appropriate for controlling factories?
¥ What is the trade-off between levels of detail required and the speed of
response?¥ What characteristics and configurations of autonomous agents give rise to
emergent behaviors, swarm stability, and divergent behavior?¥ How will humans interact with factory systems?  What will be the nature of
the user interfaces?Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1095Modeling and Simulationfor the Virtual Factory
INTRODUCTIONThe development of manufacturing systems often proceeds in the operatingfactory by trial-and-error experimentation using valuable factory resources and
time, with a resulting high cost in lost manufacturing productivity due to
prototyping and debugging on the factory floor.  Data continue to be generated at

an exponentially increasing rate, but there is little opportunity to assimilate, much
less act on, the information they represent.  The abundance and variety of custom-

ized and unintegrated new technological capabilities introduce problems for man-
agers, engineers, supervisors, and operators within a factory, with which the work
force may be ill-prepared to cope.  Better ways to introduce new manufacturing

technology onto the factory floor must be developed to help improve our manu-
facturing capabilities.As noted in Chapter 4, the factory environment is complex.  To develop
high-level insight into what is happening in the factory environment and how
factory operations might be affected by changes in that environment, manufactur-
ing researchers have attempted to construct simulations and models of factories
that factory decision makers can experiment on without disrupting actual produc-
tion.  This approach requires a virtual factory to be a simulation that faithfully

reflects that operation in all of the dimensions relevant to human managers, from
the week-long and month-long time scales that characterize todayÕs material
requirements planning (MRP) and manufacturing resources planning (MRP-II)
planning and scheduling systems to the second- and minute-long time scales that
characterize real-time dynamic schedulers (human or computer) of shop floor
operations.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGCONSIDERATIONS IN THE DEVELOPMENTOF VIRTUAL FACTORIESLearning from Past ProblemsThe idea of a virtual factory is not new.  But in the past, the development and
application of large coherent models of factory operations have been largely
unsuccessful, even as more local simulations (e.g., those operating at the equip-
ment level or process level) have succeeded.  The models of the past have not had

the content to capture the essence of factory operations, yet even these inadequate
models were so difficult to produce that after great effort they typically ground
down into Òanalysis paralysisÓ and were abandoned.
Possible causes for such failure include the following:¥ The initial models were too poor in detail to provide answers that satisfied
factory demands, and so the concepts were abandoned.  Even small events may

produce large fluctuations in factory operations, and adequate models must be
capable of reflecting these subtle influences.¥The simulations were too slow to provide timely answers.  Timeliness is
paramount in factory operations; a piece of equipment that is unexpectedly down,
or is being used for another task when required to perform a function, can disrupt
a shift schedule.  Data must be provided and acted on very quickly to preserve the

integrity of operations.¥The representations of the process were inaccurate, leading to wronganswers.  Processes may be simple or complex; in any event, all the important

characteristics of a process need to be accurately represented so that applying a
model will supply useful answers.¥The user interfaces were so complicated and/or incomprehensible thatthey were unusable.  The most common user of information is a human being,

who can be overwhelmed by either the number or the complexity of the user
interfaces required to access or disseminate information.  For example, senior

factory managers are best able to comprehend results that are explicitly tied to
financial metrics of performance; results tied to metrics relevant at lower levels in
the hierarchy will be less helpful to them.¥There were insufficient skilled personnel to understand and apply themodels intelligently.  Use of models is not inherently easy.  It requires skills that
enable using models and simulations, as well as understanding and analyzing the
results.  Learning these skills requires education and training.
¥There were sufficient skilled experts on the factory floor to manage op-erations, so that modeling and simulation were considered unnecessary.  When

things are going relatively smoothly, new tools such as modeling and simulation
are felt to be superfluous; current skill sets are thought to be sufficient to do the
job.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODELING AND SIMULATION FOR THE VIRTUAL FACTORY111¥Invalid input data to simulations led to incorrect results.  For example,
communications on the factory floor were insufficient to keep the model up to
date.  (Factory floor communications are used, among other things, to keep track

of equipment placement on the shop floor, a factor with a big impact on work
flow; if a model does not reflect changes in equipment placement (which may
change on a time scale of hours), the modelÕs output relevant to making workflow decisions may well be incorrect.)¥Factories themselves constantly change (e.g., new or modified manufac-turing processes may be installed), and a lack of synchronization between a
model and what is actually being done on the shop floor may invalidate the
model.¥Simulations may have been performed at inappropriate levels of detail foraddressing problems of interest and relevance to decision makers.  An element of

considerable importance in constructing a simulation is understanding what kinds
of questions need to be answered for what purposes.¥TodayÕs simulation models are difficult to expand, and they present verydifficult problems in scaling up.For such reasons, factory-level modeling has never succeeded in capturingthe attention of senior manufacturing management the way that process and
product models have.  However, recent advances in information technology make

the idea of realistic simulations of factory operations much more feasible than
they have been in the past.Determining the Requirements for Effective Factory ModelsA virtual factory model will involve a comprehensive model or structure forintegrating a set of heterogeneous and hierarchical submodels at various levels of
abstraction.  Each submodel will be designed for a specific purpose, but together

they will operate from a common source of data or knowledge base and will be
able to deal with the task at hand without expensive or time-consuming hand-
tailoring of interfaces for a userÕs particular needs.  To a very high degree, the
software used to control actual factory operations will also drive the operation of
the virtual factory model, although it will do so very rapidly so that simulations
can be run on a timely basis.A key consideration in the development of these tools will be accounting forthe essential stochastic nature of events on the factory floor.1  Since managers
1 A Research Agenda for CIM (MSB, 1988, p. 20) recommends research on methods for represent-
ing decision objects, for example, states, actions, utilities, prior and posterior probabilities, samples,
costs, and decisions; methods for mapping these to manufacturing objects; development of relevantheuristics and algorithms; and exploratory assessment of the merit of these techniques in specificdomains.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGwill be using virtual factory models to perform Òwhat ifÓ exercises to anticipate
unexpected events (e.g., tool breakdown, new demands for expediting orders, the
arrival of new machines, unplanned maintenance) and to indicate what actions
need to be taken (e.g., which machine is to be changed, what materials are to be
provided), a simulation based only on deterministic factors would correspond to
one Òexperiment,Ó and in a stochastic environment, there is no reason to expect
that the same line configuration or schedule plan would yield the same result on
any particular run.  However, a suite of modeling tools that could test a given

configuration or plan against thousands of experiments (and the random events in
each run) might well provide a meaningful basis on which to make decisions
about a configuration or plan.  A second important consideration is that the

development of simulation models and tools should be broad enough to encom-
pass both the factory technologies and processes of today (which are embedded
in the manufacturing infrastructure and may not be replaced for many years to
come) and those of tomorrow (i.e., those technologies and processes that have not
yet been deployed widely or even invented yet).A complete simulation of even a modest factory will require the integrationof numerous models and is out of reach today.  However, an appropriate first step

in developing a full factory model is the virtual production line, which involves
simulation of individual tools and, more importantly, simulation of the integrated
operation of the tools in production.  A wide variety of individual, single-activity

models are already in use in manufacturing.  But the comprehensive integrated

modeling of the manufacturing enterprise will provide new insight into the causes
of and remedies for scheduling bottlenecks and new strategic options.2An ultimate goal of the research agenda outlined here would be the creationof a demonstration platform that would compare the results of real factory opera-
tions with the results of simulated factory operations using information technol-
ogy applications such as those discussed in this report.  This demonstration

platform would use a computer-based model of an existing factory and would
compare its performance with that of a similarly equipped factory running the
same product line, but using, for example, a new layout of equipment, a better
scheduling system, a paperless product and process description, or fewer or more
human operators.  The entire factory would have to be represented in sufficient

detail so that any model user, from factory manager to equipment operator, would
be able to extract useful results.There are two broad areas of need:  (1) hardware and software technology to
handle sophisticated graphics and data-oriented models in a useful and timely2 A Research Agenda for CIM (MSB, 1988, pp. 13-15) recommends research on methods and
technologies for process operation analysis, optimization, control, and quality assurance and (on p.17) recommends research on methods for coupling process operation with process planning andresource allocation so that these activities can be accomplished concurrently.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODELING AND SIMULATION FOR THE VIRTUAL FACTORY113manner, and (2) representation of manufacturing expertise in models in such away that the results of model operation satisfy manufacturing expertsÕ needs for
accurate responses.MODELING TECHNOLOGYA requirement for manufacturing models is that all levels of detail be inter-nally consistent, since very small influences at a very local level may have a
significant impact even at the highest factory level (e.g., if a piece of equipment
goes down, the resulting schedule disruptions can shut down the entire factory).
A factory may well demonstrate mathematically chaotic behavior, such that very
small influences may have totally unpredictable outcomes.  The enormous range
of objects (e.g., pieces of equipment, people, raw materials, batches or lots of
material, process steps, process control, assemblies of objects, a wide variety of
information Òobjects,Ó material-handling and robotic equipment, and so on) en-
compassed by even a partial manufacturing model further adds to its complexity.In general, the complexity needed in a model to generate accurate resultsstrongly influences the time it takes to simulate some factory condition.  Thus,

there is a trade-off between speed of response to provide timely answers and the
level of detail required to provide Ògood enoughÓ answers.  For example, some
simulations of semiconductor processing operations may take hours or days of
computation (i.e., may take much longer than the operations take in reality); such
performance may be useful for analytical purposes but not for controlling or
advising for real-time operations.If advanced modeling technology is to be useful in the future, it must notdisregard the large investment that has been made in existing data systems.  The

client-server systems and relational databases of today, and even object-oriented
databases, will be the legacy systems three and four decades hence.  New technol-

ogy must be able to fold these legacy systems into its representation and be able
to resolve semantic differences that may exist.In addition, new modeling technology will likely reside in an extensivedistributed computing environment.  Thus, fundamental issues of maintaining

data integrity in a distributed computing environment need to be resolved.  Ad-

ministration of systems, networks, and applications is today resource-intensive;
more efficient and effective methods of managing these elements will be re-
quired.Finally, information at the appropriate level of detail must be presented torelevant decision makers and analysts.  Visibility of the activities of an enterprise

is a prerequisite to effective control.  Research is needed regarding how to present

to different users (from managers to operators) the information inherent in the
business model, which can reflect an actual state, potential future states, and post-
mortem analysis of past states to determine what went right or wrong.  People

should be able to prepare presentations of various kinds of information on theirInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGown, rapidly, and without the use of support personnel, and to retrieve ÒlessonslearnedÓ and present that information at the appropriate times to users.
Specific research issues related to developing manufacturing models includeimproving methods and tools for:¥ Efficiently managing large amounts of related data distributed over manymachines and locations.  Data may be directly linked to the computer model
of the production process, automatically updating the status of the model,
and it will be desirable to automate data collection to the maximum degree.¥ Specifying complex data relationships.  Since the various scales of manu-
facturing are intimately interlinked, models will require large amounts of
detail, probably stored in distributed object-oriented databases.  However,

these databases will need to be consistent across geographical sites and will
span many time zones.  Large servers will be needed to manage the model

applications and the propagation of changes.¥ Easing interoperability of design process tools.  Interoperability problems
lie in two domains, in the meaning of the information passed between tools
and in the mechanics of their transfer.  To address the first issue, a complete
data model of the simulation process must be created, one that will specify
the information at every stage of operation.  When this is coupled with a flow

model of the simulation, it will provide an unambiguous definition of what
information is being interchanged and when.  The mechanics of information
transfer require either the development of standards for passing messages
between tools (e.g., the communication required between objects in an ob-
ject-oriented paradigm3) or the specification of programming interface stan-dards, or both.¥ Constructing formal models that reflect factory resources.  Reflecting
factors such as resource availability, condition or repair status, and shop
floor location, such models should interact with process and product models;
indeed, at sufficiently high levels of abstraction, process model components
may appear as components of a resource model.  Careful configuration man-

agement of these models will provide an approach to alleviating the problem
of validating models for a continually changing factory environment.¥ Presenting data (e.g., using human interface tools).  For example, model
displays may have to be very large, either to enable viewing large quantities3 This is one stated goal of the product data exchange using STEP (standard for the exchange ofproduct model data) project described in Chapter 3.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODELING AND SIMULATION FOR THE VIRTUAL FACTORY115of data or to show lots of visual detail.  The displays may even have to be
mobile, so that they can be carried around in a factory.  Display panels may

be attached to a computer or be in the form of glasses used by a viewer to
simultaneously view the model and the real world.¥ Reducing the magnitude of the testing and validation task problems bycarefully configuring the relationships between models used for control and
those used for simulation.  A factory control system that has been success-
fully tested for operation in real time could in principle be connected to a set
of inputs that simulate the input it receives in real time, and could thus serve
as the foundation of a (partially validated) simulation model as well.¥ Developing new paradigms for understanding dynamic interactionsamong the different aspects and components of the manufacturing enter-
prise.  A real factory consists of many interacting elements; thus, it is reason-
able to expect a high-fidelity simulation to consist of many interacting ele-
ments (models) as well.  But the real factory is difficult to understand, in part

because of these interactions, and so a real problem of understanding is
posed by a complex multitude of interacting models.  Developing new ways
to understand the complexity, nature, and scope of interacting components
will be a major challenge with ramifications for ensuring model fidelity and
validation.The following are research areas within modeling technology that need morework:¥ User interfaces.  Since factory personnel in the 21st century will be
interacting with many applications, it will not suffice for each application to
have its own set of interfaces, no matter how good any individual one is.
Much thought has to be given both to the nature of the specific interfaces and
to the integration of interfaces in a system designed so as not to confuse the
user.   Interface tools that allow the user to filter and abstract large volumes

of data will be particularly important.¥ Model concurrency.  Models will be used to perform a variety of geo-
graphically dispersed functions over a short time scale during which the
model information must be globally accurate.  In addition, pieces of the

model may themselves be widely distributed.  As a result, a method must be
devised to ensure model consistency and concurrency, perhaps for extended
time periods.  The accuracy of models used concurrently for different pur-

poses is a key determinant of the benefits of using such models.¥ Testing and validation of model concepts.  Because a major use of
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGmodels is to make predictions about matters that are not intuitively obviousto decision makers, testing and validation of models and their use are very
difficult.  For factory operations and design alike, there are many potential

Òright answersÓ to important questions, and none of these is 
Òprovably cor-rectÓ (e.g., what is the 
ÒrightÓ schedule?).  As a result, models have to be
validated by being tested against understandable conditions, and in many
cases, common sense must be used to judge if a model is Òcorrect.Ó  Because
models must be tested under stochastic factory conditions, which are hard to
duplicate or emulate, outside the factory environment, an important area for
research involves developing tools for use in both testing and validating
model operation and behavior.  Tools for automating sensitivity analysis in

the testing of simulation models would help to overcome model validation
problems inherent in a stochastic environment.¥ Model evolution.  Models are not static, in the sense that as users learn
more or as the factory environment changes (e.g., as a result of new rules,
new heuristics, changing equipment sets, and so on), models have to be
updated.  In addition, as new knowledge is developed, models need to be

enhanced, speeded up, and made more detailed.  The information that can be

obtained from a model depends fundamentally on the modelÕs capabilities,which are expected to improve with time.  This is a fruitful area for research.
¥ Chaos theory.  To the extent that manufacturing is a mathematically
chaotic environment, chaos theory may be able to show where critical as-
sumptions break down and where they may lead to computationally impos-
sible situations and totally unpredictable behavior.REPRESENTING AND CAPTURINGMANUFACTURING EXPERTISEIt is obvious that the modeling sophistication implied by the preceding sec-tion will demand an extraordinary degree of manufacturing expertise at all scales
of operation (from shop floor operator to senior management).  But a number of

factors specific to the manufacturing enterprise exacerbate these demands even
further:¥Since activities and actions at the different scales of manufacturing opera-tion cannot be considered independently, expertise relevant to one level will
often couple strongly to expertise at a different level.  Since models will pass

information up and down the management ladder, information exchange mecha-
nisms must be consistent.  Hence, a consistent model representation language is

needed that will precisely define a modelÕs objects and the relationships betweenobjects at different levels of abstraction.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MODELING AND SIMULATION FOR THE VIRTUAL FACTORY117¥The desired coupling of a model (the virtual factory) directly to a realfactory demands that changes in the real factory be quickly incorporated into the
model, or, conversely, that the model be used to drive changes in the real factory.
For example, the movement of a piece of equipment in a model would cause a
robot to relocate the corresponding real piece of equipment.  Or, a change in the

temperature in a model object would cause the real temperature to change in the
real factory.  To enable such coupling, the links to the real factory from the model

need to be very robust and bidirectional.¥Different ÒwindowsÓ into a model will have to be provided for different
users, including ÒhelpÓ-line operators, engineers, managers, supervisors, techni-cians, schedulers, human resources personnel, and maintenance personnel.  Each

type of user will have his or her own perspective on reasons for using the model,
and the model should be able to be tailored to accommodate those specific needs.It is likely that traditional approaches in artificial intelligence with respect toknowledge engineering will be helpful in capturing expertise, since heuristic or
even analytical manufacturing information is difficult to formalize.  At the same

time, research in the area of capturing manufacturing expertise should not be
limited solely to the artificial intelligence knowledge-engineering approach.  For

example, it would also be valuable to investigate how people involved in the
manufacturing enterprise construct meaning when they are listening to others
describe some manufacturing process or activity.  Hard experience in such situa-

tions suggests that even when all participants share the same spoken and written
language (English plus mathematics), it is often difficult to specify certain proce-
dures without ambiguity.The following describes some of the research and development needed forcapturing and representing information:¥ Gathering expertise.  Although it has been possible to gather knowledge
from experts in certain narrow and well-focused domains, acquisition of
knowledge is still difficult.  Since manufacturing is such a varied and com-

plex activity, and since the information exists over a very wide range (from
high-level factory decision making to running a specific piece of equipment),
capturing the tacit knowledge of an experienced work force for later reuse
represents a key challenge.¥ Languages for gathering and representing knowledge.  An information-
theoretic based language is needed in which to gather and assemble re-
sponses from experts and channel them into a machine-usable form.  In

addition, a good language is needed to represent the information in the model.
This may or may not be the same language as that used to gather knowledge;
however, it will certainly be closely related.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGRESEARCH AREAS NOT SPECIFIC TO MANUFACTURINGA number of research problems in areas not specific to manufacturing willalso need to be addressed if the virtual factory is to be realized.  For example:
 ¥ Models that must be concurrently activated and used may have to be built
by geographically dispersed teams.  Methods to provide for concurrent engi-

neering and for keeping models or pieces of models synchronized will have
to be developed.¥ Models must run at real-time speeds if they are to be used in conjunction
with real-time factory operations; they must run 1,000 or 10,000 times faster
than real time if they are to be used to experiment with different factory
configurations. ¥ Testing and validation of models will be difficult, since there are so manyvariables and combinations of objects involved.  ÒProvably correctÓ modules
will have to be developed, so that large models can be constructed that are
free from error.  Tools to help build models will be required.
 ¥ Model security, to protect a model from unwanted tampering or accidental
incidents, to make the model accessible to users but protected from un-
wanted actions, is another area of concern. ¥ The computational requirements for such simulations will be very high,
perhaps requiring the use of supercomputers.  However, traditional super-

computers have been configured for homogeneously parallel problems.  The

virtual factory simulation will require extensive parallel computation, but it
will not be homogeneous.  Therefore research is needed on new techniques

to apply massive parallel processors to the simulation question.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1196Information Infrastructure IssuesINTRODUCTIONManufacturing information infrastructure refers to the computing and com-munications facilities and services needed to facilitate, manage, and enable effi-
cient manufacturing; key elements include database and information manage-
ment systems, data communications networks and associated services, and
management of applications software.  For the next generation of manufacturing,

information infrastructure must have the high degree of connectivity, compatibil-
ity, and ease of use that already characterizes traditional physical infrastructure
(electric power, water and sewage services, telephone service, and the like).A vision for the manufacturing enterprise of the 21st century includes theability to use an integrated information system to support the entire product cycle
from product design to product delivery to the end user.  Such a system would

facilitate communications among groups, automate Òcorporate memory,Ó and aid
in decision making.  Likely using the National Information Infrastructure (NII),

this system would function at both the intrafirm (e.g., connecting branch offices
dispersed all over the country) and interfirm (e.g., connecting the firm to suppli-
ers and customers) levels.   Such opportunities are particularly relevant to small

manufacturers that will be able to find niches for their specialized capabilities
more easily when the NII enables convenient electronic connections for firms
small and large.The use of networked infrastructures can diminish the role played by place,time, and hierarchy in the structure and management of organizations.  A wide

range of organizational possibilities remain to be fully explored, and thus inves-Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGTABLE 6.1  Research to Advance Infrastructure Systems
Subject AreaExample of Research Needed
Architectures and standardsStandard manufacturing control architectures
Generic functionality within control architecturesCost-benefit criteria for potential standardsIntra-enterprise andPrinciples and architectures for coupling network-
inter-enterprise integrationbased applications
Automatic interpretation of transactionsAutomatic message routing and associated processingSupport for multiple protocols and multiple speeds over agiven mediumTime-critical message delivery in interconnected networksProtocols and services that support specific demands ofobject-oriented applicationsServices for human- and machine-based browsing andsearching of information and resourcesTools and techniques supporting supply-chain dynamicsand associated planningMechanisms and systems to support information sessionmanagementArchitectures forAutonomous agents to monitor and respond to production
autonomy andevents
distributedKnowledge agents for enterprise-wide management of
intelligencemodels, names, transactions, and rules
Architectures for manufacturing systems involvingdistributed intelligenceTools to find and distribute informationStable sets of rules for interacting agentsDynamic variations in agent autonomyInformation retrieval systemsModeling and prototyping functions for user interfaces
Next-generation data manipulation languages
Maintenance of data consistency and integrity throughdatabase updatesNetwork-based services for information browsing andsearchingSoftware engineeringSimplification of system designs, operation, and
maintenanceSelf-healing systemsSupport for new programming paradigms
Tools for component-based architecture life-cycleapproachesGeneral tools unconstrained by the limitations of specificprogramming languagesTools with aspects of knowledge-based collaborationsoftwareInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES121TABLE 6.1  continued
Subject AreaExample of Research Needed
Software engineeringRapid prototyping and other methodologies for faster
 (continued)development
Techniques for encapsulating legacy systems anddeveloping mediator supportAnalysis methodologies, metrics, and selection techniquesReference architectures that cut across manufacturingdomains to support software reusabilityData representations that depict both spatial and temporalaspectsTools for better and more user-configurable user interfacesDependable computing systemsBetter technology to support changing software without
removing a system from operationContinuous availability of on-line servicesFault-tolerant hardware and software
Increased system security and trustworthinessCollaboration technologySoftware, user interfaces, and hardware to support
cooperative worktigation into new information technology (IT)-enabled organizational forms is anarea of research interest, as new organizational models will ultimately be needed,
or earlier paradigms for understanding organizations revised, to better understand
how activities might be reorganized to exploit information technology for better
(or higher) performance.Progress toward this goal involves development of both physical (e.g., wires,computers, gateways, and switches) and ÒsoftÓ (e.g., protocols and information
services) information infrastructure technologies.  Areas with research opportu-

nities are listed in Table 6.1 and are discussed in the remainder of this chapter.
For convenience, these topics are divided into areas specific to manufacturing
(architectures and standards, and integration of activities within and among enter-
prises) and not specific to manufacturing, although the dividing line between
manufacturing-specific and nonmanufacturing-specific categories is particularly
fuzzy for infrastructure elements.ARCHITECTURES AND STANDARDSArchitectures and standards provide structure for many levels of intercon-nection, from those among devices to those among businesses.  There are archi-

tectures for systems supporting specific functions, for enterprise-wide informa-
tion flow, for control of processes, and for management.  As the need for
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGexchanging data and knowledge among various manufacturing applications growsand the sophistication of individual applications increases, the interfaces between
them become fuzzier and more complex and important.  Although each interface
may itself be easy to use, correct, and robust, the complex of interfaces in a large,
diversified factory is fragile and is subject to failure for relatively insignificant
causes.1  As a result, applications developers spend disproportionate time and
effort addressing the interfaces, per se, rather than the application itself.Standards support the passing of information between the various elementsof a manufacturing enterpriseÕs information system.  For example, they facilitate
connections from computer-aided design (CAD) to computer-augmented process
planning to computer-aided manufacturing (CAM).  Standardization provides the

benefits of common systems (cost savings, improved integration (Òplug and playÓequipment and systems) and information flow, and so on).The vision for 21st-century manufacturing presumes that interconnectingmanufacturing applications will be as simple as connecting household appliances
to a power gridÑone need only know how to run the application (equivalent tousing a microwave oven) and manage the interface (plug it in and press a few
buttons).  This ease of interconnection and interoperation extends from devices

found on the factory floor to applications connecting the factory to the product
design facility to applications connecting an enterprise to its suppliers and cus-
tomers.  An 
Òapplication socketÓ for manufacturing would benefit both equip-
ment vendors and customers and enhance factory performance.The desirability of common standards notwithstanding, businesses have
largely been unable to agree on protocols or standards of communication for
different kinds of requests.  One reason for this failure has been inadequate

technology (e.g., the use of primitive fixed-format data representational formats)
and excessive complexity.  But a more important reason is that attempts to reach
a common technical understanding have been hampered by epistemological dif-
ferences reflected in the unstated assumptions of each participant in a technical
discussion.  Social factors relevant to the adoption of standards are discussed in

Chapter 7.Research is needed to develop better manufacturing architecture, standards,and interfaces, including research to develop standard equipment control archi-
tectures and generic functionality within the architectures, to support general
manufacturing information standards, and to lower the cost of more open, less
proprietary approaches.  Especially desirable would be architectures whose stan-

dards accommodate some upgrade capability, so that technology vendors could
worry less about premature freezing of technology and the locking out of poten-1 Wysk (1992) identified as an obstacle to implementing computer-integrated manufacturing thedifficulty of integrating information system components (i.e., hardware and software) with informa-tion (both internal and external) into a smoothly running system.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES123tial competitive advantages, while customers could worry less about intrinsicobsolescence.The importance of standards for manufacturing interconnections raises thequestion of where technology research enters into the development of standards;
the answer is not clear.  For example, efforts to develop PDES/STEP (product

data exchange using the standard for the exchange of product model data) are not
research per se, but the kind of problem that PDES is intended to solve may
require research.2Because of the importance of international standards in the global market-place, strong participation of U.S. interests in standards making is valuable, and
greater involvement of U.S. academic researchers (who are less involved than
researchers in other countries) in standards making may strengthen the U.S.
technology base in manufacturing.  Research is a foundation for the consensus

building inherent in standardization, and researchers (from industry, academia,
and government) should bring their insights to bear on that process.INTEGRATIONRedesign of Business Practices  Today, workers talking on the telephone, typing on keyboards, obtaining
parts, scheduling factory operations, and setting up delivery schedules contribute
much more to manufacturing costs than do the workers performing Òtouch la-bor.Ó3  Lessons learned in both service and manufacturing industries attest to thevalue of systematic redesign of business practices and to the key role played by
information technology and infrastructure in such reengineering.4In particular, workers in a factory may be working very hard on an inappro-priate set of tasks.  They may be doing things that are not necessary, doing them

inefficiently or even redundantly, or doing their work in such a way that it is not
usable or accessible elsewhere.  Information technology can be used to help

identify such problems.   For example, when modeling techniques are used and
2 The PDES efforts are not standards making in the traditional sense.  Like many other activities
that have moved into the standards arena, they involve significant levels of development activity asopposed to simple harmonization of approaches.  This is true in many other areas of high-technology

standardization, such as the unified approach to conceptual data modeling.3 For example, Miller and Vollmann (1985) assert that Òoverhead costs as a percentage of valueadded in U.S. industries continue to increase and have become a major concern of manufacturing
managersÓ and that 
Òthe growing implementation of factory automation increases overhead costs as apercentage of value added.Ó  They point out that 
Òmost overhead costs are created by transactions,not physical products.  Such hidden factory costs are generated by logistical, balancing, quality, and

change transactions.Ó4 See Chapter 6 in CSTB (1994a).  For a discussion of business process reengineering, see Ham-
mer and Champy (1993).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGthe model is compared with an actual process, steps that do not add value canoften be identified.  Such information is needed if management is to support a

process of continuous change and improvement.  Once such problems are identi-

fied, information technology can often play a key role in restructuring business
processes for greater effectiveness and efficiency.  IT can help to reduce the

number of tasks involved in an activity, change the nature and sequence of tasks,
and reduce the total time involved in a business processIntra-enterprise IntegrationWithin a manufacturing company, activities such as design, production, mar-keting, finance, sales, use of human resources, and distribution have historically
been linked to each other on the basis of issues such as ease of management and
physical proximity.  For example, using the manual and semiautomated manufac-

turing information systems of the past, integration was achieved through interac-
tions between people where knowledge, data, and project status were shared
through formal conversation in meetings and reviews and informal conversation
in the hallways.Today, electronic mail, shared and remotely accessible databases, Ògroup-ware,Ó and other forms of electronic communication present new options for
centralizing and dispersing activities and also for supporting cross-functional
teams and processes.  For example, enhanced communications options tend to be

associated with greater decentralization, obviating the need for all tasks to flow
through an office or headquarters.  Electronic communications enable a much

higher degree of geographic independence.  While communication has always

been fundamental to large organizations with distributed establishments, IT sup-
ports ever greater geographic dispersion of personnel, allowing firms to reap the
benefits of lower-cost production labor or specialized expertise associated with
specific geographic regions.What has stood in the way of a greater degree of intra-enterprise integration?There are many causes, but one major reason is that the technical integration of
various applications into a smoothly running system has been and continues to be
quite problematic.  Commercial software from one source does not integrate well

with software from other commercial sources or with internally developed soft-
ware, revisions come out slowly and hence frustrate users who expect a rapid
response, and so on.  System-level issues have received relatively little attention,

both because of their difficulty and because they relate to problems that fall
between the offerings of individual vendors.  Customizing of general applications

to specific customer needs and integrating applications and technologies from a
variety of sources make development of a robust manufacturing system a formi-
dable task.  Such problems have plagued all kinds of organizations, but the

combination of physical and information-based work in manufacturing adds fur-
ther complications.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES125For example, several manufacturing companies have invested many thou-sands of person-hours in developing and integrating factory information systems,
a disproportionately large investment in comparison with their investment in
other parts of the factory system.  This imbalance is especially serious consider-

ing that these companies have often purchased ÒfinishedÓ software application
systems from commercial sources, which when measured against the benefits
received have proved to be less than satisfying.  Since large-scale systems for

manufacturing are often one of a kind, they present special problems because
they are developed by teams with relatively limited experience with the kind of
system needed, and they generally entail very high life-cycle costs.A second illustration is the integration problems associated with CAD toolsfor mechanical products.  Each vendor of such tools has its own database design,

and exchange of models between different CAD programs is possible only for
relatively simple constructs, despite the existence of a standard called the initial
graphics exchange specification (IGES).  Each CAD tool has its own unique

interface that may take months to learn, and each comes with a different set of
software tools for manufacturing support that may provide functions such as
numerically controlled machining, sheet metal bending, or electrical wire rout-
ing.Such incompatibilities are found throughout various manufacturing applica-tions, and every phase of the design and manufacturing process requires its own
distinct computer model and data representation.  The representation of a part in

a database may appear differently for a machining operation than it would for an
inspection operation.  The design representation necessary to support an engi-

neering drawing is different from the design representation necessary to support
a finite element analysis, and in most cases there are no automatic algorithms
available to convert from one representation to another.  For data other than data
on the shapes of parts, few good computer representations exist at all.  Even when

the interfaces are perfect, a small design change requires a tedious and labor-
intensive process of propagating the changes through all the CAD tools and
representations.  Box 6.1 elaborates on the fundamental knowledge gaps that

underlie difficulties in integrating applications.Databases and database management systems, equipment control systems,communications systems, and design support tools all present a multifaceted
challenge to achieving interoperability.  Meeting that challenge requires a deep

understanding of underlying data constructs, the operations that constitute the
relevant manipulations, and the assumptions behind various operations and cal-
culations.5  While now readily available in certain domains (e.g., the representa-
5 For example, Defense Department officials tell a Gulf War story regarding an inquiry about thenumber of MREs (Meals, Ready to Eat) available.  The answer that came back was 
ÒÐ38,000.Ó  This
ridiculous answer was the result of incompatibilities between two databases:  one defined an ÒMREÓas a single individual package (one meal for one soldier), while the other defined an ÒMREÓ as a
pallet of 500 individual packages.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGBOX 6.1  Knowledge Gaps Relevant to
Intra-enterprise Integration¥The science and engineering of many phenomena underlying todayÕs prod-
ucts are not well understood.  Examples include the behavior of composite mate-
rials, failure modes of complex computer systems, turbulent fluid flow, failuremodes such as crack growth and fatigue, and material and chemical incompatibil-
ities.¥The models that do exist capture one phenomenon, behavior, or mode of
energy storage at a time, while most complex systems exhibit multiple modes at
once.  Integration of single-mode models is also problematic.
¥While the main dimensions of parts and parameter values of an electrical or
chemical nature can be specified with reasonable certainty, less is known about
how much variation about those nominal values is permissible.  The current means
of setting tolerances are historical or very conservative.  An example is that mate-rials specifications are often stated without indication of variances.  The result is

that costs are raised and materials and energy are wasted, both in production andin the over-engineering of products that will perform even if tolerances happen toreinforce rather than cancel each other.¥The most efficient ways to carry out design processes to address all the
interacting variables are not known.  Right now an iterative and ÒconcurrentÓ pro-
cess is used, relying heavily on human memory and face-to-face communication.¥It is not known how to construct and populate a database that will contain in
an easily accessible form all the information that the designers of modern productswill need.¥It has been difficult to develop standards for data interchange to which all
vendors will adhere.  Indeed, a vendor seeking greater differentiation between its

products and those of other vendors may well choose a proprietary data format orrepresentation.  At the same time, customers may not realize the waste and over-head incurred in retraining their personnel to use many different software packag-
es.¥Finally, we do not know how best to link people to a rising tide of increasing-
ly complex information.  For example, information systems must be able to provide

information at appropriate levels of abstraction:  a product designer may not needto know the details of how a partially finished part is held in a jig, although aproduction manager might.  Information displayed for different individuals in the

manufacturing system should reflect their different needs.  The term Òinformation
ergonomicsÓ has been coined to capture this challenge.tion of integer and real numbers), such an understanding is sorely lacking inmany of the domains that manufacturing touches.Commercial interests play a key role as well.  Vendors have often chosen todevelop products with proprietary interfaces and data representations.  Suppliers

of manufacturing equipment anxious to ÒdifferentiateÓ their products have ob-
scured generic elements in their control computers, thwarting change and raising
the cost of acquisition, operation, and maintenance.  Such practices have tended

to sacrifice interoperability to the desire to capture a set of customers.  Not only
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES127do such proprietary designs inhibit communication with competitorsÕ products,
but they also block communication with adjacent machines and with older capital
equipment and networks previously installed within a single plant.  Communica-

tion is further confounded by network architectures that typically channel com-
munication into hierarchies that mimic the power structure of an organization,
inhibiting or complicating the exchange of simple messages between peers.The result has been that information systems products from one vendor arenot designed to be (and sometimes cannot be) integrated with similar products
from a different vendor.  (In some cases, even products from a single vendor are

incompatible with each other.)  Interfaces between these systems and equipment

are often crude, causing many problems in their use and, according to many
manufacturing executives, discrediting the entire information technology effort.
Representations for product designs, process plans, and factory resources are
quite often company- or even site-specific.6Architectures (functional, control, communication, and management) alsovary excessively.  Furthermore, these architectures are difficult to describe and

model.  Defining architectural linkages and creating integration ÒhooksÓ for sen-sors, machine control, process planning, scheduling of maintenance and repair,
and machine interfaces are as critical as creating faster and better devices for each
of these areas.  To a large degree, the presence of such hooks would give users the

flexibility to assemble their own solutions from off-the-shelf software and hard-
ware components.The top-level goal is the effective and rapid exchange of data and knowledgebetween all operational systems and subsystems,7 although such a goal applied to
research systems might well freeze technologies prematurely and inhibit im-
provement.  Achieving it will require common languages, operating systems, and

networks.  Beyond common formats for data representation, a common under-

standing of data, that is, a common semantics, is also needed for complete knowl-
edge interchange.  Three important areas of research on the interconnection of

applications include the following:1.  Research is needed on organizing principles and architectures for con-
necting different network-based applications into a seamless environment.
Such connection is necessary, for example, to link flexible manufacturing6 Internally developed integrated information technology solutions are always possible in prin-ciple.  But as a practical matter, only the very largest firms have the resources to develop even partial

information technology solutions in-house, and essentially no firm can do it all alone.7 The need for commonality and interoperability among manufacturing applications of informationtechnology is in some ways analogous to the problems faced by European engineers 250 years ago as
they struggled to integrate mechanical systems that utilized a puzzling array of hole sizes, bearingsizes, and thread sizes.  The crucial difference is that standardization of the latter took place over
decades, while today U.S. manufacturing cannot afford to wait decades for these standards to arrive.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGcells to a plantÕs scheduling function and to link the scheduling function tothe enterprise order, delivery, and financial systems.  Enterprise integration

also implies a need for research to enable the automatic interpretation of the
type of transaction being executed, the routing of the message to the right
location for processing, and the processing that must occur when the mes-
sage for the transaction reaches the correct system.2.  Research is needed to support communications networks that can support
the real-time control of manufacturing processes (e.g., a cutting tool shaping
a piece of metal).  Such networks transmit control messages, each of which

must be received and acted on within some critical time, t.  While the
process being controlled should be able to tolerate some variation in t, thenetwork must be able to guarantee delivery of that message unconditionally
within that time.  Many common protocol suites such as today
Õs TCP/IP orOpen Systems Interconnection deliver messages on a Òbest-effortÓ basis and
cannot reliably meet such delivery-time requirements, while other protocols
assure timely delivery by reserving communications bandwidth, usually on
private lines and usually through restrictions on the type and number of
messages carried.  Since there is increasing demand for the ability to transmit

control messages on existing open communications networks, research is
needed to formulate the principles for construction and operation of net-
works that support time-critical message delivery in a context of intercon-
necting, multipurpose networks.  If possible, such systems should be com-

patible and interoperable with other time-critical and non-time-critical
applications and communications; in this event, they could be made compat-
ible with a wide range of TCP/IP products.3.  Research is needed to develop services tailored for human- and machine-
based information and resource browsing and searching, using knowledge-
based assistance agents for semantic interpretations, translations, and rela-
tionships.  The availability of such services will be essential to ensuring

greater information infrastructure performance and efficiency.  The higher-

level network directory services of today will not meet the requirements of
near-future applications.8Inter-enterprise IntegrationThe notion of a supply chain (Figure 6.1) will be integral to manufacturingfor the foreseeable future, and suppliers will be passing partially finished compo-
nents or materials to those closer to the point of final assembly.  Increasingly,
8 Some relevant work has been undertaken in the context of the X.500 directory standard, andfurther work on implementing that standard is necessary.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES129along with the movement of goods, information must move up and down thesupply chain.  Information technology can facilitate the passage of information

within a manufacturing enterprise, but as importantly, it can enable different
organizational structures and relationships among various elements in the supply
chain, and networked infrastructures can extend well beyond a firmÕs boundaries.IT can be used to link value chains across firms and shift work involved in
various functions between organizations.  Already, electronic data interchange

(EDI) connects companies to their suppliers, shippers, buyers, and even their
banks.  Providing a shared body of information and a common set of standardized

forms, EDI transforms the ordering, invoicing, shipping, tracking, and customer
service functions, among others, for a growing number of enterprises.  Through

these electronic linkages, IT enables companies to emphasize their core compe-
tencies by ÒoutsourcingÓ activities that are mostly common across industries
(e.g., payroll, purchasing, or accounting) to other providers that can perform
these activities more efficiently.  In addition, electronically linked firms can

group and regroup as the need arises in alliances of convenience.At present, much of the material-related cost of production stems from theFIGURE 6.1  The supply chain, a basic element of manufacturing that will become
increasingly information intensive.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGpurchasing, packaging, shipping, unpacking, and moving around of componentmaterials.  Better communication between supplier and customer enterprises

would reduce such costs; although not new, EDI and other tools to support
streamlined processes are obvious points of departure and candidates for support-
ing technology that will eventually culminate in the electronic communication of
financial information and even electronic funds transfers, involving corporate-
level systems and systems at third-party financial institutions.Mechanisms and systems are required to support information session man-agement.  These include the means for connecting to and coordinating the deliv-

ery of information between multiple sources using multiple streams, as well as
the mechanisms for collaboration using this information.  In addition, tools and

techniques are needed to facilitate real-time planning through the entire supply
chain; in certain factories, this is already a partially achieved goal, but for a
variety of reasons the techniques are not widely applicable across all manufactur-
ers.  Intelligent agents (computer automata) may be able to perform most of the

hand shaking between customers and suppliers without requiring human inter-
vention; if realized, these agents might provide human users with new, flexible,
easy-to-use human-oriented protocols and standards that are as obvious as the
current paper-based solutions.  This level of analysis is generally impossible

today; given the typical operation of manufacturing resource planning systems, it
can take weeks.  Research will be required in terms of software architectures,

protocols for communication, and access and security mechanisms (see ÒDepend-able Computing SystemsÓ below).  These needs are above and beyond the trans-
action-based processing and management that will clearly be required.NON-MANUFACTURING-SPECIFIC RESEARCHGiven that manufacturing operations are typically large and complex, it isnot surprising that the software for controlling and managing such operations is
also large and complex.  Research in many traditional areas of computer science,

including information retrieval, software engineering, and reliable computing, as
well as in collaboration technology, will be relevant to manufacturing.  Work by
computer scientists in these areas, but framed in a manufacturing context, will
both enrich computer science and result in important benefits to manufacturing.99 An approach calling for research work at the intersection of computer science and engineering(CS&E) and other problem domains was contained in the CSTB report Computing the Future (CSTB,
1992).  In particular, this report called for academic CS&E to increase its contact and intellectual
interchange with other disciplines (of which manufacturing could be one); to increase traffic in
CS&E-related knowledge and problems among academia, industry, and society at large; and toenhance the cross-fertilization of ideas in CS&E between theoretical underpinnings and experimentalexperience.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES131Information Retrieval SystemsManufacturing applications are data-intensive.  Enormous amounts of data
are needed to support manufacturing activities (e.g., to represent the millions of
parts on a Boeing 777 or the millions of transactions that occur on a factory
floor), and the relationships among the data are complex, sophisticated, and
changeable.  For example, a very large scale integrated chip component has a

different description for each activity; functional, geometric, behavioral, tempo-
ral, and other views of the part must be supported.  Any changes in one view must

ripple through all of the other views and extend to invalidate or update usage of
the component throughout a design process.  The movement toward multimedia

databases and applications compounds the problems presented by simple text or
numerical databases.Modern information storage and retrieval systems are designed to handle allaspects of data and information management except generating or collecting the
data.  These systems serve as the primary interface to data for the user through

powerful query languages, for bulk storage devices through the file system, for
the rest of the computer through the operating system, and for the rest of the
world through communications networks.  In each of these areas, advances have

been rapid, but progress has only generated more ambitious goals.  Information

retrieval for manufacturing will stress existing technology and will require a
major research effort.  The following three problems illustrate the type of work

that is needed:1.  Incorporation of modeling and prototyping functions into a manufactur-ing database management system.  The language used for data manipulation
within the system should contain the basic syntax and semantics that de-
scribe products and processes; in other words, the product and process de-
scription language should be a sublanguage of the data manipulation lan-
guage.  However, current data manipulation languages were developed to

handle financial and other types of data that can easily be cast into a rela-
tional database model.  Manufacturing data, especially data related to geom-

etry, are instead associative.  Consequently, using current data manipulation
languages for manufacturing data is counter-intuitive and difficult.  Research

is needed to develop the next generation of data manipulation languages,
perhaps based on the object-oriented data model.2.  Maintenance of data consistency and integrity in a rapidly changingdatabase that may be distributed.  In the design phase, the database must
serve not only as the primary repository of ongoing work but also as the
principal medium of communication among the participants (who may be
using simulation, analysis, and design tools, as well as manufacturing execu-
tion systems); these participants may also be geographically distributedInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGacross many time zones.  Any disparity in the copies of the database seen by
different users as changes are made will wreak havoc.  In the processing

phase, consistency is essential if real-time control of the process is to be
achieved.  A real-time production schedule is realistic only if the data about

equipment status and work location are correct when the schedule is gener-
ated.  Here the performance (i.e., speed) issue that is always present in

database consistency becomes particularly difficult to resolve.  Propagating

changes throughout the entire system imposes additional constraints on real-
time performance.3.  Information browsing and searching in a distributed manufacturing envi-ronment.  Vendors and suppliers connected through the National Informa-
tion Infrastructure will want to make information about their products avail-
able electronically to customers that may not know about them.  Design and
production engineers will need to browse various information archives in
search of a part or a process that they may need.  Thus, while network tools

such as gophers, MOSAIC, and Wide-Area Information Search systems are
promising starts to the general problem, research is needed to develop more
advanced automated tools that accept information on needed parts or pro-
cesses as input, search or make appropriate inquiries at appropriate sites on
the NII, and return to the user a list of those sites and the information found
there.  Such an effort would also depend on new indexing schemes and data

representations that would allow semantically driven searches of both text
and nontext information.Software EngineeringIn view of the experiences of the major manufacturers represented by mem-bers of the committee and those who briefed the committee, the current state of
the art in software engineering is barely adequate to meet current manufacturing
needs.  The software problem has a direct impact on a manufacturer
Õs ability torespond quickly to a changing marketplace with new products.  The reason is that

new product development often calls for rapid responses and agile manufactur-
ing, which themselves require advanced information technologies, open systems
concepts, and component reuse.The following list describes some of the most important areas of softwareengineering research for manufacturing:¥ Tools to support the software engineering process in manufacturing.  Auto-
mating complex, intelligent manufacturing systems requires both solid engi-
neering life-cycle approaches and supporting tools.  Unfortunately, in many

cases, tool development lags significantly behind the use of new methodolo-
gies, as in the case of tools to support the recent component-based architec-Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES133ture life-cycle approaches.  Companies using such approaches for compo-
nent development and reuse are suffering from the lack of useful tools for
system analysis, requirements management, design, configuration and inte-
gration, and simulation.  Until such tools become available, the building of

large, complex manufacturing systems will remain a costly exercise.   For

example, more general tools are needed that are not constrained by the limi-
tations of specific programming languages, as well as tools that have aspects
of knowledge-based collaboration software.¥ Programming paradigms that enable manufacturing personnel, rather thansoftware development experts, to develop and change application systems
for the shop floor or the design laboratory.  This capability will require
better methods of developing software and better human-machine interfaces
to enable domain-specific software specification.  Object-oriented program-

ming is a particular paradigm of interest.¥ Support for faster development of easier-to-use and more effective systems.Simplification of designs, operation, and maintenance is desired, as are in-
creased predictability of systems, self-healing systems, and system extensi-
bility.  Research is needed in system optimization and enhanced system

operation and maintenance; better capabilities for rapid prototyping are a
particular need.  Visualization and human-computer interaction techniques

will be key.¥ Accommodation of legacy systems.  Manufacturers have a great deal of
investment that they will be loath to give up even when new and improved
technology is available.  Thus, research on how to facilitate transitions to

new technology is necessary.  One direction for such research is the develop-

ment of techniques for encapsulation of legacy systems and of mediator
support.¥ Tools for systems analysis.  Although there are many different analysis
methodologies, such as responsibility-driven, data-driven, and activity-based
methodologies, system analysis remains more an art than a science.  How do

we compare types of analyses?  Are some techniques simply better than

others, or do different types of system development or applications dictate a
choice?  Are the techniques sufficient, or are new ones needed?  Research is

needed to help answer these questions.¥ Better metrics.  A number of metrics have been developed for the testing
phase of the engineering process to measure dimensions of system perfor-
mance such as speed and timing.  There are no metrics that specify how well

a problem in manufacturing is understood and formulated.  What are the
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGmetrics for analysis, and how do we measure our successes and failures?When do we know that analysis is complete or at least good enough?  Can

these questions be addressed with metrics?  Given the frequent need for rapid

system development, metrics specifying temporal aspects of analysis should
be considered.  Are there temporal metrics for analysis techniques (e.g.,

state-transition diagrams, object models, event-stimulus diagrams) that could

be related to system characteristics?¥ Software reuse.  The ability to reuse software and system artifacts and
results from associated analyses in the development of new systems or appli-
cations would leverage previous investments in expertise, effort, money, and
time.  Examples of software artifacts from object-oriented analysis and de-

sign include object models (including representations of data and behavior)
and object interface definitions.  One type of research supporting reusability

could lead to reference architectures that cut across manufacturing domains.
For example, there could be families of reference architectures for continu-
ous processes and for discrete processes.  Goals would include minimizing

the number of reference architectures for which third-party suppliers must
develop software or systems and increasing the ability to leverage previous
expertise across projects.¥ Better representations of spatial and temporal dimensions in software.Software representation currently focuses on declarative knowledge.  Re-

search is needed to achieve representations that depict both spatial and tem-
poral aspects of associated data, enriching a systemÕs repository of knowl-edge and facilitating the visualization, design, specification, monitoring, and
analysis of manufacturing processes.  Multimedia visualization of these new

representations may include Òwalking throughÓ models or providing simula-
tions of system behaviors in one window while the activated models em-
ployed are presented in another window.  Such elements would contribute to

the realization of virtual factories, which involve enhanced modeling and
simulation of processes and products.  New programming interfaces that

capture the spatial and physical abstractions of manufacturing are essential
to allow end users to program their own processes and work flows.Dependable Computing SystemsManufacturing plants require continuous operation, creating a need for de-pendable computing systems.  Better technology to support 
Òhot swapsÓ of soft-
ware (i.e., changing software without removing the system from operation), con-
tinuous availability of on-line services, and fault-tolerant hardware and software
are among the technologies needed for dependable manufacturing systems.Manufacturing provides an application arena for a wide variety of researchInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES135relating to increased system security and trustworthiness, including access con-trol and authentication.  The need to determine and verify the user of a computer
system or network is becoming increasingly important as a way of preserving
system and data integrity, ensuring that sensitive data and systems are accessed
only by those who are authorized, and ensuring the highest levels of system
availability.  These concerns affect both intra-enterprise and inter-enterprise com-

munications.10  The manufacturing environment, especially the factory environ-
ment, calls for economical and robust technology to address these needs.Finally, as manufacturing tools become more autonomous, it becomes im-perative to ensure the correctness of controlling software, as control software
with errors may be a major contributor to factory downtime due to physical
damage.Collaboration Technology and Computer-supported Cooperative WorkThe trend toward organizing workers of all kinds into teams with significantlevels of decision-making authority gives rise to a need for technology to support
collaborative activity.11  For example, intelligent systems are needed to support
collaborative efforts in the design of complex products; they can also facilitate
collaboration among factory and other, nonproduction personnel.  Research needs

include information technology to support empowered work teams of various
kinds of personnel and tools for total quality management.Research relating to technical tools for computer-supported cooperative work(including software, user interfaces, and supporting hardware) should be comple-
mented by research examining relevant aspects of human behavior, education
and training requirements, and other similar issues, to ensure both that optimal
tools are developed and that they can be used easily.10 Electronic contract documents and order qualifications, which are envisaged as part of ourfuture enterprises, will require methods for identification, authentication, and non-repudiation.11 Aside from the emerging, largely message-based groupware products, todayÕs tools are aimed atsupporting individual professional performers rather than collaborating teams.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURING1367Organizational and Societal Infrastructure
Chapters 3 through 6 discuss a research agenda for information technologyrelated to manufacturing.  If this research agenda is fully pursued, the scope of

what is achievable will be greatly expanded.  However, an equally important

challenge is understanding how manufacturing enterprises can actually make use
of information technology; even today, much technology remains unused.Put differently, the effective use of information technology (IT) in manufac-turing depends on more than technology research.  It also depends on success in

(1) understanding the concerns of manufacturing decision makers; (2) motivating
effective collaboration and technology transfer between industry and academia;
(3) motivating individuals within manufacturing enterprises to implement infor-
mation technology; (4) developing open standards and appropriate metrics of
performance; and (5) ensuring through education and training that the skill base
in manufacturing adapts to the new types of tools, techniques, and organizational
structures made possible by information technology and to other Òbest practicesÓ
and ÒbenchmarksÓ not necessarily associated with information technology.  Also

needed will be execution of global business strategies that protect high-value-
added jobs for U.S. manufacturing facilities.  In some instances, these essentially

practical recommendations contain their own requirements for research, particu-
larly social science research.  The challenge for the nation is both to improve on

existing capabilities (the focus of the technology research agenda described in
Chapters 3 through 6) and to enhance the potential for manufacturing firms to
actually use advanced information technology successfully (the focus of this
chapter).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE137TARGETING THE DECISION MAKERPlanned change is driven by decision makers.  Of course, these decision
makers may not necessarily reside in the corporate executive hierarchy; nearly all
employees in a company have some decision-making authority.  However, people

at different levels of a hierarchy have different concerns; as a result, they look to
new technologies to answer different questions, as suggested in Figure 7.1.  Tech-

nology researchers who wish their innovations to be adopted must craft their
research in a way that the benefits of the research are highlighted to match the
concerns of the decision makers who will decide on their technologies as well as
those who will use them.  Focusing on the technology alone is rarely sufficient to

persuade a decision maker to adopt a particular solution.  Unless the use of

information technology demonstrably provides substantial payoffs for the end
user, the end user will not take the trouble to learn and adapt to the technology,
and that will guarantee that the new technology will not be used.A good example of technology fitting the needs of particular users is evidentin the rapid diffusion of personal computers into the workplace.  When personal

computers became available for a few thousand dollars apiece, they could be
deployed to address the problems of decision makers who controlled budgets on
that scale without the need for action at higher levels of authority.  However, the
purpose of introducing personal computers was not to proliferate them or the
technology they represent; their use is justified because they can solve real fac-
tory problems with a demonstrated dollar benefit.MOTIVATING TECHNOLOGY TRANSFERAND ACADEMIC-INDUSTRIAL INTERACTIONNo matter how good are the ideas and advances developed by academicresearch groups, they are useless in a manufacturing context unless transferred to
industry.  Effective transfer requires a stronger relationship between academia (or

other sources of new technology) and industry.1  Although most of the important
recent developments in design and manufacturing have come from industry,
manufacturing firms and their information technology system vendors need the
knowledge and expertise of the academic research community, whose role is to
pursue longer-term research that may not have obvious immediate payoffs.  This
1 For example, new design methods developed in academia are especially hard to transfer toindustry because industry normally gets such methods from computer-aided design (CAD) vendors.So the transfer takes two steps (from developers to CAD vendors and then from CAD vendors totheir customers).  However, CAD companies are typically small and very limited in their resources,

and so they do not take risks on new research ideas.  Instead, they take their cues from their major
customers.  Consequently, a technology transfer strategy for design methods must enlist the support
of potential users as well as equip the CAD vendors.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGWhoWhereWhat, Why, and How
Chief executive officerChief financial officerChief operating officerWorldwide marketingand sales executiveChief technologistFactory managerProduction managerEngineering manager
Information systemsmanagerHuman resourcesmanagerArea supervisorsSystems operatorsProduction schedulersYield managersShift supervisorsProcess engineers
Equipment managersQuality engineersInformation engineersEquipment operatorsProcessing techniciansMaintenance personnelInformationtechnologistsWhat is my productioncapacity?Who gets what when?
Are we profitable?What products do we makenext year?Do we have the right skillmix?How is my factory doing?What is the cost?What are the critical issues?
How are the suppliers?Is the system responsive?How is my area doing?Is the information current?Are we on target?
What is the area yield?Is the material on time?Is my shift operating well?What is todayÕs schedule?Is the process in control?Is the product quality high?Systems running smoothly?What is the equipment status?How do I fix this process?
Where is the material?What lot is run next?Do we have sufficient spares?To enable a correct response to the higher-level questions,answers to the lower-level questions must be correct.FIGURE 7.1   Questions asked at different levels in the manufacturing hierarchy to which
information technology can be expected to be responsive.CorporateFactoryAreaProcessEquipmentInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE139is not a new problem, but it is particularly acute in the area of manufacturingtechnologyÑand resolving it is more important now than ever before, especiallysince organizations long known for their ability to facilitate the transfer of basic
research to practical implementation (e.g., Bell Laboratories, Fairchild R&D,
IBMÕs T.J. Watson Research Center laboratories) are being cut back, reoriented,or even eliminated.The success of computer-aided design (CAD) programs for electronic designin the marketplace is instructive and provides a good model for university-indus-
try relationships in other manufacturing domains.  CAD programs for electronic

design have been developed over the last 20 years, primarily in universities and
industrial laboratories, often aided by governments grants (mostly from the Na-
tional Science Foundation (NSF) and the Advanced Research Projects Agency
(ARPA)).  The transfer of these technologies from laboratories to industry is due

to a robust and aggressive set of private-sector vendors, whose role has been
largely to implement and package research results for general consumption.  Elec-

tronic design analysis research is still going strong, primarily in raising the level
of design abstraction and in improving the capabilities of existing algorithms.
Development and deployment of field-programmable gate arrays are starting to
make it possible to build early hardware prototypes, rather than relying on soft-
ware simulations.  Again, private-sector vendors (Xilinx, Actel, Altera for chips,
Quickturn for systems) are marketing the basics needed for such prototyping.Some of the seeds of the problem of transferring technology for manufactur-ing lie in the culture of universities.  Unfortunately, manufacturing is dismissed

in many academic circles as a shrinking portion of the gross national product
symbolized by unexciting smokestack factories.2  Inducing academics to work on
the inherently interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary problems that characterize
manufacturing problems is difficult when tenure in universities often depends on
evidence of the faculty memberÕs ability to be successful as an independentresearcher gaining peer recognition; teamwork and industry collaboration are not
regarded as important contributions.  Industry recognizes this fact by forming

design teams and finding ways to reward all the participants.  In academia, many

forces are starting to motivate collaborative research, which is presenting new
challenges and opportunities to administrators; these include, for example, inter-
disciplinary manufacturing research centers (CSTB, 1993).Industry can help by articulating to academia the basic intellectual issues ofmanufacturing, not only to help guide research (e.g., by providing data and prob-
lems to academic researchers) but also to make those issues recognizable to
people in traditional disciplines.  Strong statements from industry would help to

impress on manufacturing faculty (many of whom have limited expertise in infor-2 For a perspective on the larger problem of nurturing academic work related to system develop-ment, see CSTB (1994b).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGmation technology) the need for industry involvement and the increasing impor-tance of information technology to manufacturing.  Finally, if industry were

widely regarded as being open and accepting of new ideas, academic researchers
might have more incentive to work on industryÕs problems.A variety of mechanisms could foster better academic-industrial interactionrelating to manufacturing.  A fellowship or sabbatical program, for example,

could place academics in factories and factory people in academia for periods of
about a year.  (Shorter periods have proven less satisfactory; periods of about a

year allow a researcher to better understand the special qualities and inherent
problems of the manufacturing environment, to explore its different operations
and dimensions (e.g., by rotating through different units), and to contribute sub-
stantially to addressing a problem.3)  Historically, this concept has been thwarted
by tenure pressures that militate against long absences from the university by
researchers during the period in which they are forming their research programs.
To succeed now, mechanisms are needed to ensure that researchers are not penal-
ized for this kind of investment of time and effort.The committee is particularly attracted to the concept of a Òteaching fac-tory.Ó  The study of manufacturing requires a strong laboratory experience, in
which difficult concepts and poorly understood interactions can be demonstrated
and learning can be reinforced, and a teaching factory is designed to provide this
laboratory.  A teaching factory would gather together the necessary processing

and control equipment (including tools, fixtures, machines, computers, and inter-
faces) and organize these elements so that a product or family of products could
be produced.  However, the teaching factory would also be organized to demon-

strate and make manifest a variety of activities and principles, including the
specifics of processing, control, system and product design, associated manage-
ment, and their interactions.  A teaching factory would serve as a testbed that

could help researchers see if their ideas are valid.  Setting aside portions of real

factories for such experiments is usually too costly to be considered.  Yet testbeds

must be realistic enough to enable researchers not only to find out if their ideas
work but also to learn the constraints of real manufacturing environments and
discover opportunities and research problems.4  Research to develop innovative
and economic means of creating teaching factories is necessary to prepare manu-3 Industry could reciprocate by funding further education for its workers.  One example of a useful
exchange is the Massachusetts Institute of TechnologyÕs Leaders for Manufacturing program, whichlinks engineering and business school faculty with industrial representatives and involves master
theses developed by students Òon locationÓ in manufacturing environments.
4 The Metal Oxide Semiconductor Implementation Service (MOSIS) provides a facility to experi-ment with innovative chip designs; a researcher provides a chip design, and the MOSIS service
returns (in a very short time) a chip fabricated to the designÕs specifications.  The concept of a
Òmechanical MOSISÓ service has been proposed in the past, and it continues to be attractive as a
vehicle for rapid testing of interesting manufacturing ideas.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE141facturing specialists for the factory of the future as well as to develop deepunderstanding of specific processes.One variation on the concept of a teaching factoryÑthe extension of themanufacturing enterprise into academic institutionsÑwould be made possible bya broad, enhanced national information infrastructure (NII) such as that envi-
sioned as enabling greater inter-enterprise integration and the virtual factory
concept (see ÒInter-enterprise IntegrationÓ in Chapter 6).  Efforts to develop a
capability for remote access should specifically address problems related to elec-
tronic connectivity, the transfer of technically complex principles, and shared
access (perhaps remotely) to expensive manufacturing equipment and critical
information or knowledge.Any program that provides major funding for academic research in manufac-turing will likely increase academiaÕs interest in manufacturing; of course, that isan objective of the federal Advanced Manufacturing Technology initiative.  An-

other mechanism for boosting the prestige of manufacturing would be an NSF
postdoctoral program for manufacturing fellows.  Matching grants would lever-

age limited federal funds with industrial resources, using industrial support to
signal areas of particular interest to industry.  Similarly, funding could be di-

rected to appropriate university-industry partnerships that are launched with ex-
plicit mechanisms for technology transfer.Finally, consortia may be necessary to undertake meaningful manufacturingresearch, a trend recognized in a number of federal programs.5  The issue of
manufacturing is bigger than any company, indeed bigger than any industry.
Consortia may be the way to carry out expensive research, especially in areas that
transcend specific products.  One may question the relevance of, for example, the

possible collaboration between an aircraft company and a semiconductor chip5 For example, the Intelligent Manufacturing Systems (IMS) program is an international programfor cooperative research and development in advanced manufacturing that involves the United States,Japan, Canada, Australia, the European Community, and the European Free Trade Association.  It is

intended to bring together large and small manufacturing companies, research and academic institu-tions, and public authorities in a structure that facilitates the sharing of intellectual property.  In the
United States, the IMS program is run out of the office of the assistant secretary for technology
policy in the Department of Commerce.  This program is not aimed at any particular research topic or
direction for attention, though certainly the application of information technology to manufacturingdoes fall under its umbrella.A second example is the technology deployment activity of ARPAÕs Technology ReinvestmentProject that focuses on manufacturing extension centers (MECs).  An MEC is an organization that
works with small manufacturers to assist them in using technology (including information technol-
ogy) to improve performance and productivity.  MECs are intended to be consortia consisting of
institutions of higher education, nonprofit organizations, or government entities in the service ofspecified clientele.Other consortia are described in Putting the Information Infrastructure to Work (NIST, 1994, pp.
7-23).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGcompany.  However, it turns out that there may be many possible benefits of
collaboration.  Boeing has established a sophisticated design program for its new

line of aircraft, and the supplier-customer relationship established to share de-
signs of parts can benefit a chip maker also trying to share design topics.  Both

companies share concerns about environmental issues, team development, and
technology to share information.  Interindustry collaboration may indeed provide

a rapid path to the introduction of new technology.The development of the NII is sure to have a significant influence on indus-try collaboration.  Sharing of information will lead to more collaboration and the

availability of high-bandwidth communications networks will facilitate more and
better ways to collaborate, as will the availability of an infrastructure involving
adoption of standards that support interoperability.  As graphic and image-rich

information management capabilities become available through the NII, for ex-
ample, the collaboration between industries and suppliers is very likely to be
enhanced.MOTIVATING INTRODUCTION AND IMPLEMENTATIONOF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYUnderstanding Organizational IssuesThe introduction of new technologies into an organization almost alwaysaffects existing social structures.  A factory operation that is as tied to informa-

tion technology as the vision of Chapter 1 suggests will inevitably have different
employment hierarchies, divisions of labor, information flows, and forms of
organizing for tasks than those that exist today.  To facilitate a smoother integra-

tion of new information technology into manufacturing businesses, research is
needed in the following areas.Human ResourcesEven in a highly automated and information technology-intensive manufac-turing enterprise, human beings will continue to have a critical impact on opera-
tions.  Important questions regarding the human role must be addressed:
¥ How should responsibilities be divided between people and information
technology?  At the extremes, this division may be clear (clearly, people

should decide if it is socially responsible for a certain product to be pro-
duced, and computers should decide at what moment to turn off a cutting
torch).  However, intermediate cases are less clear, especially as information

technology becomes capable of acting with more autonomy and can assume
tasks previously thought to require human input.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE143¥ How should goals and incentives be structured to ensure that the aggregate
of individualsÕ behaviors is most supportive of an enterprise
Õs overall objec-tive?  Individuals in a hierarchy may well be much more sensitive to the

demands of their immediate environment than to the company
Õs overall goals;
most individuals in an organization do what is necessary to satisfy their
supervisor, and what the organization wants overall is secondary.  In moti-

vating the appropriate behavior, a system that rewards individuals on the
basis of satisfying the needs of (internal or external) customers may be more
efficacious than current approaches, and information technology may well
provide the means to make such a  reward system more immediate and thus

effective (Holland, 1985, pp. 1-7).¥ What mechanisms are needed to give individuals the skills they need?  This
issue implies training or apprenticeship programs and invites exploration of
issues such as just-in-time training for small firms that cannot afford to
release staff for more traditional educational environments.  Older workers

who associate high technology with increased job insecurity may be particu-
larly apprehensive about the introduction of IT.CommunicationsTraditionally, the content of communications is structured as distinctionsbetween data, information, and knowledge.  This continuum can be regarded as

one of ever-higher abstraction coupled to increasing levels of contextual aware-
ness and relevance.  Intuitively, data belong to 
Òlow-levelÓ computers while
knowledge is the province of Òhigh-levelÓ human actors.  But as computers
become capable of assuming higher-level functions, what data, information, and
knowledge are relevant to which entities?  (For example, a person or a computer
might have a single function that requires selected communications content from
across an entire facility, or it might deal with the entire communications content
regarding a geographically and temporally bounded environment.  Under what

circumstances is each design more appropriate?)  How can the communications

stream best be made available to workers and for what purposes?  How can the

differing requirements of individual agents be taken into account?  How can

information overload on human beings be detected and corrected?Organization for Ad Hoc TasksFor substantial tasks, teams are necessary.  As enterprise integration for
manufacturing expands to include actors not traditionally included in a manufac-
turing factory complex (e.g., suppliers and customers), issues of team manage-
ment and organization will assume added importance.  For example, the prob-

lems of adjusting organizational structures to permit and support flexibility inInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGdesign and increased interaction with suppliers and customers as they participatein product development constitute one of the fundamental issues manufacturers
are wrestling with today.  Moreover, the group dynamics of teams with human

and computer actors are very poorly understood.  Put differently, what should the

partnership between person and machine be like?Informal Hierarchies of StatusIn addition to a formal organizational hierarchy (as might be depicted on anorganizational chart), most organizations also have informal hierarchies that re-
flect the greater status or prestige of certain categories or classes of individuals
relative to that of others.  In manufacturing companies, product designers are

often at the top of the pecking order, even though a successful manufacturing
operation requires talent and intelligence in other job functions as well.  Such

status is consistent with the fact that product designers have a much richer array
of computer-based tools to help them in their work than do factory managers or
process designers.  One consequence of this richer array of tools is that product

designers can point to computer-supported decisions whereas others usually must
rely on experience and intuition, and it would not be surprising if the preferences
of product designers were given more (and perhaps undue) weight as a conse-
quence.  Preceding chapters have underscored the fact that knowledge about

product design is more advanced than that for process design or factory manage-
ment, but it is also clear that limited resources are more often invested in accor-
dance with the needs of those of higher prestige and influence.  Because of a

long-standing history of status differentials in U.S. manufacturing organizations,
it may be necessary for management to pay explicit attention to differences in
status and to make special attempts to listen to the needs of individuals across an
organization so that they can contribute on a more equal basis.Overcoming History and Managing RiskThe history of attempts to introduce computer-integrated manufacturing(CIM) systems into factories demonstrates that companies have tried to adopt
these systems without adequate justification or based on the wrong metrics or
parameters; the result has been that these large expenditures of dollars have been
poorly justified and often wasted.  As a result, many decision makers in manufac-

turing regard CIM technology as technology searching for problems to solve.  In
some cases, such a perception may taint even good CIM applications.Moreover, the gap between manufacturing managers (the customers formanufacturing research) and technology ÒpushersÓ (the suppliers of manufactur-ing research) is often large; technologists at times push technology because it is
Òneat stuff,Ó whereas managers want and need answers to today
Õs problems.  This
gap between technology pushers and customers with real problems is significantInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE145and is the source of much friction.  Many information technology researchers are
so immersed in computer technology that they take increasing computerization as
a given.  These researchers often suffer some hubris about 
Òthose people out onthe factory floor who cannot write programs or integrate new systems . . . .ÓManufacturing managers, including members of this committee, express concern
that they already have more technology than they can use.  They note that many

human obstacles must be overcome before todayÕs, let alone tomorrowÕs, infor-mation technology can be used to benefit manufacturing.  Attention to the mana-

gerial and cultural preconditions for effective use of information technology is an
important elementÑperhaps the most important elementÑof the developmentand application of advanced manufacturing systems (CSTB, 1994a).The gap between technologists and managers was demonstrated directly tothe committee in its interviews with senior manufacturing executives, who spoke
in terms of cost, quality, and time to market while the committee spoke in the
jargon of information technology.  The company executives
Õ view of what was
contained in information technology differed strongly from the committeeÕs view;the committeeÕs view of manufacturing was strongly at variance with the execu-tivesÕ view.  As one of the interviewees for this report put it, ÒThe managers andthe technical experts talk two different languages.  The technologists regard the

managers as being too tied up in return-on-investment concerns and therefore
likely to miss emerging capabilities, while the managers and decision makers
regard the technologists as being too uninvolved in real factory problems to
understand what the customer really wants and needs.Ó  Such discussions demon-
strated that both technologists and executives need to make greater efforts to
bridge the communications gap before technology can be applied to the real
problems faced in manufacturing in companies across the United States.Manufacturing managers know that realizing the promise of informationtechnologies to help improve factory performance is not easy, and there are many
opportunities for mismatched expectations.  Expectations may differ between

technology supplier and userÑindeed, users may have had too little input into thedesign of new systems.  Achieving a solution may take so long that it may come

only after the problem has largely disappeared or been fixed by other means, or
the conditions have changed so much that the solution is no longer applicable.  A

new system may not make use of embedded legacy systems that are too expen-
sive to discard or too integral to operations to modify.  The skills required may

differ significantly from those of the existing work force (see ÒEducation, Train-ing, and RetrainingÓ below).
Thus, the resistance of many senior managers to the introduction of informa-tion technology into real manufacturing operations is not unreasonable, and it
arises from the fact that many of the new information technologies are untested
and unproven in actual manufacturing lines, and in some cases have offered poor
results.  New systems are not used because they are untested, and they cannot be
tested because no one wants to be the guinea pig.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGAnother contributor to risk aversion is time pressure.  Bringing in new sys-
tems consumes valuable production time, which may not easily be recovered.  It

is easier (and therefore common) for a factory to use an old, perhaps less effi-
cient, system than to suffer ÒdowntimeÓ as the result of installing and testing a
new system.  Box 7.1 provides some guidelines for introducing new information
technologies that are responsive to the difficulties that line managers face in
approaching these technologies.The scope of change inherent in manufacturing systems can confound finan-cial analyses.  The financial impact may appear too large to justify for a single

factory, even if the new technology appears worthwhile for the enterprise overall.
In addition, the benefits of investing in a new system may be hard to quantify,
especially if they relate to quality; metrics for improved quality, service, and
accessibility are particularly problematic.  Research is needed to support more

appropriate financial and business justifications and to better define the cost ofBOX 7.1  Guidelines for Introducing Innovative
Information Technology in Real Production Lines¥ Take small steps.  Deliver improvements incrementally, rather than striving to
deliver Òthe solutionÓ all at once.  Deliver improvements that can be installed with
lower levels of management authority.¥ Lower the risk.  Avoid serious disruption of manufacturing facilities while appli-
cations are being tested or while systems are being introduced onto the factory
floor.¥ Deliver real solutions to real problems; focus on the customer, not the technol-ogy.  Indeed, there is a great deal of good technology already waiting to be used.
Develop the customer ÒpullÓ in concert with the technology 
Òpush.Ó¥ Develop a vision and a set of strategies that have temporal longevity.  Create
a system that withstands the ups and downs of yearly budget plans.  For example,

ÒleanÓ manufacturing is still not 100 percent utilized, in spite of the fact that it was
started over 30 years ago!¥ Work in teams with customers and suppliers.  Since having a viable supplier
base is a key to success, it is important to make suppliers a part of the solution,rather than regard them as part of the problem.  Similarly, the known (and perhaps
anticipated) needs of customers should be the ultimate focus of installations of
information technology.¥ Develop systems that build on legacy systems, unless it appears that the
legacy system is so hopelessly useless that it must be jettisoned.  It is hard to

quickly change the momentum of manufacturing enterprises; try to make incre-mental improvements.¥ Where possible, buy off-the-shelf information technology from commercialsuppliers.  In general, it is better to use commercial vendors than to undertake
custom development projects on oneÕs own.  Doing the latter forces one to inherit
all the issues that relate to product and application support for the product lifecycle.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE147quality, the cost of insufficient quality, and the trade-offs among quality, time,and money (Box 7.2).6One mechanism that could contribute to better planning for the time and realcost involved in implementing new systems (although not necessarily changing
those quantities) would be an extension of the Òbeta testÓ concept into manufac-
turing environments.7  Beta tests can assess the fidelity of a product to its designspecification, augmenting a real production environment with special instrumen-
tation to assess errors or relay feedback to developers.  Although pilot plants have

been used for years as laboratories to assess production concepts, research is
needed to explore how actual production facilities, operating at normal volumes,
can be used directly for achieving continuous improvements or innovation.  Le-

gitimizing beta test periods would disclose the need for and real costs of a prac-
tice to manufacturing management at the proposal stage.  The beta test concept

could also provide a basis for links to research facilities, with the benefit of
enhancing the understanding of what does and does not work in a given type of
system or application.  Research could help to define the tools, techniques, and

practices appropriate to beta testing in manufacturing contexts.Finally, the development of the NII may, for entirely psychological reasons,stimulate the incorporation of information technology into manufacturing.  To

the extent that the NII is a medium that ordinary people use every day (e.g., to
make purchases, to read newspapers, to order and watch movies, and to transmit
pictures, images, and voice and other messages), manufacturing managers will
become more familiar with information technology, and the part of managerial
resistance to information technology in factories that is attributable to unfamiliar-
ity will likely diminish.Providing for Technology DemonstrationsIn the absence of convincing evidence that the benefits of information tech-nology far outweigh the costs, effects of factory disruption, and time required to
do the job, many managers and executives in manufacturing enterprises will be
understandably risk-averse.  For these individuals, there is a world of difference

between a promise and a concrete demonstration of a technologyÕs feasibility and6 For example, the economic production of customized manufactured products (i.e., production lotsizes of one or a few) may well depend on the adoption of new accounting systems in which theentire life-cycle cost of a product is taken into account; life-cycle costs include transportation costs,inventory costs, obsolescence costs, reengineering and retrofitting costs, and the cost of product
recall, if any.7 Software developers draw on objective third-party users in beta tests of new products or versionsto verify functional capabilities and ensure lack of defects.  Explicitly applying the concept and

practice of a beta testing period into production launch activities would provide for significant firsttrials of the custom software typical of manufacturing information systems.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGBOX 7.2  Information Technology Deployment
and JustificationInformation technology was originally used in fairly narrow ways:  accounting
and clerical functions were automated, personnel records were placed in rudimen-
tary databases, and controllers were developed for individual machines.  For these
applications the financial justification could be made on fairly traditional grounds,such as cost reduction (usually by machines and systems replacing people) or the
improved quality associated with better machine control.  As information technolo-
gy has matured, as the cost mix (hardware, software, and labor) associated with ithas changed, and as its applications have broadened, it has become more difficult
to comprehend the impact that an information system will have and, consequently,to judge whether or not an investment in the technology will pay off (CSTB, 1994a;Kaplan, 1986, 1989).  The benefits of better understanding would extend to orga-

nizations of all sizes.It has proven particularly difficult to justify the costs of providing the infrastruc-ture required to maintain and enhance information technology.  There is no

straightforward relationship between information services and the yield or qualityof the finished product.  Consequently, justifications for the infrastructure have to
be based on more speculative, qualitative rather than quantitative, arguments.
Better metrics are needed for measuring the value of support systems.  These
could also contribute to better cost management.  Recent efforts to develop activ-ity-based costing may be helpful to manufacturers in this context; additional re-
search into applications of this approach in the manufacturing context may beuseful.As companies attempt to become more agile, reduce the time required to re-spond to market needs, and explore the merits of Òvirtual enterprises,Ó they will
need tools to help determine what should be measured.  How, for example, should

one translate the metrics of agility into realistic financial terms?  How can one
measure the costs at organizational boundaries and judge whether informationtechnology will improve an operation enough to justify the costs of the system?
The speed with which enterprise-wide systems will be deployed will, to a largedegree, depend on how well companies are able to understand these issues.  That
understanding would benefit from research into Òexchange ratesÓ between agility
and financial metrics as well as case studies of enterprises that have implementedcomplex information systems.8 An advanced long-range technology demonstration differs from the Advanced Technology Dem-onstration program of the National Institute of Standards and Technology in that the latter is focusedprimarily on demonstrations of technology just before it is mature enough to support product devel-
opment.  The technology associated with an ALRTD would generally be at an earlier stage of
development at the time the ALRTD was proposed.desirability.  For this reason, the committee is drawn strongly to the notion of anadvanced long-range technology demonstration (ALRTD).8ALRTDs focus on a variety of needs, covering both technical and culturalissues.  ALRTDs are intended to provide an active means for transferring prom-

ising research into practice and move technological concepts closer to businessInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE149opportunities; connect researchers to problems, reveal knowledge gaps, and testresearch ideas; and bridge a variety of Òbelievability gapsÓ that keep new ideas
from being tried in the real world.  Successful ALRTDs would be vehicles that

could help to change manufacturing management skeptics into supporters and
believers without making them suffer through a painful process of education
within their own factory domain, and they would help answer the question, Is
there a performance benefit to making changes on the factory floor?For a candidate ALRTD to be viable and effective, it must be focused andbounded; Box 7.3 provides a number of areas in which ALRTDs might prove
helpful.  Since some investment in technology will almost certainly be required

(in some cases, as much as that required for a pilot manufacturing plant), it must
be funded well beyond the level of technical research grants.  So that its success

(or lack thereof) can be determined, quantitative goals or metrics that can serve as
yardsticks should be established in advance.  Moreover, each ALRTD should

have core nontechnological content, such as a specific business activity, so that
the technology will be the means to a clearly defined end rather than an end unto
itself.  Finally, each ALRTD should have some growth or follow-on potential and

should not be a dead end.Each ALRTD proposed should be based on a vision of what will be possibleif the ALRTD is implemented, including what knowledge will be obtained if the
ALRTD is successful.  It should have available to it the necessary physical and

information infrastructure, including other ALRTDs that could be under way at
the same time or should have been completed first.  It should clearly state the

capabilities that will be demonstrated.  Finally, it should describe expected conse-

quences of a successful ALRTD that go beyond the explicit things to be demon-
strated.Appendix C describes several possible ALRTDs that are consistent with thisdescription.STIMULATING THE ADOPTION OF OPEN STANDARDSAs discussed in previous chapters, the lack of standards is a major inhibitorto the use of existing information technology for manufacturing.  From com-

puter-aided product design tools to real-time machine controllers, the lack of
standards in various forms prevents data interchange, increases training costs,
and impedes would-be product developers who have to build basic services into
their products from scratch.  Smaller manufacturers, especially, stand to benefit

from the wide promulgation and acceptance of standards for interfaces and inter-
connections, because such standards are likely to lead to a much wider selection
of information technology products for manufacturing applications (as more ven-
dors will be able to develop products based on a common standard) and lower
prices for such products (as vendors will be able to avoid the cost of developing
unique solutions to common problems).Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGWhat prevents standards from being adopted more broadly?  One answer is
that the premature imposition of standards tends to freeze technological develop-
ment and progress, and manufacturing is certainly one arena in which the use of
information technology is relatively immature.  But a second important barrier to

adopting standards is not rooted in technical issuesÑa company trying to differ-entiate its products from those of other vendors may well choose to make them
incompatible with others.  Representing data in ways that facilitate interoper-

ability may subject a vendor to infringement liability or require it to pay royalties.BOX 7.3  Areas for an Advanced Long-range
Technology Demonstration¥ Executive level
Strategic analysis and evaluation of alternatives
Strategy formulationPlanning for implementation of strategies¥ Finances
Debit managementCash managementCurrency and commodities hedging
Profitability¥ Human resources
Hiring metrics
Team managementTrainingRewards
Multinational teams¥ Sales and marketing
Gathering customer input
Forecasting sales by product and geography¥ Product design and development
R&D, design, prototyping, and verification
Design methodologies and managementComputer-aided design toolsProcess design and verification¥ Production
Fabrication, assembly, logistics
DistributionInventory controlResource procurement and use planning
Procurement, source qualificationMaintenance and repair of facilities¥ Legal concerns
AlliancesContractsSafety
EnvironmentLiabilityInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE151Finally, once many competing products employ different representations andinterfaces, a company may well resist adopting a standard proposed by another
company for fear of ceding a commercial advantage to that company.Previous chapters suggest the need for technical work on the development ofopen standards that will still allow technological progress.  But there is a socio-

logical dimension to standards as wellÑeven when the underlying science andgeneric enabling technology are genuinely capable of supporting useful commer-
cial applications, the vendor community needs to find some way to agree on
standards that will expand the market for all.Many problems need to be overcome if agreement is to be reached.  For
example, trends toward distributed intelligence, as well as the need to form
alliances with other business entities (including outside design and engineering
services as well as material and equipment suppliers), raise important knowledge
management issues.  How should companies determine what proprietary knowl-

edge to share through distributed intelligence?  What are ways to share such

knowledge that protect knowledge assets and avoid disruptive interactions?  How

can commercial, off-the-shelf systems and technology best be combined with
proprietary knowledge, perhaps in the form of software and knowledge bases?
Such difficulties have already appeared in the very large scale integration appli-
cations-specific integrated circuit industry:  vendors that own significant design

libraries (for cells or ÒmacrocellsÓ) are very reluctant to disclose detailed modelsof these cells to their customers, for fear that their customersÕ ability to do
reliable simulations will hurt them competitively.A second problem is how to achieve an appropriate balance between reduc-ing the costs of variation and enabling rapid implementation of new technol-
ogyÑin short, the fundamental tension over whether and when to standardize.Research could help to establish criteria for determining when the benefits of
restricting options by the adoption of standards outweigh the costs.A third problem is how to generate widespread acceptance of and conform-ance to standards.  Because of the large number of parties with vested interests in

the particulars of any given standard, a careful and deliberative approach with
wide representation is necessary.  However, while wide representation is often a

facilitator of consensus and acceptance, it is a factor that tends to slow down the
consensus-forming process and also sometimes discourages the exploitation of
technological opportunities that may spontaneously arise.  In addition, once a

standard is in place, a substantial amount of education is often necessary to
familiarize potential users with its benefits and its technical implications.DEVELOPING BETTER METRICS OF PERFORMANCEMany metrics used today measure factory performance at high levels ofaggregation that do not provide managers with insight into what is going on at the
activity level.  For example, metrics often used today include inventory turns (a
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGmeasure of how rapidly inventory flows through the manufacturing system),defect rates (how often manufacturing problems occur), and on-time deliveries
(the extent to which manufacturing schedules are met).  These metrics are useful
to signal the existence of problems somewhere within a manufacturing operation
but cannot by themselves identify sources of the problems, which are affected by
many factors.Moreover, when the use of new technologies and approaches leads to newcombinations of previously separate activities, many traditional measures of per-
formance are problematic at bestÑand perhaps outright misleading or useless.For example, repetitive activities are much easier to measure than others, and
performance metrics are often based on what is easy to measure.  How does one

use metrics based on repetition when the very point of information technology is
to increase flexibility and the ability to cope with one-of-a-kind new situations
and new sets of circumstances?  Understanding in detail the impact of informa-

tion technology is crucial for obtaining the best value, because only a detailed
analysis can separate the impact of information technology from the effects of all
of the other factors that may also impinge on overall performance.Research is needed to develop good metrics that reflect the impact of infor-mation technology on manufacturing activities; a good beginning would be re-
search on measuring the effect of information technology applications using
existing metrics.  Progress in this area will require both sophisticated technical

understanding and a shared understanding within the community on the appropri-
ateness of these metrics.A related issue is that trustworthy cost-benefit analyses require reliable data.Obtaining meaningful data on costs is typically much more difficult than budget
analysts anticipate.  Consistent definitions are lacking, and typical cost categories

and allocations are designed in accordance with conventional accounting rules
rather than for tracking the performance of integrated business practices.  New

accounting categories based on the specifics of manufacturing may well be needed
if an accurate picture is to be drawn of dollar flows in manufacturing.DEVELOPING NEW MODELS FORACCOUNTING AND VALUATIONThe complexity of a large manufacturing business makes it very difficult formanagers to identify operations that cost more than their value warrants.  It is

thus necessary to develop detailed models of a business that truly relate causes
and effects, costs and benefits, and problems and solutions.  Without such mod-

els, it will be difficult to convince anyone of the wisdom of taking certain courses
of action, especially those that may be counter-intuitive.Better management accounting systems are an integral part of these models.Timely activity-based accounting systems can provide explicit guidance regard-
ing where costs can be trimmed and information on design parameters that de-Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE153mand resources.9  With traditional accounting, the overhead costs of operating a
plant are spread over all items produced in proportion to the volume of each type
of item.  But with activity-based accounting systems, the actual cost of small-

volume production can be properly attributed and thus recovered.Finally, generally accepted accounting principles that businesses use to audittheir finances and operations are derived from a business philosophy in which
capital expenditures (i.e., expenditures that relate to the long-term value of a
company) are associated with buildings and pieces of equipment.  Although this

philosophy was appropriate in manufacturing 30 years ago, its relevance has
decreased as the basis for competitive advantage has increasingly become the
ability to exploit information more effectively.  In particular, under old account-

ing principles the contribution of various types of knowledge (e.g., skilled per-
sonnel, software, and organizational structure) to the book value of a firm is
essentially zero, even if that knowledge is the primary enabler of that firmÕssuccess.It is admittedly difficult to place a book value on assets that are intangibleand inscrutable to the layperson or that seemingly lack durability.  Senior man-

agement is often legitimately concerned about the potential for misleading finan-
cial reporting as a product of estimating the value of intangible assets such as
knowledge, and a variety of stakeholders (e.g., analysts, investors and owners,
managers of organizations using software, managers of organizations producing
software, tax authorities) are likely to have different judgments on what such
assets are ÒtrulyÓ worth.  Nonetheless, given the importance of knowledge to thefuture competitive environment, serious research to find valuation schemes that
appropriately account for the contribution of knowledge to value is well worth-
while.10EMPHASIZING EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND RETRAININGThe obstacles described above are among the factors motivating the currentconcern of management theorists and analysts with the Òmanagement of change.ÓAccording to this perspective, successful enterprises of the future must change
rapidly and frequently.  Information, types of media, tools, processes, organiza-

tional structures, and so on will change, rendering knowledge and skills obsolete
several times in an individualÕs career.  Continuing education and training will
have to inculcate adaptability and the expectation of change.  These outcomes

will be difficult to achieve because change provokes anxiety and stress.  Research

into techniques and tools to help enterprises and individuals understand and9 See, for example, Nanni et al. (1988).10 Similar concerns were raised for service industries in Information Technology in the ServiceSociety:  A Twenty-first Century Lever
 (CSTB, 1994a).
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGmanage the process of change could facilitate the kinds of evolution of organiza-tions and skills that many analysts anticipate.Expectations for frequent change and greater employee autonomy imply thatthe manufacturing enterprise of the future will depend more on the knowledge
and skill sets of each employee.  Several needs follow from this assumption:
¥Education of senior managers, to help them make informed decisionsabout using new, expensive, and perhaps risky information technology;¥Education and training of middle managers, to help them reduce barriersto trying new technology that may seem only to consume time and resources or
imperil their own jobs;¥Education of designers, engineers, manufacturing engineers, and tool-makers to give them an increased technical base so that they can better under-
stand and use computer technology and design relevant software;¥Training of factory workers, who are expected to use this new technologyto improve their performance and that of their facility; and¥Retraining of factory workers whose skills are not compatible with theinformation technology paradigm and who may have to seek alternative jobs.Even the term Òfrequent changeÓ may understate the rapidity with which
individuals will have to learn new things.  Indeed, the volume of information that

is relevant to successful individual performance is both so large and so rapidly
changing that a learning model based on discrete phases of ÒretrainingÓ may not
be entirely sufficient.  Another notion
Ñwhat might be called Òjust-in-time learn-ingÓÑis based on the idea that people should learn new skills and information asthey need them to do what they must do.  While such a notion has applicability

that goes beyond manufacturing (indeed, it has ramifications for all of education),
the manufacturing domain may be one that is particularly suitable for exploring
the potential of this notion through intelligent tutoring systems, long-distance
learning systems, and multimedia experiential learning tools.Education issues are ubiquitous and topical; in addition, the renewal andcurrency of employee process- and product-specific knowledge have long been a
major problem for all manufacturing enterprises.  Needed are better means of

delivery and better understanding of human issues such as motivation (or fear
based on inadequate technical education and the resulting wish to fall back on
intuition and experience).Possible approaches to addressing the need for ongoing education includeconferences and seminars for senior and middle managers; publication of educa-
tional materials; close collaboration among academicians, designers, engineers,
and factory workers; and television and audio tape courses.Computer aidsÑcomputer-aided instructionÑalso may be brought to bearon the education and training requirements of an enterprise, providing efficient
and customized education that allows a person to learn quickly and selectively.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ORGANIZATIONAL AND SOCIETAL INFRASTRUCTURE155Instructional programs of the future will be more interactive and user-friendlythan the lecture and fixed-sequence documentaries of today.  Computer aids for

learning may be built into new manufacturing technologies themselves, as well as
installed in stand-alone workstations for educational purposes.  Multimedia and

virtual reality technology may hold promise for providing a flexible, socially
acceptable, and nonthreatening interface for educational and skill-building pro-
grams; an NII and future home and factory systems offer the means to distribute
and use such programs.  The delivery systems will have to provide overview data

as well as fundamental knowledge.  NSF support of these technologies, perhaps

through Education and Human Resources Directorate programs, could increase
the skill base of the manufacturing sector, as well as of other sectors of society in
general.The challenge of providing new educational technology can easily be under-estimated.  But it is a complex, multifaceted task.  The target population spans a

wide range of educational backgrounds, capabilities, and needs.  Some individu-
als will want a high-level overview of the material, and others will want in-depth
courses with detailed practice sessions.  The work force today spans multiple

languages in the domestic United States, and specific topics will also be made
available to people in other countries and from different cultures.  Thus the

content of educational programs and information is critical, the quality of presen-
tation must meet modern expectations, and usability must be tunable to purpose.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURING156BibliographyAdvanced Manufacturing Program, Office of Technology Commercialization, Technology Adminis-tration, U.S. Department of Commerce.  1989.  
Economics, Management Policies and Finan-cial Accounting Practices for a Shared Flexible Computer Integrated Manufacturing Facility.U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C.Amello, Gilbert F.  1993.  ÒManaging the Integration of Semiconductor Manufacturing,Ó remarks
presented at International Semiconductor Manufacturing Sciences Symposium SEMICON/Weston July 19.Bartlett, Christopher A., and Sumantra Ghoshal.  1992.  
Transnational Management:  Text, Cases,
and Readings in Cross-border Management.  Irwin, Homewood, Ill.
Bjorke, O.  1979.  ÒComputer Aided Part Manufacturing,Ó 
Computers in Industry  1:3-9.
Clinton, William J., and Albert Gore, Jr.  1993.  ÒRemarks by the President and Vice President to
Silicon Graphics Employees.Ó  Electronic mail press release dated February 22.
Clinton, William J., and Albert Gore, Jr.  1993.  
Technology for AmericaÕs Economic Growth, a NewDirection to Build Economic Strength, February 22.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1992.  
Com-puting the Future:  A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineering.
  National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) and Manufacturing Studies Board (MSB),National Research Council.  1993.  
Information Technology and Manufacturing:  A Prelimi-
nary Report on Research Needs.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1993.  
Na-tional Collaboratories: Applying Information Technology for Scientific Research.  National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1994a.
Information Technology in the Service Society:  A Twenty-first Century Lever
.  National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, D.C.Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council.  1994b.
Academic Careers for Experimental Computer Scientists and Engineers.  National Academy
Press, Washington, D.C.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY157Council of Economic Advisors for the Joint Economic Committee.  1994.  
Economic Indicators.U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.Cowger, Gary L.  1991.  Remarks made at ÒThe Integrated Enterprise:  Moving Beyond TechnologyCAM-I Conference,Ó Orlando, Florida, September 25.
Cutkosky, Mark R., Robert S. Engelmore, Richard E. Fikes, Michael R. Genesereth, Thomas R.Gruber, William S. Mark, Jay M. Tenebaum, and Jay C. Weber.  1993.  
ÒPACT:  An Experi-
ment in Integrating Concurrent Engineering Systems,Ó IEEE Computer  26(1):28-37.
Darlin, Damon.  1994.  
ÒAutomating the Automators,Ó Forbes  153(4):156-160.
Dertouzos, Michael L.  1989.  
Made in America:  Regaining the Productive Edge.
  MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass.Division of Information, Robotics, and Intelligent Systems, National Science Foundation.  1993.
Summary Report of the Intelligent Manufacturing Research Planning Meeting, June 7-8, Wash-
ington, D.C.Erisman, Albert M., and Kenneth W. Neves.  1987.  
ÒAdvanced Computing for Manufacturing,ÓScientific American  257(4):163-169.
Eversheim, Walter.  1991.  
ÒStrategies and Tools Meeting Future Challenges in Manufacturing,Ópaper presented at ÒInternational Conference on the Application of Manufacturing Technolo-giesÓ held April 17-19 in Washington, D.C., and sponsored by Society of Manufacturing Engi-neers.Friedman, Avner, James Glimm, and John Lavery.  1992.  
The Mathematical and ComputationalSciences in Emerging Manufacturing Technologies and Management Practices, SIAM Reportson Issues in the Mathematical Sciences, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Phila-delphia, Pa.Genesereth, Michael R., and Nils J. Nilsson.  1987.  
Logical Foundations of Artificial Intelligence.Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, Calif.Greenfeld, I., F.B. Hansen, and P.K. Wright. 1989.  ÒSelf-sustaining, Open-system Machine Tools,
ÓProceedings of the North American Manufacturing Research Institution 17:281-292.Hammer, Michael, and James Champy.  1993.  
Re-Engineering the Corporation:  A Manifesto for
Business Revolution.  Harper-Collins, New York.
Harrington, Joseph.  1984.  
Understanding the Manufacturing Process:  Key to Successful CAD/
CAM Implementation.  M. Dekker, New York.
Holland, John H.  1985.  
ÒProperties of the Bucket Brigade Algorithm,Ó Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference on Genetic Algorithms and Their Applications, J.J. Grefenstette (ed.).
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pa.Initial Graphics Exchange Specification (IGES) Version 5.2.  1993.  U.S. Pro, Fairfax, Va.
Interchem On-Line.  1993.  
ÒA Day in Your Not-too-distant Future?Ó  Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 2-3.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO).  1994.  
Industrial Automation Systems andIntegrationÑProduct Data Representation and Exchange, Part 1:  Overview and Fundamental
Principles.  ISO 10303-1.  ISO, Geneva.
Jaikumar, Ramchandran.  1988.  
ÒFrom Filing and Fitting to Flexible Manufacturing,Ó Harvard
Business School working paper No. 88-045, Boston, Mass.  Reproduced in R. Jaikumar, 
Ò200Years to CIM,Ó IEEE Spectrum  30(9):26-27.
Kahaner, David K. (U.S. Office of Naval Research Asia).  1993.  
ÒA Survey and Discussion of CIMProjects in Japan.Ó  Electronic mail message dated January 13, 1993, to 
ÒDistributionÓ from
kahaner@cs.titech.ac.jp.Kaplan, Robert S.  1986.  
ÒMust CIM Be Justified by Faith Alone?Ó  Harvard Business Review64(2):87-95.Kaplan, Robert S.  1989.  
ÒManagement Accounting for Advanced Technological Environments,ÓScience  245(4920):819-823.
Lardner, James F.  1986.  
ÒComputer Integrated Manufacturing and the Complexity Index,Ó TheBridge  16(1):10-16.
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR MANUFACTURINGLuss, Hanan, Moshe B. Rosenwein, and Elizabeth T. Wahls.  1990.  
ÒIntegration of Planning andExecution:  Final-Assembly Sequencing,
Ó AT&T Technical Journal  69(4):99-109.
Manufacturing Studies Board (MSB), National Research Council.  1988.  
A Research Agenda forCIM.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Manufacturing Studies Board (MSB), National Research Council.  1991.  
Improving EngineeringDesign:  Designing for Competitive Advantage
.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Marks, Peter.  1993.  
15 Key Processes in the CASA/SME Wheel.  Draft copy.
Merchant, M.E.  1971.  
ÒDelphi-type Forecast of the Future of Production Engineering,Ó ICIRPAnnals  20(3):213-225.
Miller, Jeffrey G., and Thomas E. Vollmann.  1985.  
ÒThe Hidden Factory,Ó Harvard BusinessReview  63(5):142-150.
Moore, John.  1994.  
ÒAgencies, Vendors Split on IDEF3 Techniques,Ó Federal Computer Week,August 1.Mukherjee, Amar, and Jack Hilibrand (eds.).  1994.  
New Paradigms for Manufacturing.  NSF 94-
123.  National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.
Nanni, Alfred J., Jeffrey G. Miller, and Thomas E. Vollmann.  1988.  
ÒWhat Shall We Account For?ÓManagement Accounting  69(7):42-48.
National Critical Technologies Panel.  1991.  
Report of the National Critical Technologies Panel.The National Critical Technologies Panel, Arlington, Va., March.National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).  1994.  
Putting the Information Infrastruc-ture to Work: A Report of the Information Infrastructure Task Force Committee on Applica-
tions and Technology.  SP857.  National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg,
Md., May.National Research Council.  1994.  
Virtual Reality:  Scientific and Technological Challenges.
 Na-
tional Academy Press, Washington, D.C.OÕLone, Richard G.  1991.  
Ò777 Revolutionizes Boeing Aircraft Development Process,Ó AviationWeek & Space Technology  134(22):34-61.
Pan, Jeff Y.-C., Jay M. Tenenbaum, and Jay Glicksman.  1989.  
ÒA Framework for Knowledge-based Computer-Integrated Manufacturing,Ó IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufac-turing  2(2):33-46.
Pan, Jeff Y.-C., and Jay M. Tenenbaum.  1991.  
ÒAn Intelligent Agent Framework for EnterpriseIntegration,Ó IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics:  Special Issue on Distrib-
uted Artificial Intelligence, September.
Port, Otis.  1991.  
ÒÔThis Is What the U.S. Must Do to Stay Competitive,ÕÓ Business Week  No. 3244,
December 16, p. 92.Porter, Michael E.  1992.  
Capital Choices:  Changing the Way America Invests in Industry.
  Council
on Competitiveness and Harvard Business School, Washington, D.C., June.Sadeh, Norman.  1993.  
Micro-Opportunistic Scheduling:  The Micro-Boss Factory Scheduler
.  The
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pa.Shiraishi, M.  1988.  
ÒScope of In-Process Measurement, Monitoring and Control Techniques inMachining Processes,Ó Part 1
ÑÒIn-Process Techniques for Tools,Ó Precision Engineering10(4):179-189.Shiraishi, M.  1989a.  
ÒScope of In-Process Measurement, Monitoring and Control Techniques inMachining Processes,Ó Part 2
ÑÒIn-Process Techniques for Workpieces,Ó Precision Engineer-ing  11(1):27-37.
Shiraishi, M.  1989b.  
ÒScope of In-Process Measurement, Monitoring and Control Techniques inMachining Processes,Ó Part 3
ÑÒIn-Process Techniques for Cutting Processes and MachineTools,Ó Precision Engineering  11(1):39-47.
Siewiorek, Daniel P.  1992.  
ÒRapid Prototyping:  The Design Process, Tools, and Fabrication,
Ópresented at ÒInformation Technology and Manufacturing:  A Workshop,
Ó National Science
Foundation, Washington, D.C., May 5-6.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BIBLIOGRAPHY159Sousa, Louis J.  1993.  
ÒEvidence of a New, Value-added Materials Paradigm,Ó Journal of theMinerals, Metals and Materials Society  45(6):9-11.
Spur, Gnter (ed.).  1990.  
Production Technology Centre, Berlin, Fraunhofer-Institut f
rProduktionsanlagen und Konstruktionstechnik, Berlin.Tenenbaum, Jay M., and Rick Dove.  1992.  
ÒAgile Software for Intelligent Manufacturing,Ó pre-
sented at ÒInformation Technology and Manufacturing:  A Workshop,
Ó National Science Foun-
dation, Washington, D.C., May 5-6.Tenenbaum, J.M., R. Smith, A.M. Schiffman, A. Cavalli, and M. Fox.  1991.  
The MCC EnterpriseIntegration Program:  A Prospectus.
 Preliminary report, June 4.
The Economist.  1994.  ÒManufacturing Technology:  On the Cutting Edge,Ó Vol. 330, No. 7853, pp.3-18.Trobel, Russ, and Andy Johnson.  1993.  
ÒPocket Pagers in Lots of One,Ó IEEE Spectrum 30(9):29-
32.U.S. Air Force Manufacturing Technology Directorate.  1991.  
Automated Airframe Assembly Pro-gram.  NB91-51.  Northrop Corporation Aircraft Division and Wright Research and Develop-
ment Center, July.U.S. Air Force Manufacturing Technology Directorate.  1993.  
Producibility Methodology and ToolSet (PMATS) Initiative:  Concept Development and Program Strategy
.  A white paper 
ÒfinaldraftÓ dated May 1, Wright Research and Development Center, Cincinnati.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, Bureau of EconomicAnalysis.  1994.  
Survey of Current Business.  U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,
D.C., April.Wall Street Journal.  1994.  
ÒEuropean Car Recycling Accord,Ó April 29, p. A9E.
Ward, Elaine.  ND.  
IDEF.  MITRE-Washington Software Engineering Center, MITRE Corporation,
McLean, Va.Weiss, L.E., F.B. Prinz, D.A. Adams, and D.P. Siewiorek.  1992.  
ÒThermal Spray Shape Deposi-tion,Ó Journal of Thermal Spray Technology  1(3):231-237.
Wysk, Richard.  1992.  
ÒIntegration Requirements for Intelligent Manufacturing,Ó presented at 
ÒIn-formation Technology and Manufacturing:  A Workshop,
Ó National Science Foundation, Wash-
ington, D.C., May 5-6.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.163AList of ContributorsSuzanne Barber, University of Texas at AustinCraig Barrett, Intel Corporation
Steve Benson, Thesis Inc.
John Birchak, Intel Corporation
Robert E. Boykin, Consortium for Advanced Manufacturing International
Douglas F. Busch, Intel Corporation
Mark R. Cutkosky, Stanford University
Alan De Pennington, University of Leeds
Richard Dove, Paradigm Shift International
Ken Evans, R”seautique
David R. Ferguson, Boeing Computer Services
David Files, Eastman Kodak
Donald A. Jenkins, Allied Signal
Reuben S. Jones, Softech Inc.
Robert E. Joy, Northrop Corporation
Robert Kaplan, Harvard Business School
Karl Kempf, Intel Corporation
John K. Korah, Electronic Data Systems Corporation
Alison McKay, University of Leeds
Greg McLaughlin, Sun Microsystems Laboratories Inc.
Gordon Moore, Intel Corporation
Richard E. Morley, Flavors Technology Inc.
Victor Muglia, Caterpillar Solar Turbines Inc.
Mark Pearson, University of LeedsInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164APPENDIX AGeorge Pfeil, Ford Motor CompanyJan Pounds, Minnesota Technology Inc.
Michael Pratt, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Ari Requicha, University of Southern California
Charles M. Savage, Digital Equipment Corporation
Warren L. Shrensker, General Electric (retired)
Bruce Sohn, Intel Corporation
William J. Spencer, Sematech Inc.
N.S. Sridharan, Intel Corporation
John M. Swihart, National Center for Advanced Technologies
George Thompson, Johnson & Johnson
David Ullman, Oregon State University
Ernest O. Vahala, General Motors North American Truck Platforms
Herbert B. Voelcker, Cornell University
Frank Wilde, Collaborative Technologies CorporationInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.165BSite Visit to Romeo Engine Plant
March 23, 1994A FACTORY DESIGNED TO USE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYFordÕs Romeo engine plant is its newest, having started production in thesummer of 1990.  Its 750 employees and approximately $1 billion, 3-million-

square-foot physical plant make a wide variety of V-8 engines totalling about
2,400 per day.  The plant buys about 70 percent (by value) of what it ships and

devotes most of its energy to machining engine blocks, pistons, connecting rods,
and crank shafts and then assembling everything into a complete tested engine
ready to install in a car.  Plant manager George Pfeil believes that the plant could

not be operated without information technology.Information technology (IT) exerts its effects in two ways:  by empowering
people and by organizing the flow of people and parts.  This is a very clean and

highly automated plant with a large number of robots performing assembly and
thousands of feet of conveyor lines moving parts through a series of machining
operations.  IT permits a relatively small number of people to keep all these

machines running and all the complex operations on track.   For example, one line

for machining engine blocks is 2,500 feet long and is operated by 8 people per
shift.  In older plants without extensive IT, 30 people would be needed.
When the plant was designed in the late 1980s, IT was a central part of thedesign.  The plant was equipped with a network of what Pfeil calls Òwhite cour-

tesy phones,Ó which are actually input/output consoles on which all production
information is available to all employees.  Similarly, the controllers of the ma-

chines were wired into these consoles as well as into a pager system so that
machine stoppages could be recorded and the responsible person paged automati-Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166APPENDIX Bcally.  Even though several U.S. and foreign companies built the machining and
assembly lines, all used a common Programmable Logic Control (PLC) system
specified by Ford and linked their machines to it.There are no first-line supervisors, and shop floor personnel are expected toanswer the pagers and keep their machines operating.  In a typical day there are

between 12,000 and 16,000 manual and automatic pages.  In this way IT enables
the shop floor personnel to take command of the machinery, keep it running, and
make the necessary decisions to do so.  The United Auto Workers Union is fully
involved and supports this method of operation.Clearly, such a system could not have been overlaid onto a previously de-signed factory.  Designers thought through how this factory would be linked by

IT as part of their operating philosophy and human relations strategy, and IT was
up and running the day production started.  Pfeil says in retrospect that it was not

easy explaining to upper management why this kind of plant needed so much IT,
but the designers did it anyway.  Today the benefits can be accounted for both

qualitatively and quantitatively:¥A small number of spirited union employees can turn out a very largenumber of engines; it is a Òworld-class operation.Ó¥Statistics on Òthings gone wrong per thousand [engines]Ó in the first 6
months after the launch of a new engine reveal an average of over 150 on typical
launches in the 1980s versus 37 on the first Romeo launch in 1991 and 41 on the
second in 1993.HOW INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IS USEDIn addition to the white courtesy phones, IT is used in several other ways atthe Romeo engine plant.  For example:
¥In the tool crib, an electronic display indicates how to set up each tool andadjust it for proper alignment prior to installing it on a machine.¥Each time an engine must be diverted from the assembly line for minorrework, the operator records the cause and the remedy; that engine is then tracked
in the warranty system after it is sold to see if any unusual problems arise.¥A bar code on each engine tells the cold test machine what equipment ison the engine so that the correct test can be used.¥When the cylinder head is bolted to the block, the bolt torque is sensedand recorded.¥A Machine Monitoring System keeps track of equipment status.  Accord-
ing to the plant newspaper, 598 machines are monitored and 15,000 items are
recorded each minute.  Each time a machine, robot, or conveyor stops, the PLC

deduces the cause from sensors and the state of the control logic; the cause is
recorded and accumulated with other causes to form the basis for the reportsInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B167described below.  Pfeil notes that accurate data of this kind are essential and
cannot be gathered by people, who tend not to notice short stoppages (the vast
majority) and cannot always be present when breakdowns occur to note their
cause.¥Each week performance data on each section of the plant accumulated bythe PLCs are collected and packaged into Pareto charts that identify bottleneck
stations and the top 10 reasons for their failing to keep up; recent data are com-
pared to 7-week trends so that plant personnel can tell if they are making progress
in improving uptime; these reports are available to all employees on the white
courtesy phone consoles.  The bottleneck is identified by a formula that compares

theoretical with actual output, adjusted for faults on other machines.  Pfeil de-

cided long ago that people are poor judges of which machine is the bottleneck.Scheduling is currently done using manufacturing resources planning (MRP-II), but Pfeil is searching for better methods that take account of constraints.  A

mathematician by training, he is familiar with such methods as linear program-
ming and OPT (a commercial factory scheduling program that takes constraints
like machine capacity into account).  Pfeil notes that any success in 
Kaizen(continuous improvement) will Òcause the bottleneck to move around.Ó  That is,
as one machineÕs capacity is increased or a breakdown is fixed, the bottleneckwill by definition shift to the next slowest or most constrained machine.  Sched-

uling software must be capable of being easily reprogrammed to keep up, or else
the schedules will rapidly become useless.  Currently reprogramming is not pos-
sible, or it takes so long (typically hours) that the situation has changed already.Frank Keene, Cast Iron Block Machining Line manager, notes that by 1996there will be a step increase in production complexity as the California emission
standards begin to take effect.  Managing all the machines, parts, and people will

become increasingly difficult.  An important problem is reconfiguring the plant

to make a different-model engine.  This requires shifting people from one area to

another, an action that can take 30 to 45 minutes.  Right now he has no accurate

way of predicting how many people will be needed for each type or how long it
will take to move them.  Thus there is some waste in plant operations that must be

eliminated in order to absorb the expected increase in complexity.TRAINING FOR USE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYTraining is essential to the success of the Romeo plant.  It is such a strong
part of the plantÕs culture that Pfeil teaches one of the courses, called Productivity201.  Training starts with operation of the white courtesy phones and proceeds to

sensitize the employees to the importance of keeping the plant running.  Basic to

this is building an appreciation of the value of the data that can be obtained via the
white courtesy phones.  These data include the Pareto charts and other data.

Productivity 201 and other courses utilize a simulation of a typical line written inInformation Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168APPENDIX BWitness (a commercial package for simulating discrete events) by a professorfrom the University of Detroit.  A sample class exercise asks the students to look

at the Pareto chart, identify the causes of downtime, and schedule preventive
maintenance.  When the simulation is complete, the students can see if productiv-

ity has increased.  This and similar exercises help teams to develop better prob-

lem-solving methods and improve team dynamics.Employees do not use this system to help them decide how to schedule actualpreventive maintenance.  However, Pfeil and his staff use it to plan production a

week ahead as well as to see if their plans produce the anticipated production of
all the required varieties of engines.  Although basic training of new employees is

done using company-wide course material, Romeo found that it had to generate
its own advanced training curricula.  Topics include such business issues as

preventive maintenance (discussed above), quality, basic finance, and productiv-
ity.  Interestingly, although other plants are copying the approach of using the

white courtesy phones, RomeoÕs training materials are not being widely used inother Ford plants.WHAT NEEDS TO BE IMPROVEDIn addition to shortcomings in scheduling algorithms, Pfeil notes that userinterfaces are too cumbersome and take too long to learn.  They are also too text-

oriented.  He thinks an interface like that on the Macintosh would be better.  (At

Project Alpha, FordÕs technology transfer operation, David Wood said that theyneed better Òinformation ergonomics,Ó meaning not only better interfaces but
also better tools for turning data into useful information so that people know what
to do.)More broadly, Pfeil feels that advanced factories face huge Òsociology prob-lems.Ó  The plant is large and the company is even larger.  It is difficult for one
person to know what to do so that the whole thing improves.  Currently, U.S.

management uses ÒincentivesÓ to direct employees
Õ behavior.  The problem is
that incentives are substitutes for really knowing what action is best.  Further-

more, current incentives for hourly employees are not always consistent with
those of salaried employees.  It would be better if IT could be used to inform all

employees about how they were doing and how their personal returns could be
improved while those of the company also improved.  The white courtesy phones

are a step in that direction, but only a first step.  In particular, more needs to be

learned about how teams operate, how they process data and reach decisions, and
how best to present data to them.  Productivity 201 demonstrates an intermediate

version of what should be the better methods of the future.  Since the Romeo

plant will face increasing complexity within a very few years, such improve-
ments are needed soon.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.169CIllustrative Advanced Long-range
Technology Demonstrations
The projects described below are intended to illustrate the types of advancedlong-range technology demonstrations (ALRTDs) suggested in Chapter 7.  These

sketches omit many important issues, such as project size, participants (universi-
ties, companies), duration, budget, and funding mechanism; intellectual property
concerns; and so on.  However, given the broad scope of some of these projects,

support of ALRTDs by mission-oriented agencies as well as research agencies
would be desirable.  Each project is described briefly in terms of its vision, the

infrastructure it would require, the objectives of the demonstration, and its sig-
nificance.A MANUFACTURING ENTERPRISEMODELING MANAGEMENT SYSTEMVisionAn enterprise faces many problems in the course of doing business.  To
develop insight into these problems and to evaluate different courses of action,
decision makers often rely on computer-based models of these problems as they
apply to the enterprise.  Today, such models are often built Òfrom scratch,Ó

because the problems span a set of organizational or functional boundaries that
differ from those related to previous problems that have been modeled.  How-

ever, the model of the problem at hand still requires access to most of the same
databases that have been used previously; what is different most often relates to
data form, aggregation, granularity, period, frequency, precision, and so on.  A
Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170APPENDIX Cmanufacturing enterprise modeling management system (MEMMS) would man-age the reconfiguration of databases and existing models to account for these
specific needs (Table C.1).InfrastructureA MEMMS would require a complete, modern digital communications sys-tem, most likely including a wide area network, a local area network with the
necessary bandwidth, network management software, network servers, and indi-
vidual man-machine interfaces; also included would be bridges into databases
external to the enterprise.  The enterprise would require a standard language and

dynamic data dictionary, a distributed database management system, and digi-
tally accessible archival systems.  Models of different aspects of the business

would have to be stable enough to allow the enterprise itself to evolve.Objectives of the Demonstration¥To show that a MEMMS would provide direct, tangible, bottom-linebenefits to the enterprise in flexibility, response time, and the complexity of
problems that can be tackled.  Problems could be addressed quickly and effi-

ciently when an organization had completed the up-front work of standards,
common language, data elements definition, database design, and modernization
of the archival knowledge bases.¥To show that an appropriate methodology for model construction withinan enterprise involving techniques of modular design, scaling, enterprise model
hierarchy, and modeling software architecture would allow individual models
and databases to be reconfigurable and reusable for new problems.¥To show that a MEMMS is possible that would enable employees in allfunctions within an enterprise to manage reconfiguration of a set of models for
meaningful analysis and solution of problems facing manufacturing enterprises
today.  A corollary is that a software interface for a MEMMS is possible that does

not require highly specialized training in its operation.SignificanceThe MEMMS would provide a common language and analysis tools thatwould accelerate decision making but provide all players with access to the best
and most current data and tools. Organizations would thus be able to focus more
on the enterprise problems and less on the task of building new models.  The

interdependence of disparate business functions within the organization would
become clear, and integration of all activities would accelerate.  These changes

would allow organizations to become more focused, flexible, and responsive to
the marketplace.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C171TABLE C.1 A Manufacturing Enterprise Modeling Management SystemExample ModelsExample Databases
ResearchProcess, material, and productMaterial properties data,
andconcept modelsperformance data, boundary data
developmentProductProcess and productMaterial performance data,
designmodels
Ñdesign, fabrication costproduction costs, design history
libraryProductionProcess and product modelsData on volume, mix, cost,
materials, maintenance, uptimeSupplierProduct and process models,Statistical process data, status and
managementproduction and throughput modelscost data, production data
LogisticsShop floor productionData on volume, condition of paths
planning and throughput modelsof material flow, shipping schedules
FinancialFinancial models
Ñproduction, debtProduction costs, financing costs,
managementstructuring, investmentexternal interest rates
HumanCost-per-employee, succession,Compensation data, employee
resourcesand training modelsratings, government regulations
managementSales andPrice-cost-market share models,Customer needs; costs to produce,
marketingsales forecasting modelsship, and advertise; data on
customer needs, preferencesBusinessDynamic strategic analysis models,Macroeconomic data; data on
strategy andscenario modelsmarkets, competitors, costs,

planningexchange rates
Alliance-jointProcess and product models,Data on production, processes,
venturefinancial models, distribution andproducts, costs, revenues,
managementflow modelstechnology used
ExternalLife-cycle models, legislative andData from the Environmental
stakeholderregulatory modelsProtection Agency, Occupational
managementSafety and Health Administration,
legislative records, newspapersNOTE: The manufacturing enterprise modeling management system would connect models andinternal databases through a network and would access external databases as necessary.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172APPENDIX COPERATION OF A MACHINE SHOP BROKERAGE SYSTEMVisionA machine shop brokerage clearinghouse would be given responsibility foron-line brokerage policies and procedures for participating customers, permitting
their machining needs to be matched to the available machining capacity of a
certain set of suppliers.  The broker
Õs responsibilities would include the establish-ment of machine shop certification and qualification, bidding procedures, re-
quest-for-quote procedures, arbitration of disputes, payment, and so on.  The

clearinghouse would solicit suppliers and advertise for customers; participating
customers and suppliers would be connected by network in a given geographic
region.InfrastructureThe region served would require a wide area network and easy access ofcustomers to the network.  Suppliers and customers would have to be skilled

enough to handle such things as computer-aided design data exchange, electronic
data interchange requests for quotes and invoicing, electronic funds transfer pay-
ments, and so on.  Suppliers would have to be sophisticated enough to handle

statistical process and quality control techniques, provide records of employeesÕtraining and qualifications, and use computerized production order tracking and
status reporting.Objectives of the Demonstration¥To show that a set of policies and procedures could be developed for thepurpose of electronic brokering of machine-shop-type work tasks and assurance
that this type of business could be supported by existing technology.¥To show that a clearinghouse of this nature would enable customers tofind services of assured quality and dependability and at reasonable cost.¥To show that technical and business issues between customers and suppli-ers (answering questions, modifying the design) could be handled over the net-
work.ConsequencesThe traditional business practice in which companies deal with a small num-ber of familiar suppliers would change.  Brokering would allow an enterprise to

become more flexible and cost-effective by providing a menu of certified suppli-
ers with differing availability, cost, skill sets, and quantity attributes.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C173BROKERAGE FOR NATIONAL PROTOTYPING FACILITIESVisionPrototyping technology is being developed in a number of U.S. universities,private industries, and national laboratories.  To demostrate their capabilities and

to increase customer awareness of and access to these facilities, a national broker-
age institute would take responsibilty for on-line policy and procedures such as
the establishment of prototyping site certification and qualification, bidding pro-
cedures, request-for-quote procedures, arbitration of disputes, payment, and so
on.  The institute would solicit members and advertise for customers.  If it were

successful, the flow of business into these facilities would help to amortize their
high cost.InfrastructureThe institute would require a wide area network and easy access of custom-ers to the network.  Suppliers and customers would have to be advanced enough

to handle computer-aided design data exchange, electronic data interchange re-
quests for quotes and invoicing, electronic funds transfer payments, and so on.
Suppliers would have to be sophisticated enough to handle statistical process and
quality control techniques, provide records of employeesÕ training and qualifica-tions, and use computerized production order tracking and status reporting.Objectives of the Demonstration¥To show that a set of policies and procedures could be developed for thepurpose of electronic brokering of prototyping work tasks and that this type of
business could be supported by existing technology.¥To raise the visibility of limitations in software, standards, and theprototyping processes and also pinpoint industries in which large markets for this
type of work exist.  This should spur further research and development along the
lines that industry really needs.ConsequencesA prototyping brokerage would expand access to and knowledge ofprototyping processes and capabilities.  Prototyping decreases design time by

validating design decisions or providing early notice of design errors.Information Technology for Manufacturing: A Research AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174APPENDIX CREAL-TIME SALES FORECASTINGVisionA company should be able to locate and query financial, economic, anddemographic databases and predict sales of one of its products by regional mar-
ket.  With such information in hand, it would then notify its supplier base of its

anticipated needs for a defined time period in the future.InfrastructureA real-time sales forecasting system would require databases, search tech-niques, and modeling methods for extrapolating information that is not available
directly.  Of particular relevance are national and regional econometric data on

and models of consumer behavior at the present time; data on stocks of finished
goods unsold in a companyÕs own pipeline plus estimates of stocks in competi-torsÕ pipelines extrapolated from other economic data; methods of determining
demand for the companyÕs products based on demand from allied economicfields (e.g., demand for electric sockets based on demand for wire, or demand for
paint and varnish based on demand for lumber); and access to statistics from
home shopping systems.Objectives of the Demonstration¥To show that a company could find needed data.¥To show that a company could construct the models it needed if modelsdid not exist, or that it could find experts to help construct models.¥To show that a company could obtain valid sales forecasts more rapidlywith information technology than by former means, and/or that it could obtain
more accurate forecasts than before.¥To show that a company could integrate these forecasts advantageouslyinto dealings with its suppliers or business partners.ConsequencesNormal business practices would change greatly because each company aswell as its competitors would have better forecasts.  Thus each firm would have

to add its own capabilities to what is available to everyone on the network.
Relationships with suppliers would become tighter, ordering patterns would
change to ever-smaller orders spaced more closely together, and inventories
would become smaller, saving working capital.