DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/4940Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors Research336 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-05276-4 | DOI 10.17226/4940Raymond S. Nickerson, Editor; Committee on Human Factors, National ResearchCouncilEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iEmerging Needs and Opportunitiesfor Human Factors ResearchRaymond S. Nickerson, EditorCommittee on Human FactorsCommission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and EducationNational Research CouncilNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.  1995
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.National Academy Press ¥ 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. ¥ Washington, D.C.NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board
of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the NationalAcademy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences
and with regard for appropriate balance.This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to proceduresapproved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of
Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance
of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare.  Upon the authority of the
charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it toadvise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Bruce Alberts is president
of the National Academy of Sciences.  The National Academy of Engineering was established
in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization ofoutstanding engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federalgovernment.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimedat meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior
achievements of engineers.  Dr. Harold Liebowitz is president of the National Academy of
Engineering.The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciencesto secure the service of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination ofpolicy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  The Institute acts under the responsibility
given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the
federal government and upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research,
and education.  Dr. Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was established by the National Academy of Sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the AcademyÕs purposes
of furthering knowledge and of advising the federal government.  Functioning in accordance
with the general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principaloperating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of
Medicine.  Dr. Bruce Alberts and Dr. Harold Liebowitz are chairman and vice chairman,

respectively, of the National Research Council.The work of the Committee on Human Factors is supported by Department of ArmyContract No. DAAD05-92-C-0087 issued by the U.S. Aberdeen Proving Ground Support Activity.
The views and opinions, and findings contained in this report are those of the author(s) andshould not be construed as an official Department of Army position, policy, or decision, unlessso designated by other official documentation.Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 95-70762International Standard Book Number 0-309-05276-9Additional copies are available from  National Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Ave., N.W.,
Box 285, Washington, D.C.  20055.  Call 800-624-6242 or 202-334-3313 (in the Washington

Metropolitan Area).Copyright 1995 by the National Academy of Sciences.
Printed in the United States of AmericaEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iiiCOMMITTEE ON HUMAN FACTORS1990 - 1994RAYMOND S. NICKERSON (Chair, 1991-1994), Bolt, Beranek, andNewman Laboratories (retired), Cambridge, MassachusettsDOUGLAS H. HARRIS (Chair, 1988-1991), Anacapa Sciences, Inc.,Charlottesville, VirginiaPAUL A. ATTEWELL, Department of Sociology, City University of NewYorkM.M. AYOUB, Department of Industrial Engineering, Texas TechUniversityJEROME I. ELKIND, Lexia Institute, Palo Alto, California
PAUL S. GOODMAN, Center for Management of Technology, CarnegieMellon UniversityJOHN D. GOULD, IBM Corporation (retired), Yorktown Heights, NewYorkMIRIAN M. GRADDICK, AT&T Corporation, Basking Ridge, New Jersey
OSCAR GRUSKY, Department of Sociology, University of California,Los AngelesROBERT L. HELMREICH, NASA/UT Aerospace Crew Research Project,Austin, TexasJULIAN HOCHBERG, Department of Psychology, Columbia University
WILLIAM C. HOWELL, American Psychological Association ScienceDirectorate, Washington, D.C.ROBERTA L. KLATZKY, Department of Psychology, Carnegie MellonUniversityTHOMAS K. LANDAUER, Department of Psychology, University ofColorado, BoulderTOM B. LEAMON, Liberty Mutual Research Center, Hopkinton,MassachusettsHERSCHEL W. LEIBOWITZ, Department of Psychology, PennsylvaniaState UniversityANN MAJCHRZAK, Human Factors Department, University of SouthernCaliforniaNEVILLE P. MORAY, PERCOTEC-LAMIH (Laboratory for Automation,Mechanical, Industrial and Human Engineering), Universit” de
Valenciennes, FranceWILLIAM B. ROUSE (Chair-Elect, 1994-1997), Search Technology, Inc.,Norcross, GeorgiaJOYCE L. SHIELDS, HAY Management Consultants, Arlington, Virginia
LAWRENCE W. STARK, School of Optometry, University of California,BerkeleyEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivCONTENTSCHRISTOPHER D. WICKENS, Aviation Research Laboratory, Universityof Illinois, SavoyROBERT C. WILLIGES, Department of Industrial Engineering andOperations Research, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
UniversityJ. FRANK YATES, Department of Psychology, University of Michigan
LAURENCE R. YOUNG, Man Vehicle Laboratory, MassachusettsInstitute of TechnologyANNE S. MAVOR, Study DirectorHAROLD P. VAN COTT, Principal Staff Officer (until 1992)BEVERLY M. HUEY, Senior Staff OfficerJERRY KIDD, Senior AdviserEVELYN E. SIMEON, Senior Project AssistantivEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSvCONTRIBUTORS TO PART IIPAUL A. ATTEWELL, Department of Sociology, City University of NewYorkM.M. AYOUB, Department of Industrial Engineering, Texas TechUniversityJOSEPH B. CAVALLARO, HAY Management Consultants, Arlington,VirginiaJEROME I. ELKIND, Lexia Institute, Palo Alto, California
PAUL S. GOODMAN, Center for Management of Technology, CarnegieMellon UniversityJOHN D. GOULD, IBM Corporation (retired), Yorktown Heights, NewYorkDOUGLAS H. HARRIS, Anacapa Sciences, Inc., Charlottesville, Virginia
ROBERT L. HELMREICH, NASA/UT Aerospace Crew Research Project,Austin, TexasBEVERLY M. HUEY, Committee on Human Factors, National ResearchCouncilROBERTA L. KLATZKY, Department of Psychology, Carnegie MellonUniversityHERSCHEL W. LEIBOWITZ, Department of Psychology, PennsylvaniaState UniversityNEVILLE P. MORAY, Department of Mechanical and IndustrialEngineering, University of Illinois, Urbana-ChampaignRAYMOND S. NICKERSON, Bolt, Beranek, and Newman Laboratories(retired), Cambridge, MassachusettsD. ALFRED OWENS, Whitely Psychology Laboratory, Franklin andMarshall CollegePENELOPE M. SANDERSON, Department of Mechanical and IndustrialEngineering, University of Illinois, Urbana-ChampaignKAREN SEIDLER, U.S. West Advanced Technologies, Denver, Colorado
JOYCE L. SHIELDS, HAY Management Consultants, Arlington, Virginia
HAROLD P. VAN COTT, Committee on Human Factors, NationalResearch Council (retired)CHRISTOPHER D. WICKENS, Aviation Research Laboratory, Universityof Illinois, SavoyROBERT C. WILLIGES, Department of Industrial and SystemsEngineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State UniversityJ. FRANK YATES, Department of Psychology, University of Michigan
CAROLYNN A. YOUNG, Department of Psychology, University ofMichigan (deceased)Note:Affiliations current as of the report preparation period.
vEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiContentsPREFACEixEXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
PART I:SUMMARY REPORT11

PART II:BACKGROUND PAPERS69
1Productivity in Organizations71
2Training and Education86

3Employment and Disabilities106
4Health Care131
5Environmental Change158

6Communication Technology and Telenetworking177
7Information Access and Usability200
8Emerging Technologies in Work Design220

9Transportation241
10Cognitive Performance Under Stress262
11Aiding Intellectual Work291
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
The Committee on Human Factors was established in October 1980 bythe Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education of the
National Research Council.  The principal objectives of the committee are

to provide new perspectives on theoretical and methodological issues, to
identify basic research needed to expand and strengthen the scientific basis
of human factors, and to attract scientists inside and outside the field for
interactive communication and performance of needed research.Human factors issues arise in every domain in which humans interactwith the products of a technological society.  To perform its role effec-

tively, the committee draws on experts from a wide range of scientific and
engineering disciplines.  Members of the committee include specialists in

such fields as psychology, engineering, biomechanics, physiology, medi-
cine, cognitive sciences, machine intelligence, computer sciences, sociol-
ogy, education, and human factors engineering.  Other disciplines are repre-

sented in the working groups, workshops, and symposia organized by the
committee.  Each of these disciplines contributes to the basic data, theory,

and methods required to improve the scientific basis of human factors.Since its inception in 1980, the Committee on Human Factors has is-sued more than a dozen reports regarding the state of knowledge and re-
search needs on topics deemed important by the committee and its sponsors.
This report is the product of a committee-initiated project.  It identifies

major problem areas in which human factors research can make an impor-
tant contribution during the next few decades.  Part I provides the committeeÕsrecommendations and conclusions.  These conclusions are drawn from the
ixEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.background papers prepared by committee members, staff, and their col-leagues and included in Part II of the report.  The committee list is a

complete membership roster covering the report preparation time.  During

this time, some members completed their terms and new members were
added.Throughout the project the committee received encouragement and sup-port from a variety of sources.  In particular, we would like to express our

gratitude to our sponsors for their continuing interest and important in-
sights.  The sponsors include:  the Air Force Office of Scientific Research,

the Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences, the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Air Force Armstrong
Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory, the Army Advanced Systems Re-
search Office, the Army Human Engineering Laboratory, the Army Natick
RD&E Center, the Federal Aviation Administration, the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, the Naval Training Systems Center, and the U.S. Coast Guard.The committee would also like to thank staff of the National ResearchCouncil for their important contributions to our work.  Harold P. Van Cott,

study director until his retirement in 1992, was involved in shaping the
early planning stages; Beverly M. Huey, acting study director from 1992 to
1994, supported the committee through its deliberations and the many stages
of report drafting; and Anne Mavor, the current study director, helped bring
the project to a successful conclusion.  Finally, we gratefully acknowledge

Barbara White for her fine editorial contribution and Evelyn Simeon for her
excellent administrative assistance and hard work on the manuscript.Raymond S. Nickerson, Chair 1991-1994Committee on Human FactorsxPREFACEEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Emerging Needs and Opportunitiesfor Human Factors ResearchEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive Summary1This report identifies 11 areas considered by the National ResearchCouncil Committee on Human Factors as fertile ground for human factors
research during the next few decades.  The papers in Part II, written by

committee members, staff, and colleagues and addressing these areas, pro-
vide the basis for the conclusions and recommendations articulated in Part I
of the report.The committeeÕs first report, Research Needs for Human Factors, pub-lished in 1983, three years after the committee was established, focused on
six topics that reflected interests of the sponsors at the time and were within
the expertise of the committee members to address.  Since the committeeÕs

establishment, both its sponsorship and the composition of its membership
have broadened considerably.  Technology has also advanced rapidly, and

both the national and world situations have changed in significant and re-
markable ways.  Some of these changes create new challenges and opportu-

nities for human factors research.The committee therefore thought it appropriate to again attempt to iden-tify research needs and opportunities for human factors.  The process of

selecting the topics to emphasize in the report was lengthy and deliberative.
It was agreed at the outset that committee members should write the report,
that the report should be forward-looking, that it should focus on problems
that need attention rather than on the research that is currently being done,
and that it should be selective rather than comprehensive.  The process

produced a consensus on 11 topics, which can be fairly easily grouped
under three major headingsÑas follows:Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHNational or global problems¥Productivity in organizations¥Training and education¥Employment and disabilities¥Health care¥Environmental changeTechnology issues¥Communications technology and telenetworking¥Information access and usability¥Emerging technologies in work design¥TransportationHuman performance¥Cognitive performance under stress¥Aiding intellectual workIn keeping with the committeeÕs decision to be forward-looking, rela-tively little past research is reviewed in the report, and that is done only to
help provide an appropriate frame of reference for thinking about future
possibilities.  Some of the recommendations are relatively general; others,

quite specific.  Some follow traditional lines of research; others relate to

problems that have received little attention from the human factors commu-
nity so far.  In the latter cases, the recommendations are offered more as

points of departure for further discussion and planning than as items for a
research agenda.PRODUCTIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONSProductivity is a major national and international concern.  Economists
see productivity as a primary determinant of competitiveness both for com-
panies within an industry and for national economies.  Productivity is also

believed to be causally linked to standard of living, so increasing productiv-
ity globally is seen as the best hope for improving living conditions world-
wide.  Human factors researchers have given considerable attention to how

to improve human performance in the workplace and thereby increase indi-
vidual productivity; they have put relatively little effort into determining
how individual productivity relates to the productivity of the groups, orga-
nizations, or industries in which the individualsÕ work is done.
Our focus is on the latter issue, in particular on identifying the condi-tions under which increases in individual productivity are likely to be re-
flected in increases at organizational levels.  Research needs and opportuni-

ties include developing a better understanding of the linkages among within-job
activities that have implications for total-job productivity, determining how
individual jobs within an organization are causally linked to the productiv-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3ity of the organization as a whole, and identifying structural differencesamong organizations that show how the productivity of higher organiza-
tional units depends on the productivity of their components.TRAINING AND EDUCATIONIt is widely recognized that education and training are of critical impor-tance to the national economy and to the well-being of the nation and that
the countryÕs educational and training systems have not been meeting thenationÕs needs.  The problem is compounded by the expectation that in the
future the workforce will have to be more proficientÑespecially more ver-satile and adaptiveÑin order to cope effectively with the rapidity of techno-logical change in the workplace.  As a discipline that historically bridges

psychology and engineering, human factors should be important in applying
laboratory discoveries about learning to the design of educational and train-
ing systems.Determining how best to do this is a major challenge for research.  A
closely related research challenge is the identification of training and edu-
cational requirements that arise from interactions among changing technolo-
gies, changing workforce demographics, changing organizational structures,
and other developments that are likely to have implications for the design of
effective educational and training systems.  Other opportunities for human

factors research in this area include evaluating technologically innovative
approaches to education and training, applying user-centered design prin-
ciples to educational and training systems, developing approaches to sup-
port lifelong learning within work settings, and anticipating technology-
induced changes in job-skill requirements and their implications for educational
and training needs.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIESThe population of people with one or another type of disability is large.The rate of unemployment for people with disabilities who would like to
work is several times higher than the unemployment average nationwide,
and the percentage of people who live below the poverty line is two to three
times greater for people with a disability that interferes with their ability to
work than for the total working population.  These circumstances not only

represent a severe problem for many people with disabilities, but they also
create a significant economic burden for the nation.  Most of the previous

research on how to enhance employment opportunities for people with dis-
abilities has tried to find ways to use technologyÑespecially computer andcommunication technologiesÑto mitigate the limiting effects of disabilitiesin the workplace and elsewhere.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHWith more than half the workforce now engaged in information-ori-ented jobs, we need to continue our efforts to find ways to use computer
and communication technologies to increase employment opportunities for
people with disabilities.  Another major challenge for research is to increase
our understanding of how the capabilities and limitations of people with
specific disabilities compare with the requirements of specific jobs; such an
understanding is essential to the design of devices, systems, and procedures
that will expand the range of jobs that people with disabilities can effec-
tively perform.  There is also a need to explore ways in which specific jobs

might be designed or redesigned to accommodate people with disabilities.HEALTH CAREMany health risks, such as cancer and heart disease, stem at least inpart from behavioral and occupational factors.  Significant threats to health

are even found within the increasingly complex technology used for the
delivery of health care.  Many of these threats arise from the possibility of

human error in using health-care equipment and carrying out health-care
procedures, for example in trauma centers and by people without medical
training in their homes.A major challenge to human factors research is to help improve thedesigns of medical devices and health care procedures so that they are less
conducive to human error.  Another challenge is that, as the percentage of

our population that is elderly and very elderly continues to grow, it will
become increasingly important to learn to design living environments that
limit the risk of accidents without sacrificing the functionality that residents
need or want; this effort must include work on the design of spaces that
accommodate the types of health care devices that are more and more com-
monly utilized in the home.  Other challenges include developing effective

memory aids for helping people to take medicines in proper dosages on
schedule; improving the interpretability of labels, warnings, and instruc-
tions on medicines and health care devices that are intended to be used by
nonprofessionals; developing and evaluating practical ways to train people
in using such devices, and devising ways to convey health care and health
maintenance to consumers generally.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGEThe topic of detrimental environmental change is not usually associatedwith human factors research but is included in this report because it is a
serious national and international problem that has elements that deserve
attention from human factors researchers.  Scientists, policy makers, and

the general public have become increasingly concerned about the threat thatEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY5certain changes in the environment pose.  This threat has many dimensions,
and human activities are among its causes.  Because these activities are

aimed at satisfying human needs and desires, it is reasonable to assume that
they will increase as world population grows.  Some research has been done

on how to get people to modify behavior to make it more environmentally
benign.  A complementary effort is needed to find ways to modify technol-

ogy so as to decrease the opportunities it affords for harming the environ-
ment without impairing its effectiveness in meeting human needs.Because many of the most significant threats to the environment aredirect consequences of the production and use of energy, a major objective
should be improving the efficiency of energy use and substituting forms of
energy that do not harm the environment for those that do.  Computer and

telecommunications technologiesÑincluding electronic mail, teleconferenc-ing, computer-supported work facilities, and virtual reality systemsÑpro-vide many opportunities to substitute energy-light and material-light re-
sources for energy-heavy and material-heavy ones.  The challenge to human

factors researchers is to help ensure that such facilities are sufficiently well
designed from the usersÕ point of view that they will be used in ways that
decrease overall energy demands.  Other challenges include helping to make
mass public transportation a more attractive alternative to private automo-
biles for transport in urban areas; improving, from a human factors perspec-
tive, approaches to recycling and waste management, including procedures
for handling radioactive and toxic wastes; and increasing accessibility of
information in environmental databases to users and potential users of that
information.COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKINGSince the establishment of the first computer networks, network tech-nology has advanced rapidly.  The ARPANET began as a four-node system

in 1969; its successor, the Internet, now connects computers around the
world, and the number of users, already in the millions, has been doubling
annually for some time.  With the carrying capacity of networks continuing

to increase, it is now possible to transmit enormous amounts of data (in-
cluding digital voice and high-quality video) from almost anywhere to al-
most anywhere at relatively low cost.  People have unprecedented access to

information (in libraries, museums, news databases, and other repositories),
to information-based tools and resources, and to other people.  Computer-

based communication should remain a high priority for human factors re-
search, because in the future nearly everyone is likely to be a user of this
technology, directly or indirectly, for work and for numerous other reasons.Human-computer interaction has been the focus of considerable humanfactors research in the past.  Many of the problems that have received
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHattention will continue to be major challenges for research.  These include
issues relating to interface design, information finding and utilization, per-
sonal information management, and usersÕ comprehension of the systems
with which they interact.  Speech as a means of communication deserves

continuing human factors research, and Òwalk-around,Ó three-dimensional
representations of objects and environments with which users can interactÑi.e., virtual realityÑare innovations that will require the resolution of avariety of human factors issues before their potential can be fully realized.
Other needs and opportunities for human factors research involve the devel-
opment of tools to facilitate interaction with huge and complex databases
and studying interpersonal communication through computer-based systems
to compare it with more traditional communication and to learn how to
shape its technology to enhance its effectiveness for the various human
purposes it is intended to serve.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITYAmong the more striking characteristics of modern societyÑthe Òinfor-mation societyÓÑis the dependence of its many institutions on constantaccessibility to accurate, up-to-date information.  Associated with this in-

creasing dependence on information is a greatly increased quantity of infor-
mation available to people in all walks of life.  Availability does not neces-

sarily mean ready accessibility, however, and users, or potential users, of
information that is available often experience frustration in locating, access-
ing, and interpreting the information they want.  Any effort to make infor-

mation more accessible to people who need or want to use itÑincludingmany people who are not technically trained or orientedÑmust devote at-tention to a variety of human factors issues relating to the ways in which
people might interface with information repositories and tools that are in-
tended to facilitate finding, using, and conveying information.Much relevant work has focused on the design of interfaces and querylanguages for databases representing restricted domains, on the effects of
alternative organizations or representations of databases for search and re-
trieval, and on the relative effectiveness of various information search tech-
niques.  These issues will continue to require research.  As databases con-

tinue to increase in both size and complexity, effective ÒnavigationalÓ tools
will become more important to the user and more difficult to develop.  Evaluating
the effectiveness of information systems is, in large measure, a human fac-
tors problem.  To support the design of effective automated search and

retrieval systems, or retrieval aids, progress is needed on quantifying the
value of information as distinct from the amount of information retrieved.
Assessing the effectiveness of systems that are intended to facilitate brows-
ing, as opposed to structured search, is another difficult, and unsolved,Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY7problem.  Related problems include the need for a better understanding of
how to exploit the potential of computer-based information systems for
presenting data and information in innovative visual forms and of how to
use the spatial metaphor to construct data worlds that can be explored effec-
tively by moving around within them.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGNMany U.S. industries, especially in manufacturing, have found it in-creasingly difficult to remain competitive in the global marketplace.  Com-

peting effectively in the future will depend on the ability of the country to
use its material and human resources more efficiently, and especially on its
being able to adapt quickly to rapidly changing technology and market
conditions.  This means, among other things, that firms must become suffi-

ciently flexible to shift production quickly from one item to another and
that they must be able to produce items economically in relatively small
quantities.  This in turn requires a different job design from that found on

conventional twentieth-century assembly lines.  Emerging technologies
Ñautomation, robotics, information technologiesÑwill figure prominently inthe workplace changes that will occur.Jobs have always changed over time as new technologies have beenintroduced in the workplace, but the rate of change has accelerated consider-
ably in the recent past with the pervasive infusion of computer-based tech-
nologies.  Human factors researchers must devote more attention to the intro-

duction and use of new technologies in the workplace.  This need has become

evident in such disparate problems as the physical difficulties (e.g., eyestrain
and carpal tunnel syndrome) that are sometimes associated with the use of
information technology devices and the claims of some investigators that
these technologies are not providing the expected increase in productivity.
Other challenges include reducing human error in the workplace, especially
in information work in which errors that are difficult to identify can signifi-
cantly affect the quality of work products; determining the skill requirements
of new high-technology jobs and of ways to combine human and machine
capabilities effectively; and developing a better understanding of the increas-
ing demand for people to play the role of supervisory controllers, and of
backups in the case of failure, in highly automated systems.  A special chal-

lenge is helping to ensure that the work climate, culture, and environment are
humane and fulfilling to the human beings who work within it.TRANSPORTATIONThe goal of all forms of transportation systems is the expeditious move-ment of people and goods from place to place with a minimum risk to lifeEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHand property.  These two objectives
Ñmaximizing speed and minimizingriskÑmake up only one of several trade-offs involved in the design andoperation of any transportation system.  Helping to resolve these trade-offs

is, in part, a human factors problem because these trade-offs involve ques-
tions of (1) how well vehicles can be controlled in various situations given
human capabilities and limitations and (2) considerations of human atti-
tudes and preferences with respect to comfort, convenience, and risk accep-
tance.Considerable research has been done on driver and pilot performance,and many sources of driver/pilot error have been identified, some of which
have affected vehicle and cockpit design.  There are, however, many re-

maining needs and opportunities for human factors research, especially in
view of the ever-increasing technical complexity of vehicles and transporta-
tion systems.  An example of a problem relating to driving safety that has

received some attention but that needs further research is the dependence of
driving performance on dynamic visual acuity.  To receive a license, drivers

are currently tested for static visual acuity, but there is evidence suggesting
that dynamic visual acuity, for which tests are not given, is a more effective
predictor of accident probability.  More work is needed on this important

question.  We also need work leading to a better understanding of the roles

of alcohol and drug intoxication in driving and of the effects of driver
attitudes toward risk.  The introduction of increasingly sophisticated equip-

ment in automobiles and airplane cockpits, as well as the automation or
semiautomation of more and more functions, raises many issues that human
factors research should address.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESSStress manifests itself in modern life in a variety of ways, sometimestragically.  Some occupations are generally viewed as especially stressful,

air traffic controllers being a case in point.  Here the reason for the stress
Ñthe possibly tragic consequences of a significant errorÑis obvious.  Jobs
can also be stressful for much more subtle reasons; they may cause low
levels of relatively continuous stress, a situation that can also have major
consequences for workers.  Although much research has been done on the

effects of stress on cognition, the need for research on this topic is likely to
increase over the foreseeable future for several reasons, including threats to
job security from increasing competitive pressures in many industries, the
need to accommodate to increasingly rapid change in the workplace, the
greater cognitive demands of many jobs, and the application of new meth-
ods of electronic monitoring and surveillance.Laboratory studies of stress have been limited by well-grounded restric-tions on exposing participants in experiments to genuinely threatening situ-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY9ations and the infeasibility of the long-term experimental studies that wouldbe required to study chronic stress.  One priority for future research must be

a search for feasible ethical solutions to the problem of these limitations
and for ways to study the influences of stressors that more closely approxi-
mate those that occur in real-world situations.  Possibilities that have been

used to some extent but that should be more fully and creatively exploited
include analyses of naturally occurring incidents and the use of simulations.
Virtual reality technology should extend the possibilities for simulating stressful
situations with a high degree of realism without exposing people to physical
threats; how best to exploit this technology for this purpose should be one
goal of research.  Other major goals of research should be to develop a

better understanding of how the more detrimental effects of stress can be
counteracted, how to predict individual differences in reactions to stress,
how to train people to cope with stressful situations, and how to make
person-machine systems more resistant to the detrimental effects of stress.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORKAs computer technology has become widely available in the workplace,many software tools have been developed to help people perform intellec-
tual tasks.  Efforts to develop additional and more powerful aids to intellec-

tual work will undoubtedly continue for the foreseeable future.  Human

factors research is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of such aids, to
provideÑthrough task analysesÑa better understanding of what further aidswould be useful, and to participate in the design, implementation, and itera-
tive improvement of such aids.  Past research has demonstrated that the

introduction of technological aids to intellectual work has not had the an-
ticipated effects and has not always increased either productivity or peopleÕssatisfaction with their jobs.Evaluative studies are needed to provide the insights required to im-prove upon existing aids and to ensure that they accomplish what is in-
tended.  There is also a need to study the demands of intellectual work in

specific settings to identify how it could be aided by the development of
new tools; any such studies should be done with a sensitivity to the fact that
new tools often change the nature of a job by making it possible to do
things that could not be done before.  Human factors researchers can con-

tribute to the design, implementation, and evaluation of new aids for intel-
lectual work, especially by bringing to the process an iterative design phi-
losophy and a focus on usersÕ needs; these factors have proved to be importantin the development of systems whose ultimate characteristics are impossible
to specify in detail in advance.  Other challenges for human factors research

include (1) identifying nonobvious but important aspects of current ways of
performing tasks (e.g., spatial arrangement of papers on a desk serving asEXECUTIVE SUMMARY9Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHreminders of task priorities) for which some substitution should be made inan electronic aid and (2) developing a better understanding of why people
often fail to use aids that could improve the performance of their jobs.CONCLUSIONThe needs and opportunities for research discussed in this report areconsidered by the Committee on Human Factors to be among the more
important challenges to the human factors research community for the im-
mediate future.  The list is not exhaustive, nor was it intended to be, but the

committee believes the items on it to be important without exception.  The

committee recognizes too that none of the problems discussed is the exclu-
sive province of human factors research; most of them are broad in scope
and deserve attentionÑespecially collaborative attentionÑfrom many disci-plines, human factors among them.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11PART I
Summary ReportEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13Emerging Needs and Opportunities for
Human Factors Research
INTRODUCTIONThis summary report identifies the areas that the Committee on HumanFactors believes represent new needs and opportunities for human factors
research during the next few decades.  It is organized as follows:  after a

background discussion, we describe the process by which the committee
determined which topics to cover.  Each topic is then considered in turn,

and the committeeÕs consensus regarding needed research is presented.A set of papers addressing these topics appears as Part II of this vol-ume.  These papers were written by committee members, sometimes with

assistance from colleagues, as part of the process of informing the committeeÕs
discussions of the topics addressed.  The conclusions and recommendations

articulated in this report draw heavily on these papers.BackgroundThe National Research Council established the Committee on HumanFactors in 1980.  The committeeÕs original sponsors were the Office of

Naval Research, the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, and the Army
Research Institute.  The National Aeronautics and Space Administration

became a sponsor in 1981.  The committeeÕs charter was to identify basic

research needs of the military services as they relate to human factors issues
and to make recommendations for basic research that would improve the
foundations of the discipline.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHThe committeeÕs first report, Research Needs for Human Factors, pub-lished in 1983, focused on six topics:  human decision making, eliciting

expert judgment, supervisory control systems, user-computer interaction,
population group differences, and applied methods.  These topics were se-

lected after committee discussions of research needs, tours of military labo-
ratories, and solicitation of suggestions from the human factors community
through an article in the Human Factors Society Bulletin.  Topics were
selected because they were germane to the sponsorsÕ interests, within the
expertise of the committee members to address, incompletely addressed by
previous or ongoing research, and important vis-‹-vis the committeeÕs char-ter.Since the publication of Research Needs for Human Factors, the com-mittee has been responsible for numerous panels and workshops, many of
them about problem areas discussed in that report.  Figure 1 gives a com-

plete list of the reports produced by these panels and workshops.Since the committeeÕs establishment, its sponsorship has broadened con-1994Organizational Linkages:  Understanding the Productivity Paradox
1993Workload Transition:  Implications for Individual and Team Performance
1992Human Factors SpecialistsÕ Education and Utilization:  Results of a
Survey1990Application Principles for Multicolored Displays:  A Workshop Report
Quantitative Modeling of Human Performance in Complex, DynamicSystemsDistributed Decision Making:  Report of a Workshop
Human Factors Research Needs for an Aging Population1989Human Performance Models for Computer-Aided EngineeringFundamental Issues in Human-Computer Interaction1988Human Factors Research and Nuclear SafetyErgonomic Models of Anthropometry, Human Biomechanics, andOperator-Equipment Interfaces:  Proceedings of a Workshop
1987Human Factors in Automated and Robotic Space Systems:  Proceedings
of a SymposiumMental Models in Human-Computer Interaction:  Research Issues About
What the User of Software Knows1985Human Factors Aspects of SimulationMethods for Designing Software to Fit Human Needs and Capabilities:Proceedings of the Workshop on Software Human Factors1984Research Needs on the Interaction Between Information Systems andTheir Users:  Report of a Workshop
Research Issues in Simulator Sickness:  Proceedings of a Workshop
1983Research and Modeling of Supervisory Control Behavior:  Report of a
WorkshopFIGURE 1  Reports of the Committee on Human Factors, 1983-1994.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT15siderably, and new sponsors have come from both military and civiliansectors.  The committee
Õs composition has also broadened to include notonly researchers who represent traditional human factors interests in equip-
ment design and use but also some with more cognitive and social orienta-
tions.Concurrently, technology has been advancing rapidly, and both the na-tion and the world have changed in significant and remarkable ways.  Some

of these changes offer new challenges and opportunities for human factors
research.In view of these developments, the committee found it appropriate toagain address the general topic of research needs and opportunities for
human factors.  Committee members agreed that the report should be:
¥reflective of the committeeÕs views and opinions, and also informedby inputs from several sources;¥forward looking: short on reviewing old and current work and longon identifying problems and opportunities for the future;¥problem/opportunity-oriented: the subject matter being determinedmore by what the committee perceives the needs and opportunities to be
than by its understanding of what the existing research activities of the
human factors community are; and¥selectively focusedÑwith no attempt to be comprehensiveÑon afew major topics that the committee believes to be among the more impor-
tant problem/opportunity areas for the near future.Committee members took the lead in writing the papers that constitutePart II and that provide the material on which Part I is based.Topic SelectionThe process of selecting topics for emphasis was lengthy and delibera-tive.  The decision was made early to cast a wide net for ideas and opinions

and then, through committee discussion and debate, to attempt to reach a
consensus regarding a subset on which to focus.  Suggestions of major

research needs were solicited from current and former members of the com-
mittee, from committee sponsors, and from numerous other members of the
human factors research community, including several human factors leaders
in Europe.  The committee also reviewed the topics generated as candidates

for inclusion in the original Research Needs report, the list of technical
groups of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, the list of titles of
Committee on Human Factors reports published or in process, and recent
project suggestions from sponsors.  This yielded a long list of suggested

research topics.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHAs the list grew, the committee discussed it at several meetings.  At onesuch meeting, an analysis of responses to a written request for suggestions
from past and current committee members was presented and discussed.  A

complete list of all suggestions from all sources was then distributed to
committee members, and at a later meeting, the members engaged in a
structured exercise designed (1) to permit every member to identify all the
suggestions he or she considered worthy of further consideration, (2) to
facilitate grouping the suggestions to eliminate redundancies and replace
similar suggestions with a more general category, and (3) to prioritize the
resulting list through a quasi-formal, iterative voting procedure.At all of these meetings, the discussions were long and spirited.  All
members saw the goal of identifying human factors research needs and
opportunities as very important.  However, the task of selecting a few prob-

lems or problem areas for special attention was difficult because selecting
some areas for inclusion meant excluding others.The committeeÕs deliberations eventually led to a consensus on thetopics that should be covered in its report.  Continuing discussion resulted

in some minor changes in terminology in the interest of clarity and the
merging of some topics because of content overlap.  Some of the selected

topics are well within the mainstream of traditional human factors research;
others are not.  The committee intentionally took a relatively broad view of

human factors and did not exclude a problem area simply because it has not
traditionally been a major focus of the discipline.  As it happens, the topics

are fairly easily grouped under three major headingsÑnational or globalproblems, technology issues, and human performanceÑas follows:National or global problems¥Productivity in organizations¥Training and education¥Employment and disabilities¥Health care¥Environmental changeTechnology issues¥Communication technology and telenetworking¥Information access and usability¥Emerging technologies in work design¥TransportationHuman performance¥Cognitive performance under stress¥Aiding intellectual workTwo topics the committee considers to be priority research areasÑhuman performance modeling and human errorÑare not covered in thisEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT17volume, because committee panels were established on both.  A report on
human performance modeling was recently published (Baron et al., 1990)
and one on human error management in high-hazard systems is currently in
preparation.  With these exceptions, the topics on which the committee

finally settled constitute the titles of sections of this summary report and of
the papers that make up Part II.The committee believes that these areas are, without exception, veryimportant.  However, failure of a topic to appear as a heading should not be

taken as evidence that the committee considers the topic unimportant.  The

committee recognizes that many more human factors problems and problem
areas are deserving of research than can be covered in a report of this sort.This report focuses on needs and opportunities for human factors re-search; however, the committee also wishes to note that one of the mostpressing needs at present, and probably during the near future, is to get the
results of human factors research applied to equipment, procedures, sys-
tems, and situations.  It continues to be easy to find equipment and operat-

ing procedures being designed in ways that are inconsistent with well-docu-
mented human factors research results.  How to improve the dissemination

of the results of human factors research, how to make this information
readily available to users in a helpful form, and how to make potential users
aware of its existence, are continuing major challenges to human factors
researchers and to everyone who recognizes the potential usefulness of the
results of human factors research.The ReportIntended AudienceThis report is intended for people who identify research funding priori-ties and sponsor research programs and projects and for those who perform
human factors research.  People responsible for identifying research fund-

ing priorities and sponsoring research efforts will find here the collective
opinions of the committee on how needs and opportunities for human fac-
tors research relate to several problems of major national concern.  Re-

searchers will find specific questions that the committee believes constitute
challenges to research that could contribute significantly to the solution or
amelioration of these problems.ContentsIn keeping with the committeeÕs decision to be forward-looking, littleeffort was made to review research extensively in problem areas that are orEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHhave been major foci.  A very modest amount of reviewing is done in this
summary report and somewhat more in Part II, but, in both cases, only to
help provide an appropriate frame of reference for thinking about future
needs.Some of the committeeÕs recommendations are relatively general; oth-ers, quite specific.  Some follow traditional lines of research; others relate

to problems that have not received much attention from the human factors
community in the past.  In the latter cases, the recommendations are offered

primarily as points of departure for further discussion and planning rather
than as items for a research agenda.  The justification for including them is

the perceived seriousness, from either a national or a global perspective, of
the problem areas involved.The opinions expressed in Part II are those of the authors of the papers,but their shaping has been strongly influenced by inputs from other mem-
bers of the Committee on Human Factors and the other sources of ideas
mentioned above.  The recommendations that appear in this summary report

are made by the committee as a whole.OrganizationThe remainder of this summary report is organized by topic.  A section
is devoted to each of the topics selected by the committee for emphasis.  In

each case, the section describes the problem, briefly discusses representa-
tive previous work that relates to the problem, and gives a set of recommen-
dations for research.PRODUCTIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONSThe ProblemProductivity is a major national and international concern.  Economists
see productivity as a primary determinant of competitiveness both among
companies within an industry and among national economies.  Because it is

also believed to be causally linked to standard of living, increasing produc-
tivity globally is seen to be the best hope of improving living conditions
worldwide.Although the United States is the most productive country in the world,its annual rate of increase in productivity has been considerably smaller
than that of several other industrialized countries during the last few de-
cades (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1988a, 1988b).  As a consequence, our

national competitiveness has decreased significantly in the automobile, steel,
shipbuilding, and textile industries and appears to be slipping in electronics,
computers, robotics, and biotechnology as well.  The U.S. share of the total
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT19world economy decreased from 35 percent in 1965 to 28 percent in 1985(Johnston and Packer, 1987).This trend can be attributed to many factors, such as the diffusion oftechnology, the globalization of work, and the development of new work
processes and new work structures throughout the world.  Many econo-

mists, however, are concerned that productivity in the United States is not
what it should be and that the nationÕs competitiveness will continue todecline if ways are not found to accelerate the rate of productivity increase.Human factors researchers have given considerable attention to the questionof how to improve human performance in the workplace and thereby in-
crease individual productivity.  Yet they have made relatively little effort to

determine how individual productivity relates to the productivity of the
groups, organizations, or industries within which the individualsÕ work is
done.  Our focus is on organizational productivity and how the human

factors community can contribute to improving it.The prevailing assumption appears to be that increases in individualproductivity automatically translate into increases in productivity at higher
levels of organization, but this assumption gets little support from research.
There is little evidence that increases in productivity at one level, say the
level of the individual worker, automatically translate into increases in pro-
ductivity at a higher level, say that of a work team, a corporation, or an
industry.  Similarly, there is very little theory or research that helps us

understand how observed changes in organizational productivity relate to
changes at the individual or group level.The challenge is to better understand organizational productivity.  We
want human factors researchers to think about their work in terms of im-
provement in organizational productivity.Previous ResearchMost of the research on productivity has dealt with productivity at aparticular levelÑindividual, group, corporation.  The research that has been
done by applied psychologists and human factors specialists has dealt pri-
marily with the individual.  Training has been identified as an important

determinant of individual productivity (Guzzo, 1988), along with goal set-
ting (Locke and Latham, 1990) and the details of the design of specific
tasks (Guzzo, 1988).At the level of work teams or small groups, self-management has re-ceived some attention as a determinant of productivity (Goodman et al.,
1988; Hackman, 1990).  Several studies of larger systems have focused on

the effects of the introduction of automation technologies in the workplace
and, interestingly, have not found that greater automation invariably means
higher productivity at the system level.  In particular, technological change
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHoften has had little or no positive effect on system productivity unless ap-propriate organizational change has accompanied it (Goodman, 1979; MacDuffie
and Krafcik, 1990).Although the previous research has provided some knowledge of thedeterminants of productivity at specific levels of organization, very little of
it has been directed at determining how improvements at one level do or do
not effect changes at higher levels of operation.  In particular, we know

something about how to increase the productivity of individuals, but we are
unable to specify the conditions under which improvements at this level
will translate into improvements in the productivity of an organization as a
whole.Research OpportunitiesWorkplace interventions that appear to have the potential to increaseproductivity not only at the level of the individual worker but also at that of
the organization as a whole are sometimes not implemented successfully
(Goodman and Griffith, 1991).  There is a need for better understanding of

the implementation process and, in particular, of how to ensure that innova-
tions that would increase individual and organization productivity will be
adopted and used.One opportunity for research is the exploration of how changes in orga-nizations or in technology are related to improved productivity.  Billions of

dollars have been spent on new forms of technological and organizational
change, many of which have clear or inherent benefits.  There is, however,

growing research evidence that many innovations are not successfully imple-
mented or are implemented on a temporary basis.  As a result, the objective

benefits of the proposed technological and organizational changes are can-
celed out.  If we cannot successfully implement improvements at the indi-

vidual, group, or organizational level, we cannot expect to see productivity
changes at the organizational level.The challenge, then, is to find new research approaches to successfulimplementation and institutionalization.  Much of the work over the past

decade is on how different variables (e.g., top management support) facili-
tate the change process.  This work suggests that new developments will

come from identifying the critical processes that drive the implementation.
Furthermore, a change in methodology is requiredÑfor example, there arevery few multivariate and/or longitudinal studies capturing the implementa-
tion of new technologies or organizational intervention.Another opportunity for research is the linkage between individual andorganizational productivity.  Focusing on single levels of analysis (e.g.,

individual, group) will not increase our understanding of organizational
productivity.  We assume that successful implementations create productiv-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT21ity increases at the individual level and that these changes will eventuallyappear at the organizational level.  This assumption is incorrectÑchanges atone level may have no effect on other levels of analysis.  There is neither

good theory nor research about this linkage issue.The challenge for the human factor researcher is first to acknowledgeand understand the issues associated with these linkages.  What are the

factors that prevent productivity changes at the individual level from in-
creasing productivity at the individual level?  What are some of the enablers?
Concepts such as organizational slack and different forms of organizational
interdependence are starting points of our analysis.  Increasing productivity

on some jobs can simply create slack time that does not translate into in-
creased organizational interdependence.  The degree and form of interde-

pendence between jobs and between organizational units may to a large
degree determine whether changes in one unit will lead to positive, nega-
tive, or no changes in other units.  Horizontal and vertical linkages are

critical in determining whether changes in productivity at one level get
translated to another level.A third research opportunity is the congruency among technology, people,and organizational factors.  It seems inevitable that organizational produc-

tivity must depend, in part, on the ways these factors interrelate.  The

empirical evidence supports the view that focusing solely on one factor
(e.g., productivity) will not increase organizational productivity; rather it is
the simultaneous restructuring of organizational, technological, and people
factors that is key to increases in organizational productivity.Although we know that congruency among these three factors is impor-tant,  much of our research evidence is after the fact.  We do not have any

ex ante models about how combinations of organizational, technological,
and people factors lead to increased organizational productivity.  This is an

important issue because the workplace is changing rapidly.  All indications

are that rapid change in technology, organizations, and characteristics of the
workforce will continue.  The opportunity for human factors researchers is

to provide new insights into how combinations of changes in technology,
organization, and people factors contribute to organizational productivity.A fourth opportunity for research concerns internal and external inte-gration.  New innovations in design processes and linking production pro-

cesses in manufacturing and retail/distribution organizations signal the im-
portance of internal integrations.  At the same time, there have been dramatic
changes in relationships with suppliers and customers.  ÒArmÕs-lengthÓ trans-actions are a thing of the past.  Boundaries between customers, suppliers,

and the focal organization have become very permeable.Although these forms of integration are initiated with the expectationsof improving organizational productivity, little research is available. Con-
sider the following:  in our analysis of organizational productivity, we gen-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHerally focus on linkages among levels (e.g., individual and group) withinthe organization.  But let us assume that greater levels of integration be-

tween the organization and its customer increase productivity for the cus-
tomer.  The interesting question is:  How do changes in productivity for the

customer feed back and affect productivity of the focal organization?TRAINING AND EDUCATIONThe ProblemThe critical importance of worker training to the national economy andto the general well-being of the nation is widely recognized.  It is also

recognized that the educational level of prospective trainees strongly influ-
ences the efficiency and effectiveness of training.  Unfortunately, neither

our education nor our training systems, as currently structured, appear to be
meeting the countryÕs needs.  A key symptom of the problem is the growing
number of programs in which employers attempt to provide remedial educa-
tion for incoming employees as a way to build a base upon which specific,
job-oriented training can proceed.The seriousness of the education and training problem has been docu-mented by numerous published studies, including the widely cited A Nationat Risk (National Commission on Excellence in Education, 1983) and sub-
sequent reports by the Hudson Institute (Johnston and Packer, 1987), the
William T. Grant Foundation (1988), the Commission on Workforce Qual-
ity and Labor Market Efficiency (1989), the Commission on the Skills of
the American Workforce (1990), the Office of Technology Assessment (1990),
and the National Council on Education Standards and Testing (1992).The problem could become worse in the future because the workforcewill need to be even more proficientÑespecially more versatile and adap-tiveÑthan it is now.  This expectation is rooted in the rapidity of techno-
logical change and the increasingly tight interconnectedness of the econo-
mies of the world into a single global ensemble.  Technological change

means changes in job requirements.  The ability to satisfy changing, and not

entirely predictable, job requirements in a complex, culturally diverse, and
constantly evolving environment will require a literate workforce that has
good problem-solving and learning skills.  The challenge to education and

training will be amplified by expected changes in the demographics of the
workforce.  In the aggregate, these changes mean that an increasing per-

centage of the labor needs will be met by nontraditional sources; in some
cases, special training will be required to tap these sources effectively.
Furthermore, because advances in technology tend not only to create new
jobs but also to increase the speed with which many existing jobs become
obsolete, the need for worker retraining will become increasingly common.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT23Previous ResearchA great deal of research on education and training has been done bypsychologists and educational researchers.  Inasmuch as our focus is prima-

rily on postsecondary and work-based education and training, it suffices to
mention here the following publications that, taken together, provide exten-
sive coverage of research on the design, delivery, and evaluation of training
methods and systems:  Druckman and Bjork (1991), Druckman and Swets

(1988), Goldstein (1988, 1992), Wexley (1984), Latham (1988), and Tannenbaum
and Yukl (1991).Unfortunately, many of the basic research findings on learning and skilldevelopment do not cross the boundary between the laboratory and the
workplace.  As a discipline that historically bridges psychology and engi-

neering, human factors should be able to help transfer what has been dis-
covered in the laboratory to the design of education and training systems.
How best to do this is itself a question that will require intensive study.Training and human factors are sometimes characterized as comple-mentary ways of getting human-machine systems to function smoothly, the
idea being that the objective of human factors research should be to deter-
mine how to design systems so that little, if any, training is required for the
system to function effectively.  Here we take the broader view that human

factors encompasses whatever enhances the performance of human-machine
systems, including training.  However, even within the traditional, narrower

characterization of human factors, many questions arise regarding the de-
sign and evaluation of training materials, methods, and systems.  The re-

search challenges that are identified in the following section arise from both
modes of characterizing the field.Research Needs and OpportunitiesTraining systems tend to be complex both functionally and structurally;they have to work under numerous constraints to achieve multiple objec-
tives.  Many variables are involved in the operation of such systems.  Un-

derstanding the interactions among these variables requires using a systems-
analytic approach that human factors researchers have effectively applied to
the study of many other kinds of complex systems.  The challenge is to

apply such methods to the study of training when outcome requirements
arise from interactions among changing technologies, changing workforce
demographics, and changing organizational structures.Technology has the potential to change the methods of education andtraining drastically.  Computer and communication technologies, in particu-

lar, provide the possibility of new approaches involving interactive graph-
ics, process simulation, individualized adaptive training, embedded train-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHing, and a host of other innovations.  Each of these methods, however, is
valuable only to the extent that it contributes to accomplishing the teaching/
learning objectives of the training system into which it has been incorpo-
rated.  There is a need for evaluations of technologically innovative ap-

proaches to education and training that reveal not only how effective the
approaches are but also how they might be improved.  Human factors re-

searchers can perform evaluations of the type required.An example of a type of evaluation that is much needed is a study todetermine how much (and what type of) physical fidelity is required in a
system simulation generated by virtual reality.  Inasmuch as small increases

in physical fidelity can mean large increases in costs, it is important to
know how much fidelity is enough in specific cases.The human factors community has promoted user-centered designÑdesigning systems to match the capabilities and limitations of their intended
usersÑand has widely applied it to the design of many kinds of systems,especially, but not exclusively, in military contexts.  User-centered design

principles that have proved to be effective should be applied to the design
of education and training systems as well.  The challenge is to devise,

evaluate, and perfect ways to transfer the methods, data, and principles of
human-centered design to the development of training systems and to en-
sure that feedback from applications closes the loop between research and
practice.Technology has had two particularly striking effects on jobs during thelast few decades:  (1) a decrease in the manual component of many jobs

accompanied by an increase in the cognitive component and (2) accelera-
tion of the pace of change in the workplace.  The probability that these

trends will continue establishes a need for a greater research focus on how
individuals and organizations can best learn to adapt to rapid changes in
work procedures and organizational structures while continuing to be en-
gaged in production processes.  There is need for the development of theory,

tools, and techniques that will support lifelong learning in many occupations.Because of the increasing rapidity with which jobs and the skill require-ments of jobs for them are changing, it is also becoming increasingly im-
portant to have effective methods for anticipating future job requirements
so that education and training programs can be designed to provide workers
with the requisite skills in a timely way.  Formal procedures used by human

factors researchers to identify or analyze the skills, knowledge, and abilities
that are requisite to the adequate performance of specific tasks should be
useful in establishing education and training goals, but there is also a need
for the development of more effective methods of identifying cognitive, as
opposed to psychomotor, task demands.Despite the widely acknowledged imperfection of current education andtraining systems and programs and the considerable amount of money andEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT25effort that continues to be spent on developing them, the technology forevaluating their effectiveness is still primitive and not very sensitive.  A

major practical need is for significant improvement in the means for perfor-
mance assessment. Human factors researchers have experience in evaluat-
ing the effectiveness of complex systems of many types and thus should be
in a position to help meet this need.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIESThe ProblemThe population of people with one or another type of physical or cogni-tive disability is very large.  According to the U.S. Census Bureau, there are

about 75 million people with some sort of disability in the United States,
about 30 percent of the entire population (Bureau of the Census, 1987,
1989).  Not all of these disabilities are sufficiently severe to interfere with

work or other activities, but, if we count only those that are, the number is
still large, probably as many as 30 million in the United States (Elkind,
1990).The rate of unemployment among people with disabilities who wouldlike to work is several times higher than the unemployment average nation-
wide (Kraus and Stoddard, 1989).  And the percentage of people who live

below the poverty line is between two and three times greater for people
with a disability that interferes with their ability to work than for the total
working population (Vachon, 1990).Failure to find more effective ways to make employment available topeople with disabilities is costly to the national economy in two ways.  The

cost of maintenance support programs is approximately $100 billion per
year and is increasing rapidly (Vanderheiden, 1990), and the cost of the
countryÕs lost opportunity to utilize the knowledge and skills of people withdisabilities, although difficult to quantify, is surely also great.Previous ResearchMost of the previous research that directly relates to enhancing employ-ment opportunities for people with disabilities has aimed at finding ways to
use technology to mitigate the limiting effects of disabilities.  The objective

in many cases was the development of a device of some sort to help people
compensate for the loss of sight, hearing, mobility, or other specific func-
tions.For at least two reasons, much of this work has focused on computerand communication technologies.  First, the versatility of the computer pro-

vides opportunities for creative approaches to the augmentation of abilitiesEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHthat have been diminished by physical or cognitive disorders, disease, oraccident; this has been amply demonstrated by the innovative ways that
people with disabilities have adapted these technologies for their own use
(Bowe, 1984).  Second, because more than half the workforce is now en-

gaged in information-oriented jobs (Strassman, 1985) and the percentage is
expected to increase in the future (Kraut, 1987), it is also natural to look to
computer and communication technologies as a source of job opportunities
for people with disabilities.Some emphasis on computer and communication technologies to en-hance work opportunities for people with disabilities in the future is war-
ranted and for the same reasons.  We believe that these technologies offer

great, and largely unrealized, potential to help remove barriers that have
kept people with disabilities from jobs.  We also believe that many, if not

most, of the new job opportunities that could be readily made available to
people with disabilities are likely to be in areas that make heavy use of
these technologies.Unfortunately, most of the research on how the requirements of specificjobs relate to the capabilities and limitations of prospective jobholders has
excluded people with disabilities from consideration.  Data have almost

invariably been collected only on able-bodied people; people with disabili-
ties are not even statistically represented in the results.  As a consequence,

little is known of how the capabilities and limitations of people with spe-
cific disabilities compare with the requirements of specific jobs.  A require-

ment in this context is something that is essential to getting a job done; job
requirements are to be distinguished from the architectural, social, and other
barriers that hinder a person from getting to a job location or situation but
are not essential aspects of the job itself.Research Needs and OpportunitiesMost disabilities are impediments only to certain activities, and typi-cally many fewer activities are affected than are not.  Specifically, any

given type of disability usually impedes only some of the activities required
by some jobs, and often even those impediments can be removed or over-
come by restructuring the job or using assistive technology.  A major need

is for a much better understanding of precisely how the capabilities and
limitations associated with specific disabilities relate to the functional re-
quirements of specific jobs.  This need suggests the following two objec-

tives:(1)development of a database of information on the performance capa-
bilities of people with the more prevalent types of disabilities, with a viewEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT27to incorporating such information in design references, design texts, and inhuman performance models, thereby enhancing the ability to design for
people with disabilities; and(2)systematic analysis of the skill requirements of jobs, especially jobs
in the information sector, to match requirements with the performance capa-
bilities of people with disabilities.  A clear distinction should be made

between essential job functions and nonessential aspects of job situations
that may have evolved as conveniences to able-bodied individuals who typi-
cally perform them.Some jobs cannot be done by people with certain types of disabilities inthe same way in which they are standardly performed by able-bodied people.
It is important to know whether those jobs could be performed just as
effectively in alternative ways that would be manageable by people with
disabilities.  A useful first step would be an extensive study of previous

efforts to redesign jobs to accommodate people with specific disabilities;
such a study should identify differences between efforts that have worked
and those that have not.As was noted already, the development of devices to assist people withdisabilities in overcoming specific functional limitations has received con-
siderable attention, especially from scientists and engineers who may be
keenly aware of the kind of assistance that is needed because they are
disabled in some way or because someone close to them is.  Human factors

researchers have been somewhat involved in these efforts, but this has not
been a major focus of the discipline as a whole.  The discipline has much to

contribute to this design challenge and much to learn from involvement in
this type of work.Unfortunately, knowledge of much of what has been done to applytechnology to benefit people with disabilities is not readily accessible, be-
cause the work was not all done by people who are members of the same
professional community for which the channels of communication are well
established and known.  Much of the information exists in relatively inac-

cessible documents as opposed to mainstream technical journals.  It can be

very hard to obtain detailed information on a particular assistive device or
type of deviceÑor even to discover whether a device to serve a specifiedpurpose exists.  A very useful objective would be to develop a set of com-

puter-based information resources on assistive devices, training programs,
job opportunities, and job requirements for people with disabilities.  Such

resources could also serve the research community, making information on
past and ongoing research much more readily accessible than it currently is.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHHEALTH CAREThe ProblemHealth risks stem from many sources.  Prominent among them are be-
havioral and occupational factors.  Cancer and heart disease, for example,

are often attributable to smoking, diet, or other lifestyle variables (Newell
and Vogel, 1988; Williams, 1991).  Long-term occupational exposure to

radiation or toxic substances is known to be a significant cause of certain
types of illness, as is chronic job-related stress (Levi, 1990; Smith, 1987;
Swanson, 1988).Paradoxically, significant threats to health are to be found even withinthe technology for the delivery of health care.  Many of these threats arise

from the possibility of human error in using health care equipment and
carrying out health care procedures.  Such errors can have tragic conse-

quences.  For example, Bogner (1991) has cited the substantial number of

potentially preventable incidents in which anesthesia has resulted in brain
damage or death.Much of the equipment in modern hospitals and trauma centers is com-plex, and even highly trained people can inadvertently use it incorrectly
with injurious effects.  In addition, more and more commonly, people with-

out medical training are using complicated equipment, including ventila-
tors, infusion pumps, and kidney dialysis machines, in their homes; these
devices can extend and enhance the quality of life when used correctly, but
they can cause irreparable harm when used erroneously.Injurious errors can also occur in the administration of drugs, either byadministration of the wrong substances or incorrect doses of the right ones.
This problem too is compounded by the fact that patients are often respon-
sible for their own drug regimens and are sometimes confused as a conse-
quence of the effects of illness or age.  An important challenge to research

is developing ways to reduce the incidence of human error in the delivery of
health care; this issue is likely to grow in importance as the technology that
is available for health care delivery becomes ever more complex.Previous ResearchAlthough there have been attempts to call attention to the many chal-lenges that medicine and health care delivery provide for human factors
researchers (e.g., Pickett and Triggs, 1974), health care has not traditionally
been a major focus of human factors research.The human factors community has done considerable research both todetermine the causes of human error in a variety of situations in which
people interact with machines and to identify ways to decrease the probabil-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT29ity of such errors or reduce harm when they do occur (Reason, 1990; Send-ers and Moray, 1991).  Relatively little of this work has been done in

medical or health care contexts.Innovative work has been done on evaluating the relative effectivenessof medical imaging devices (Swets et al., 1979; Swets, 1988) and on human
factors aspects of the design of imaging workstations (OÕMalley and Ricca,1990).  Some human factors evaluations have been done of glucose measur-

ing devices of the type used by people with diabetes (Kelly et al., 1990;
McDonald, 1984; Moss and Delawter, 1986).  Such studies have revealed a

number of problems with the use of even these devices, which are relatively
simple compared with many that are likely to become common for home
use in coming years.Research Needs and OpportunitiesAccident prevention and wellness maintenance are important aspects ofhealth care.  As the population continues to age and as more and more

elderly and very elderly people are able to live independently, an important
objective of human factors research will be to determine how to design
living environments that limit the risk of accidents without sacrificing the
functionality that residents need or want.  An aspect of this challenge that

deserves increasing attention is designing living spaces for the elderly that
can accommodate the types of health care devices that are more and more
commonly utilized in the home.Research in several other areas would also enhance the opportunities ofpeople to live relatively independently, despite various types of sensory,
psychomotor, or cognitive limitations.  These include developing and evalu-
ating memory aids to help people take medicines in proper dosages on
schedule; improving the interpretability of labels, warnings, and instruc-
tions on medicines and on health care devices that are intended to be used
by nonprofessionals in the home; and developing and evaluating practical
approaches to training in the use of such devices.Important questions for research are how to convey to nonspecialistsaccurate and understandable representations of (1) the health risks (or ben-
efits) associated with specific behaviors and (2) the prospects for the vari-
ous possible outcomes from specific types of treatments of their medical
problems.  More generally, the challenge is to find effective ways both to

convey the information that people need in order to make truly informed
decisions about their health care and to ensure that the information con-
veyed has been understood.The need for group programs to increase positive health practices offersan opportunity for human factors involvement in health-related work.  Pro-

grams to reduce smoking, decrease fat intake and increase fiber, reduceEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHrecreational sun exposure, and induce participation in screening programsfor such diseases as breast and colon cancer should have beneficial results.
Human factors, broadly defined, could help both in designing such pro-
grams and in evaluating their effectiveness.The designs of medical devices need to be evaluated for usability andsafety, just as do the designs of other devices.  Such evaluations are espe-

cially important for medical devices because a patientÕs well-being oftendepends on the deviceÕs being used effectively.Information systemsÑmedical databases, diagnostic and decision aids,expert systems, and computer-based advisersÑare becoming increasinglyavailable for medical practitioners of all types.  These tools differ greatly in

how well they meet adequate design standards from a human factors point
of view, and the amount of use they get varies greatly among potential
users.  Inclusion of the design features that have traditionally been consid-

ered essential to usability for a computer-based device or system appears
not to be sufficient to ensure acceptance or use by health care providers.
Research is needed to learn why potentially helpful computer-based systems
are or are not used.Among the many spectacular developments in medical technology dur-ing the recent past is the wealth of new imaging techniques (e.g., computed
axial tomography, positron emission tomography, magnetic resonance im-
aging) that permit noninvasive visual exploration of the bodyÕs internalorgans and structures.  In part because these techniques are very expensive,

it is important to understand exactly what advantages they offer and how
useful they are for diagnosis, compared with one another and with more
traditional diagnostic techniques.  The appropriate cost-benefit comparisons

require the use of psychophysical and statistical approaches of the type that
have been widely used by human factors researchers and applied psycholo-
gists on similar comparison problems and on this problem as well (Swets et
al., 1979; Swets, 1988).Another challenge to the human factors community is helping find waysto reduce the frequency and severity of the injuries suffered by health care
professionals in the performance of their jobs.  Back injury, for example,

appears to be an occupational hazard for nurses and nursing aides, who
frequently put unsafe levels of stress on the spine in performing their work
(Gagnon et al., 1986; Stubbs et al., 1983).  Both training and the develop-

ment of more effective devices to assist in lifting tasks could help remediate
this problem.Human factors, especially that part of the field that focuses on biome-chanics, has much to offer not only in preventing the chronic pain and
disabling injuries that can result from inappropriate physical stresses in
work situations, but also in rehabilitating people after an injury and pre-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT31venting its recurrence (Khalil et al., 1990; Rosomoff et al., 1981).  Develop-ing better biomechanical models could be an important part of this effort.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGEThe ProblemAlthough the problems of harmful environmental change are not usu-ally associated with human factors research, the topic is included in this
report because the committee considers it a serious national and interna-
tional problem and believes that human factors research could contribute to
a better understanding of, and perhaps solutions to, aspects of it.Concern about the threat that certain changes in the environment posefor the future has been growing among scientists, policy makers, and the
public.  Aspects of this threat include the possible impact on the world
Õsclimate of an increasing concentration of carbon dioxide and other Ògreen-house gasesÓ in the atmosphere (Houghton and Woodwell, 1989; National
Research Council, 1983); the acidification of precipitation and its effects on
lakes and streams, forests, and materials (Baker et al., 1991; Mohnen, 1988;
Schwartz, 1989); air pollution and urban smog (Gray and Alson, 1989;
National Research Council, 1991; Office of Technology Assessment, 1988);
thinning of ozone in the stratosphere (Stolarski, 1988; Stolarski et al., 1992);
contamination and depletion of fresh water supplies (la Riviere, 1989; Na-
tional Research Council, 1977; Postel, 1985); depletion of the worldÕs for-ests (Myers, 1989; Repetto, 1990) and wetlands (Steinhart, 1990; Wallace,
1985); and an accompanying decrease in biodiversity (Soule, 1991; Wilson,
1989) and worldwide loss of arable land (Crossen and Rosenberg, 1989;
National Research Council, 1990; Schlesinger et al., 1990).Human activities are believed to be among the major causes of thesethreats.  The burning of fossil fuels contributes to the atmospheric accumu-

lation of greenhouse gases, air pollution, and the production of acid rain.
The use of chlorofluorocarbons as coolants and aerosols is believed to be a
cause of the thinning of stratospheric ozone.  Water contamination results

from runoff from agricultural use of fertilizers and pesticides, from im-
proper disposal of toxic wastes, and from salt used for roadway deicing.
The list of ways in which human activities affect the environment is easily
extended (Stern et al., 1992).Because these activities are aimed at satisfying human needs and de-sires, it is reasonable to assume that they will increase as world population
grows.  Many of these activities have been much more common in the

industrialized world than in underdeveloped countries, because they are
associated with industrialization and the products of technology.  These

activities are expected to grow even more rapidly as countries in many ofEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHthe underdeveloped regions of the world try to accelerate their rate of tech-nological development.Previous ResearchPsychologists have done much research on how to get people to modifyenvironmentally harmful behavior to make it more environmentally benign
(Holahan, 1986; Russell and Ward, 1982; Saegert and Winkel, 1990; Stern,
1992).  This work includes studies of the use of incentives, rewards, educa-

tion and information campaigns, persuasion, and other techniques to moti-
vate people to conserve energy or water, participate in recycling programs,
generate less waste and decrease littering, and make other changes in their
behavior that would be desirable for environmental preservation (Baum and
Singer, 1981; Coach et al., 1979; Cone and Hayes, 1980; Geller, 1986;
Geller et al., 1982).These studies have demonstrated that the desired types of behaviorchange can be effected through the techniques that have been used.  Unfor-

tunately, studies that have checked for the persistence of the new behavior
much beyond the end of the intervention period have generally not reported
positive results (Geller et al., 1982).A complementary approach is to try to change technology so as tomaintain its effectiveness in meeting human needs while decreasing the
opportunities it affords for harming the environment.  Except for work

aimed at identifying causes of industrial accidents, which often have sub-
stantial environmental impact (Reason, 1990; Senders and Moray, 1991),
this approach has not received much attention from researchers.  It is, how-

ever, one the human factors community should be well suited to take.  We

believe there is a need both for continuation of research on ways to moti-
vate people to behave in environmentally benign ways and for much greater
attention to the possibility of shaping technology so that the natural conse-
quences of its use will be less environmentally damaging.Research Needs and OpportunitiesInasmuch as many of the most significant threats to the environmentare direct consequences of the production and use of energy, high-priority
objectives must include improving the efficiency of energy use and substi-
tuting forms of energy that are not harmful to the environment for those that
are.  Demands for energy can be decreased whenever goals traditionally

served by transporting people and material can be served equally well by
transmitting information.  Computer and telecommunications technologies

have the potential, through such media as electronic mail, teleconferencing,
and computer-supported cooperative work facilities, to reduce the need forEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT33travel for certain purposes considerably.  The extent to which the potential
of these technologies is realized in this regard will depend on their accept-
ability to industry and potential users.  A challenge to human factors re-

searchers is to help ensure that such facilities are well designed from the
usersÕ point of view; there is, however, also a need for research that will
lead to a better understanding of what factors, in addition to interface de-
sign, make these systems more acceptable to potential users and of how to
facilitate the transition to their use.Making mass public transportation more attractive, so that it is moreoften used as an alternative to private automobiles in urban areas, is also in
the interest of environmental protection because it will reduce the energy
expenditure per passenger mile traveled.  This could also help reduce noise

pollution, traffic congestion, traffic accidents, and other problems that at-
tend excessive traffic in urban areas.  Greater use of carpooling could have

similar beneficial effects.Paper and paper products account for about one-third of all the solidwaste produced in the United States.  Much of the paper that becomes a

waste disposal problem is used to store and distribute information via news-
papers, magazines, books, and other print media.  The technology to store

and distribute much of the information electronically exists and is rapidly
becoming available to the public.  A challenge to research is to determine

how to design the display and input devices that provide people with access
to electronic information so that they are acceptable, if not preferred, sub-
stitutes for paper.ÒVirtual realityÓ technology
Ñwhich has been receiving a lot of atten-tion in the press recently, in part because of its potential use in entertain-
ment and educationÑcould have implications for environmental issues.  Forexample, to the extent that virtual systems can be effectively substituted for
the sometimes material- and energy-heavy systems that have been required
in the past for training purposes, the environment should benefit.  Deter-

mining how real a virtual reality must be to be effective for specific training
purposes is largely a human factors question.A variety of other challenges for human factors research relate to theproblems of waste reduction and waste management.  One need is for the

development of design criteria for consumer goods that includeÑin addi-tion to functionality, usability, and user safetyÑsuch considerations as lon-gevity, maintainability, and recyclability or disposability.  Another is for

improvement, from a human factors perspective, of recycling and waste
management.  The handling of radioactive and toxic wastes poses some

especially difficult problems that human factors researchers should be able
to help solve.Other human factors challenges that would help the environment in-clude making the information in environmental databases more accessibleEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHto users and potential users who would use that information for research on,and the monitoring and predicting of, environmental change; continued study
of the problems of risk assessment, management, and communication; and
continued emphasis on designing industrial systems to reduce the probabil-
ity of human error, especially when it can significantly harm the environ-
ment.The problems of environmental change has not received a lot of atten-tion from the human factors research community in the past, and there has
been relatively little debate or discussion about what the community has to
offer toward solutions in this area.  We believe that human factors research

could have an impact on various aspects of these problems.  The sugges-

tions made here are but a few of the possibilities; they are offered in the
hope of stimulating more thought and discussion by which others would be
identified.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKINGThe ProblemSince the experimental establishment of the first networks linking com-puters from different geographical locations in the mid-1960s, network technology
has advanced very rapidly.  The ARPANET, which became the largest op-

erational network in the world and remained so for many years, was started
as a four-node system by the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the
U.S. Department of Defense in 1969 (Heart, 1975; Heart et al., 1978).
According to a recent Science report, its successor, the Internet, now con-
nects about 1.7 million host computers and between 5 and 15 million users,
and the numbers are doubling annually (Pool, 1993).  It now appears that

this technology will continue to advance rapidly and that its applications
will become increasingly pervasive over the foreseeable future.The establishment and proliferation of computer networks have beenaccompanied byÑindeed made possible byÑan ever-increasing blurring ofthe distinction between computer and communication technologies.  For

instance, computing resources are heavily used in the operation of commu-
nication networks, and the capabilities and services to which these networks
provide access include electronic mail and bulletin boards, computer-medi-
ated teleconferencing, and information utilities of many types.Networks are almost certain to continue to increase in number, in com-plexity, and in the rate at which they can move information from place to
place.  If their bandwidth, or carrying capacity, continues to increase at

anything like its recent rate, the transmission of enormous amounts of data
(including digital voice and high-quality video) from almost anywhere to
almost anywhere will be possible at relatively low cost.  Concurrently with
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT35advances in the technology, the uses to which it is being put are multiplyingas well.The evolving macrosystem of interlinked networks can be thought of asone enormous global nexus that has the potential to increase by many orders
of magnitude the extent to which individuals and information resources all
over the world are interconnected and therefore accessible to each other.
Such capabilities should give people unprecedented access to both informa-
tion (in libraries, museums, news databases, and other repositories) and
people.  They have the potential to greatly facilitate not only the distribu-

tion and exchange of information in the conventional sense, but also long-
distance collaboration involving a real-time sharing of workspaces, tools,
and resources (National Research Council, 1993; Wulf, 1993).Previous ResearchA great deal of human factors research has focused on certain aspectsof computer and communication technology and especially how the inter-
faces through which people use this technology for various purposes should
be designed.  Indeed the general area of human-computer interaction has

perhaps been the fastest-growing area of research done by human factors
researchers and others in closely allied fields over the last few decades.
This work has been reported in several journals that focus on the subject,
most of which have come into existence during the last 20 years.Much less work has focused more directly on the human factors oftelecommunications and the resources that are accessible through telecom-
munications systems.  Teleconferencing (Carlisle, 1975; Kerr and Hiltz,

1982) was perhaps the first service provided by telecommunications net-
works that received some human factors research attention.  More recently,

cooperative work supported by telecommunication systems has been the
focus of some research (special 1992 issues of Human-Computer Interac-tion and 
Interacting with Computers), as have electronic mail and electronicbulletin boards (Sproull and Kiesler, 1991).Computer-based communication should become a high priority for hu-man factors research for many reasons, not the least of which is the expec-
tation that eventually nearly everyone is likely to be a user of this technol-
ogy.  A growing percentage of the workforce will find it essential in the

performance of their jobs; many people will use it for personal reasonsÑinformation acquisition and exchange, personal business transactions, enter-
tainment, interpersonal communication.  The user community will be as

diverse as the general population, and the range of uses will be great.  As

this technology continues to evolve, challenges to human factors research
that we cannot now anticipate are bound to emerge; here we mention only a
few that are already apparent.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHResearch Needs and OpportunitiesHuman-computer interaction, the focus of much research in the past,deserves continued attention from human factors researchers.  Issues of

interface design, information finding and utilization, personal information
management, and usersÕ comprehension of the systems with which they
interact continue to be important research challenges.  Most terminals today

depend primarily on two-dimensional visual displays and on typewriter-like
keyboards, typically complemented with a pointing and drawing instrument
such as a mouse or trackball.  Speech will become an increasingly feasible

option for both input and output (Makhoul et al., 1990; Weischedel et al.,
1990), as will three-dimensional, Òvirtual-realityÓ representations of objects
one can Òwalk aroundÓ and environments with which users can interact
(Durlach and Mavor, 1995).  Refining these and other innovative input-

output techniques requires that a variety of human factors issues be ad-
dressed.Realization of the potential benefits of computer networks requires thedevelopment of a variety of tools that facilitate interaction with complex
databases by both specialists and the public.  Tools are also needed to help

people apply information technology effectively to manage their personal
data stores and to cope with the information overload that a greatly in-
creased connectivity to information resources and to people can create.With computer-based systems playing increasingly important roles inpeopleÕs lives, there is a need to learn more about peopleÕs attitudes andbeliefs about these systems.  We also need to understand how to increase

the likelihood that peopleÕs conceptualizations of what computer-based sys-tems can do and how they do it are reasonably accurateÑor at least notinaccurate in counterproductive ways.Many important challenges to human factors research arise becausecomputer-based communication technology has the potential to greatly in-
crease the ways in which people can communicate with each other.  More

and more people are using electronic mail, electronic bulletin boards, elec-
tronic forums and discussion groups, and computer-based teleconferencing
facilities, but these provide only a hint of what is likely to be possible in the
not-distant future.  Much human factors research needs to be done on the

design and utilization of such facilities to ensure that they develop in direc-
tions consistent with the needs and preferences of their prospective users
and in ways that really enhance and enrich interpersonal communication.
Questions involve how interpersonal communication through computer-based
systems compares, favorably or unfavorably, with communication through
more traditional media and how the emerging media might be shaped so as
to increase the opportunities for interpersonal communication as well as to
enhance the quality of the communication that occurs.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT37Communication technology and telenetworking should have importantimplications for the problem of increasing the employment of people with
disabilities.  This technology should be able to greatly increase the access

of people with mobility problems to many resources that once were avail-
able only to people who could travel to them.  The full realization of this

potential will require that questions of a human factors nature be addressed
regarding how best to design the interfaces and operating procedures that
will ensure the usability of the technology by people with various types of
disabilities.Even though the use of network technology to hold conferences amongÒattendeesÓ located at different places has been of interest since the mid-
1960s, teleconferencing has not yet become a widely used alternative to
face-to-face meetings, even when the meetings involve the expense and
inconvenience of considerable travel.  Some of the technical limitations of

teleconferencing systems are being eased as networks acquire sufficient
bandwidth to support the real-time transmission of sufficiently high-fidelity
video representations of participantsÕ images to create a realistic impression
of an actual gathering.  This should help make teleconferencing more at-

tractive, but there is still much to be learned about the human factors as-
pects of this technology before it becomes the communication asset its
originators intended it to be.The term telecommuting captures the idea of using telenetworks to pro-
vide people with the resources to enable them to work at home or in loca-
tions other than their traditional workplaces.  Substituting the transmission

of information via computer networks for the transportation of people to
and from places of work is attractive for several reasons, not the least of
which is the possibility of conserving energy and easing some of the load
on urban areas (traffic congestion, parking problems, air pollution) to which
commuting traffic contributes.  A significant fraction of the workforce is

already doing telecommuting, and increasing this fraction manyfold is be-
lieved to be technically feasible.  Impediments to greater use of telecommuting
include the need for additional user-oriented tools to ensure that workers
can perform the desired tasks; other impediments involve issues of worker
satisfaction and related psychological variables.  Human factors studies are

needed to address both types of issues.With the help of computer networks, colleagues can cooperate at adistance in ways that were impossible until fairly recently.  Teams of ex-

perts, all in different places but drawing on the same resources and sharing
a common ÒvirtualÓ work space, can collaborate on problems that require
their collective knowledge and skills.  The success with which this scenario

can be played out in specific instances will depend, to no small extent, on
how well the many human factors issues relating to the design of the under-
lying systems are resolved.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHAs the bandwidth of computer networks continues to increase, it will bepossible to transmit an increasingly detailed and veridical representation of
a physical situation to a remotely located individual.  It seems unlikely,

however, that it will be possible, at least anytime soon, to represent most
nontrivial situations in sufficient detail that one could not tell the virtual
reality from the real thing.  Fortunately, such verisimilitude is not necessary

for most applications, but the question of how real (in appearance) is real
enough is open and probably must be answered on a case-by-case basis.
Representations of reality that would be more than adequate for some appli-
cations might be inadequate for others.  There is a need for work on how to

determine the degree of fidelity required in specific instances.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITYThe ProblemAmong the more striking characteristics of modern society is the de-pendence of its governmental, economic, and social institutions on constant
accessibility to accurate, up-to-date information of many types.  The pri-

macy of information and knowledge as resources in todayÕs world is re-flected in the growing tendency to refer to our society as the information
society (e.g., Salvaggio, 1989) or the postindustrial society (Bell, 1973).An associated development is the greatly increased quantity of informa-tion available to people in all walks of life.  The material published for

professionals in specific fields has long exceeded the capacity of individu-
als to stay current except in very narrow subspecialties.  The amount of

information that is available to the public is also enormous and growing.
Being available, however, does not necessarily mean being readily acces-
sible, and users, or potential users, of information that is available often
experience frustration in locating, accessing, and interpreting the informa-
tion they want.Technological developmentsÑincluding ever more powerful informa-tion-manipulation and display facilities, ÒintelligentÓ interfaces, and infor-
mation-finding and utilization aidsÑmay help to address this problem.  An
essential aspect of any effort to make information more accessible to people
who need or want to use it, however, must be attention to a variety of
human factors issues relating to the ways in which people might interface
with information repositories and tools that are intended to facilitate find-
ing, using, and conveying information.  Moreover, this attention will need

to extend beyond the technical user of information systems because the
proportion of the labor force that engages in information handling has been
increasing rapidly and is expected to continue to do so (Koenig, 1990);
many people tap into information resources for purposes other than theEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT39requirements of their jobs.  Given the unlimited diversity of the community
of users of information systems, designers cannot rely on user perseverance
or high technical skills to overcome poor interface design.Previous ResearchConsiderable research has been done on the design of interfaces fordatabases representing restricted domains.  Menu organization, for example,
has been the focus of numerous studies (Card, 1982; Giroux and Belleau,
1986; Kiger, 1984; Miller, 1981; Norman, 1991; Shneiderman, 1987; Snow-
berry et al., 1983).  Most of these studies have used relatively small, homo-

geneous, and often abstract databases (Fisher et al., 1990) unlike those
typically found in operational settings, and search questions have generally
been goal-directed, which means that the results may not help us understand
browsing behavior.Work has also been done on the design of query languages for provid-ing database access (Belkin and Croft, 1987; Shneiderman, 1987), and stud-
ies have addressed the effectiveness of various possible search techniques
(Blair, 1984; Muckler, 1987; Vigil, 1985).  Investigators have also studied

the strategies that people use spontaneously to search for information in a
large database (Brooks et al., 1986; Chen and Dhar, 1991; Harter and Pe-
ters, 1985).  Attempts have been made to enhance database search through

artificial intelligence techniques (Croft and Thompson, 1987; Hawkins, 1988).The versatility of the computer for generating graphical representationshas sparked some interest in how databases might be represented so as to
make the information in them easier to find.  Among the approaches being

explored are some that represent data sets as three-dimensional structures
that users can inspect from different angles and at adjustable viewing dis-
tances, thus permitting views of the data from relatively global as well as
narrowly focused perspectives (Card et al., 1990; Clarkson, 1991; Newby,
1992).  Little is known, however, about the relative effectiveness of differ-

ent forms of data representation as aids to understanding complex data sets
(Jensen and Anderson, 1987; Liu and Wickens, 1992; Merwin and Wickens,
1991).Research Needs and OpportunitiesA continuing human factors challenge relating to complex informationsystems is interface design.  This applies even to systems that represent

highly restricted areas of knowledge, for example, an on-line help system
for a word-processing program or an airline flight reservation system.  An

effective interface should allow users to readily locate and access items of
information as they are needed and to make a rapid transition from one setEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHof related items to another.  These capabilities relate to the 
organizationalstructure of the database (e.g., hierarchical, matrix, network; Durding et al.,
1977) and the navigational tools for moving from entry to entry (Seidler
and Wickens, 1992).  The organizational structure may or may not be inde-

pendent of the navigational tools.  For example, a database may be orga-

nized in a strict hierarchical fashion, but navigational tools may allow the
user to access any node in the database from any other node with a single
command, obviating the need to travel up and down the paths in the hierar-
chy.  Whatever the relationship between the database structure and the

navigation aids, the important requirement from the userÕs point of view isthat it facilitate and not impede access.There is some evidence that the effectiveness of a menu design for aninformation system may partly depend on how closely the structure repre-
sented by the menu corresponds to the userÕs mental model of the structureof the database (Roske-Hofstrand and Paap, 1986).  In some cases, how-

ever, there are many ÒnaturalÓ ways to organize a database, and there is
little or no guidance as to whether one way is preferable to another, whether
one corresponds more closely than another to a mental model, how homoge-
neous these mental models are across different users, or whether the organi-
zational structure that is appropriate for one task (e.g., normal operation)
differs from what is needed for another (e.g., fault diagnosis and trouble-
shooting).  Many human factors issues must be addressed if interface de-

signs are to be optimized for particular combinations of information sys-
tems and the users they are intended to serve.  The use of electronic database
ÒmapsÓ has proved to be a promising method of making the organization of
a database visible to the user (Vincente and Williges, 1988), but major
design challenges confront the human factors community if such maps are
to represent the vast number of nodes and entries in very large databases in
a truly useful way (Mackinlay et al., 1991; Shneiderman, 1987).Some databases are fluid, in that the information in them is continuallychanging and they may not have a permanent structure.  The database of

human factors research is a case in point; not only is new information being
added to it all the time, but people do not agree on where its boundaries
should lie.  Menu-based interfaces have serious limitations when used with

such systems.  Query languages that rely on keyword searches have some

advantages, but also their own limitations.A relatively neglected, but important, question pertaining to evaluatingthe effectiveness of any information system or information search proce-
dure is how to determine the value of information to its prospective users.
This issue will have to be considered in the design of automated search and
retrieval techniques.  Not all the information that is relevant to a given topic
of interest is of equal value to a user, but little is known about how toEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT41convey to a search procedure the distinction between what would be consid-ered important and what would not.  More generally, evaluating the effec-

tiveness of information systems is a continuing challenge.  Simply counting

ÒhitsÓ or computing the ratio of hits to false alarms does not suffice, be-
cause it begs the question of what should be considered a hit, and it does
not distinguish among hits and misses of different degrees of importance.
Taking into account the use to which information is put would probably
give a more accurate picture of system effectiveness, but often this may not
be practical.  We also do not know how to assess effectiveness for systems

that are intended to facilitate browsing as opposed to structured search, and
this will be a difficult problem.A special challenge for human factors research relates to the unprec-edented capability of computer-based systems to represent information in
graphical or pictorial form.  The rapid development of capabilities for dy-

namic three-dimensional displays and of tools that permit users to manipu-
late and interact with such displays has outdistanced our ability to exploit
such capabilities to full advantage.  There is a need both to analyze the

tasks for which sophisticated visualization tools could be especially helpful
and to find better ways to evaluate how well visualization-aiding systems
help users perform their tasks.  The considerable current interest in better

understanding the use of visualization in science and the application of
computer-based displays to the development of more powerful techniques
for visual data representation emphasize the importance of human-factors
research in this area.For systems that are intended to have some built-in intelligence, design-ers have often stated that one of their goals is to give the system the ability
to adapt flexibly to the needs of individual users, and even perhaps to adapt
to changes in those needs over time.  Too much adaptability, however,

could prove to be counterproductive.  The research done to date provides

little guidance as to the conditions under which intelligent adaptability may
stop being beneficial and may actually be harmful.  In general, there is a

need to explore the trade-off between flexibility (adaptability to usersÕ needsor preferences) and consistency in the characteristics and operational fea-
tures of information systems.People already have extensive experience navigating in space; this cre-ates a strong argument for attempting to exploit spatial metaphors in the
design of tools for helping people interact effectively with large complex
databases and information networks.  But effective use of spatial metaphors

will require addressing a number of unresolved issues:  determining how

best to represent data that have a dimensionality greater than two or three,
developing effective methods for helping users maintain their orientation
(keep from getting lost) when navigating a database, providing easy meansEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHof conveying to the system desired control actions (zooming, panning, relo-cating), and numerous issues involving other aspects of user-information
system interaction.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGNThe ProblemRemaining competitive in the global marketplace has been an increas-ingly difficult challenge to many U.S. industries, especially in the manufac-
turing sector of the economy.  The U.S. lead in several industrial areas has

been eroded in recent years, and the prospects for competing effectively in
these and other areas will depend on the countryÕs ability to use materialand human resources more effectively.It appears that a critical aspect of industrial competitiveness will be theability to adapt quickly to rapid technological developments and constantly
changing market conditions.  This means, among other things, being suffi-

ciently flexible to shift production quickly from one item to another and
being able to produce items economically in relatively small quantities (Piore
and Sabel, 1984).  Production flexibility requires a very different job design

from that of conventional twentieth-century assembly lines.  Other innova-

tive ways to increase competitiveness, such as just-in-time manufacturing,
which is intended to save costs by minimizing the need for large invento-
ries, also have implications for work design (National Research Council,
1986).Emerging technologiesÑmany forms of automation, robotics, and in-formation technologiesÑwill figure prominently in shaping the workplacesof the future.  In some cases, workers will be displaced as technological

advances make their tasks obsolete or performable by machine.  Other jobs

will be transformed by the availability of new tools that workers will have
to learn how to use.  And jobs that do not now exist will be created.

Change will be the norm.Human factors research has something useful to contribute to maintain-ing the industrial competitiveness of the United States as these changes take
place, but the goal of the research must be more than the design of better
displays and controls (which is not to discount the importance of this objec-
tive).  Improving manufacturing, for example, will require attention to hu-

man factors issues conceived sufficiently broadly to include the social psy-
chology of the functioning of work groups as well as classical ergonomics.
The realization of the need for a relatively broad perspective has led to the
current interest in macro-ergonomics.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT43Previous ResearchJob design has been a focus of human factors research from the earliestdays of the discipline.  Originally attention was focused primarily on the

individual worker and the demands of specific tasks.  ÒTaylorism,Ó as a
theory of job design, was concerned with the optimization of physical effort
in order to increase speed of production.  Jobs were subdivided into repeti-

tive tasks to minimize the amount of learning required by the worker and to
maximize the speed with which a task could be performed (Knights et al.,
1985).  ÒFordismÓ introduced the assembly line, which organized Taylorizedtasks into patterns that would yield automobiles and other complex con-
sumer products.The assembly line approach was very effective in mass-producing con-sumer goods that could be sold at affordable prices, but it left much to be
desired from the workerÕs perspective and often led to stress, low workermotivation, absenteeism, and labor conflict (Kornhauser, 1965; Walker and
Guest, 1952).  Researchers interested in job design began to see worker

satisfaction and quality of life in the work setting as important complements
to worker efficiency.  In time, the importance of taking into account the

interactions among individuals in work settings was recognized, as was the
need to apply a systems perspective to the study of complexes involving
both people and machines.Despite the attention that job design has received from human factorsresearchers, most jobs still are not designed in any rigorous sense, but they
evolveÑoften being forced to change in order to accommodate the intro-duction of new technology, but not necessarily in optimal or even satisfac-
tory ways.  What was already a complex problem has been exacerbated in

some instances by the extraordinary rapidity with which information-based
technologies have permeated the workplace.The need for more attention from human factors researchers to theintroduction and use of information-based technology in the workplace is
seen in such disparate problems as the biochemical and physiological diffi-
culties that are sometimes associated with the use of information-technol-
ogy devices (e.g., eyestrain and carpal tunnel syndrome) and the claims of
some investigators that these technologies do not increase productivity as
they were expected to do.  There have also been calls for a better under-

standing of the ways in which the new technologies are changing the skills
required of workers (National Commission on Employment Policy, 1986)
and of why these technologies appear to be underused or inefficiently used
in some contexts, especially manufacturing (National Academy of Engi-
neering/National Research Council, 1991).Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHResearch Needs and OpportunitiesIf U.S. industry is to compete effectively in world markets, it must givea high priority to product quality.  The importance of quality increases with

the amount of competition that an industry faces, and many of the industries
that are important to the economic health of the nation have much competi-
tion on the world scene.  Quality flaws in products typically derive either

from worker error or from suboptimal work processes and procedures.  There
are many opportunities for human factors research on both decreasing the
probability of human error in the workplace and enhancing product quality
by improving the designs of work processes and procedures.  The study of

human error in certain types of information workÑprogramming or soft-ware design, for exampleÑposes a special challenge because errors may bevery difficult to identify and it may be almost impossible to trace back to
them from their eventual effects.Workplace health and safety will continue to be major foci of humanfactors research.  Lighting, air quality, potentially dangerous machinery,

noise, fatigue, biomechanical stress, and other traditionally important hu-
man factors issues relating to work and the workplace will still require
attention, but new problems will also surface as jobs and workplace tech-
nology continue to change.  Certain types of musculoskeletal disorders,

sometimes referred to as repetitive strain injury, appear to have been be-
coming increasingly common among people who make constant use of computer
terminals or similar keyboard devices.  So also have certain ailments that

are probably attributable to psychosocial properties of some jobs that seem
to create undue psychological stress.  Effectively addressing workplace health
and safety will require attention both to the traditional ergonomic concerns
of proper equipment design and to psychosocial factors that can directly and
indirectly affect workersÕ health and safety.
The integration of human and machine labor in semiautomated indus-trial operations continues to be a challenge, and so far it has not been met
effectively.  The idea that machine intelligence might substitute for human

intelligence in many manufacturing processes appears to have been giving
way to the idea that what is needed, for the foreseeable future at least, is a
better understanding of how to combine human and machine capabilities in
truly symbiotic ways (Brodner, 1986; De Greene, 1991; Kellso, 1989; Kuo
and Hsu, 1990).  If such systems are to be realized, many human factors

issues will have to be addressed; they range from the traditional problems
of interface design to planning, scheduling, and coordinating activities to
top-level policy setting (Sanderson, 1989).Many industrial jobs of the future will involve people as supervisors ofhighly automated operations.  When things are operating smoothly as in-

tended, Òsupervisory controllersÓ may have relatively little to do; however,
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT45when systems fail or malfunction, they may have to take quick and decisiveaction to avoid serious consequences.  Such situations pose problems of

boredom and skill maintenance.  How are supervisory controllers to be kept

attentive and interested in their jobs when everything is proceeding as in-
tended without their involvement, and how are their skills to be kept honed
so they can do what is required in moments when they are needed to avert a
crisis? More generally, there is a need for systematic and detailed descrip-
tive research about the skills, especially the higher-level cognitive skills,
that workers need in the various job situations that high technology is creat-
ing and that will be even more common in the future.One effect of the new information technologies on many jobs has beento put some distance, real or symbolic, between workers and whatever they
are producing.  This is illustrated most strikingly in the use of tele-operators
and other remotely controlled devices in some production processes, and it
is apparent in other contexts as well.  Many machinists no longer do any

machining by hand with traditional machine tools; instead they feed their
specifications to a programmable machine tool.  Even people who generate

paper products (reports, drawings, blueprints) typically do so via a com-
puter-based system that yields the paper only after the work has been done.
There has been some speculation about the effects of this change on work-
ers and on the skill requirements of their jobs (Zuboff, 1988), but there has
been little empirical investigation into the matter.The emphasis in the foregoing has been on the need to find ways toensure the competitiveness of U.S. industry in a rapidly changing world;
this is indeed a serious challenge for the nation.  We believe human factors

researchers can significantly contribute to meeting this challenge.  It is

important, however, that in doing so, this community maintain the comple-
mentary objective of ensuring that the work climate, culture, and environ-
ment are humane and fulfilling to the human beings who work within it.
Job satisfaction will require attention as long as there are jobs, but the
answer to the question of how to promote it is likely to change as the
characteristics of jobs change, and not always in predictable ways.TRANSPORTATIONThe ProblemMost people interact with transportation systems as operators and aspassengers.  Millions of us operate motor vehicles, and millions more are

passengers on airplanes and railroad trains.  In both cases, the goals are to

achieve convenient, fast, and safe travel.  Automobiles offer individual

mobility; air and rail transport offer efficient travel over long distances.  As
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHspeed and convenience have increased through advances in technology, therehas also been increased concern about public safety.In the United States, motor vehicle accidents are the primary cause ofdeath for people under age 38.  Current statistics show that there are also

1.7 million disabling injuries from motor vehicles every year.  Because

traffic accidents take a disproportionate toll from the younger population,
the average number of life years lost is two to three times higher than for
heart disease and cancer.  A large proportion of these accidents can be

attributed to human error.  Sources of such error include lack of experience,

misperception of events, poor vision, use of drugs and alcohol, fatigue, and
high levels of risk tolerance.Air travel, in contrast, is the safest form of mass transportation in termsof accident occurrence and loss of life.  However, when accidents do occur,

the toll is often catastrophic.  In over two-thirds of these accidents, human

error is cited as the primary cause.  The sources of human error in air

accidents are different from those in automobile accidents.  In modern air-

craft, pilot errors may stem from poor mental models of the functions being
performed by highly complex automated systems, from information or work
overload, or from failures in coordination and communication among mem-
bers of cockpit crews or between cockpit crews and air traffic controllers.We can anticipate that, as technology advances and greater demands areplaced on both motor vehicles and commercial aircraft for convenience and
speed, understanding the capabilities and limitations of the human operators
will become even more critical.  Human factors can make important contri-

butions by developing coherent models of the human as an operator and of
the team and organizational environment in which the human must function.
In addition, human factors can provide insights into what functions should
be automated and how this should be done to ensure efficient and safe
operation.Previous ResearchThe available knowledge base for understanding proficient driving andtraffic safety skills in motor vehicle operation can be characterized as ex-
tensive but fragmented.  As already mentioned, several sources of human

error have been researched; what is missing, however, is a conceptual model
that specifies a coherent research agenda for describing driving performance
under a variety of conditions with a range of technological alternatives.
The main lines of researchable questions have focused on deficits in vision,
the influence of alcohol and drugs, attention and automaticity, aging, and
the misestimation of risk as potential contributors to reduced driving perfor-
mance.Tests for visual acuity currently assess static acuity on one eye at aEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT47time.  However, recent research (Burg, 1967, 1968, 1971) suggests that
static acuity alone is a poor predictor of accident probability and that tests
for dynamic acuity are preferable.  Moreover, the degree to which both eyes

work together to provide the widest possible field of view has also been
found to be a crucial factor.  One problem is that the current tests used to

measure visual acuity for drivers are based on evaluating only the threshold
for resolution for high-contrast optotypes whereas, in many situations, the
driver must distinguish low-contrast objects under low illumination.  The

tests of vision that appear to have higher predictive power for safe driving
involve peripheral vision, contrast sensitivity, and motion perception (Johnson
and Keltner, 1983).Recent findings on alcohol and drug intoxication suggest that impair-ment that would affect driving can be detected in individuals with much
lower blood-alcohol levels than those now used to determine legal liability.
Also, strong interaction effects between individuals and conditions have
been recorded; this should lead to a radical rethinking of the legal limits on
blood alcohol.Another line of research on drivers deals with vigilance and the usefulfield of view.  There is evidence that repetitive tasks can result in general

drowsiness or a narrowing of the effective field of view for attention, and
some studies show that restrictions in this field can pose serious problems
for older drivers (Ball and Owsley, 1992).  Furthermore, as alertness de-

creases, reaction time can become significantly longer.Work is also going forward on driver attitudes toward risk or risk toler-ance.  Recent findings suggest that some drivers have a risk tolerance threshold
that is constant.  If such drivers have vehicles with automatic seat belts or

air bags that lower risk, they tend to increase risk by driving faster than
they otherwise would.  The net effect is that the benefits of technological

advances are canceled out.Research on motor vehicle drivers has focused on the characteristics ofthe individual and how those characteristics interact with performance.  Human
factors research on aircraft operation, however, has concentrated both on
the individual and on teamwork in multiperson operator crews.  In recent

years programmatic movement in this area has emerged under the rubric of
crew resource management (CRM).  CRM is based on the recognition that

many vehiclesÑparticularly large commercial aircraftÑare actually pilotedby a team rather than a single individual.  The performance of the vehicle as
a system thus depends in part on how well the team members accommodate
to one another in addition to how well they operate as competent special-
ists.  The approach has, as a first focus, the training of the crew.  Current

practices put great emphasis on the creation of training situations that exer-
cise the teamwork functions.  In a dynamic flight simulator, for example,

the whole crew is exercised simultaneously.  What takes place is not just
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHskill learning in the sense of interpersonal communication skills but also asolid sense of mutual confidence that can allow team members to compen-
sate for one anotherÕs weak points.Research Needs and OpportunitiesThere is no shortage of needs for rigorous research in advanced trans-portation systems.  A truly basic need is for a better systemic representation

of the human in the system.  Ideally, the community of human factors

researchers would create a model to identify the human attributes that con-
tribute most to performance.  The framework should include the distribution
of individual differences for each such attribute and something similar to a
multiple regression equation, describing in quantitative terms how each at-
tribute contributes to the quality of performance in challenging work situa-
tions.  Given such a framework, the analysis of a set of particular driver

behaviors would be more straightforward and would be more likely to point
clearly to reforms at the practical level, such as the design of tests used to
screen drivers for licensure.Another key opportunity exists in the area of automation and functionallocation.  The present atmosphere appears to favor the development and

evaluation of computer-based aids rather than complete reassignment of
operator responsibilities to a computer.  For example, it is now possible to

use information from satellites to determine oneÕs exact position in three-dimensional space.  Such positional information could be used, in turn, to

drive map-type displays in a cockpit of an aircraft, bridge of a boat, cabin
of a locomotive, or instrument panel in a car.  What effect would such

displays have on the performance of the operator and on the system as a
whole?  Would the presumptive improvement in performance make up for

the additional cost?  Would people drive automobiles more recklessly if

they thought that the new display reduced risk?The time has come when the operatorÕs role could be totally automatedin many transportation systems.  Would passengers (or, indeed, nonpartici-

pating bystanders) permit the total automation of any common carrier ve-
hicles?  What are the predominant attitudes of various cultures toward auto-

mation?  How do these attitudes influence the willingness of individuals to

disengage automated systems and revert to human control when conditions
warrant?A third important issue is the differential reactions of various culturesto team training such as CRM.  For example, in collectivist cultures a high

value is placed on the group, whereas in individualist cultures, such as the
United States, more value is placed on individual performance.  These val-

ues and their consequences should be explored in detail so that training can
be appropriately designed.  One important goal of human factors is to de-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT49fine curricula that are relevant to the task, understandable to those beingtrained, and acceptable in the context of societal values.Finally, there is a need to develop an improved methodology for under-standing human error at the group level and for evaluating group and sys-
tem performance.  Accident investigations have found that a number of

factors at the regulatory and organizational level, as well as at the indi-
vidual level, contribute to the inadequacy of safeguards against fatal deci-
sions.  Effort should be directed toward developing a taxonomy of human

factors problems at various levels that could be applied to the analysis of
accidents and incidents.  This would be an invaluable tool for researchers

and for those responsible for ensuring safety (Jones, 1993).The field of transportation provides rich opportunities to expand thescope of human factors in areas in which outcomes can have major conse-
quences.  Optimizing the interface between individuals and groups that

work with complex technology and systems requires a multidisciplinary
approach that embraces the full range of concerns of human factors special-
ists.  Concern with a particular problem, whether vehicular or aviation safety,
should not blind researchers to concepts that transcend problem areas and
that reflect more broadly on human capabilities and limitations.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESSThe ProblemStress is a fact of life in modern society and it manifests itself in avariety of ways, sometimes tragically.  Incidents of violence in the work-

place have sometimes been attributed, at least in part, to stress.  Stress has

also been implicated both in high-profile accidents, such as the Three Mile
Island incident, the downing of an Iranian airliner by the Vincennes, and thecrash of Air Ontario Flight 363 (Helmreich, 1992; Wickens, 1992).  Stress

is also involved in the countless less spectacular mishaps that occur every-
day in the workplace, in the home, and elsewhere (Druckman and Swets,
1988; Manuso, 1983).Since Hans Selye (1956) first directed the attention of the scientificcommunity to the problem of stress and articulated his theory of the Ògen-eral adaptation syndrome,Ó the concept of stress has evolved considerably.
In this report the term is taken to mean reactions to perceived significant
threats to oneÕs welfare, reactions that often entail heightened emotion (seeKeinan, 1987; Yates, 1990).  Stress, according to this conception, is depen-

dent on both the person and the situation.  What is threatening to one person
at a particular time may not be so to another person or to the same person at
a different time.  A type of threat that is especially germane to understand-

ing how stress affects cognitive performance is the threat of task demands,Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHespecially time-limitation demands, that appear to be beyond oneÕs capa-bilities to meet.Some occupations are generally viewed as especially stressfulÑair traf-fic controller, for example.  Generally, any occupation that puts one in the

position of being able to cause great harm to other people or to oneself as a
consequence of making an error is likely to be considered stressful.  Other

jobs can be stressful for much more subtle reasons, and the stress they cause
may be at a lower level but relatively continuous.  Jobs at which people

must work continuously at a near-maximum pace to maintain production
quotas, or in which inadequate personal space or privacy create social ten-
sion, or in which one has little job security are examples of jobs that can
cause chronic stress.Previous ResearchThe psychological literature on stress is huge, and a considerable amountof work has been done on the effects of stress on cognition (Hamilton and
Warburton, 1979; Hockey, 1983, 1986; Hockey and Hamilton, 1983).  We

believe that the need for research on this topic will increase over the fore-
seeable future for several reasons:  threats to job security that will come

from increasing competitive pressures in many industries, the need to ac-
commodate to increasingly rapid change in the workplace because of tech-
nological advances and other factors, the greater cognitive demands of many
jobs and the possibility that errors will have far-reaching implications, and
the stress evoked by new methods of electronic monitoring and surveil-
lance.There seems to be general agreement among researchers that stressadversely affects short-term memory, although it is not clear whether stress
reduces capacity or imposes a greater load on short-term memory (Cohen,
1978).  Another consensus conclusion is that stress reduces the scope of

perceptual attention (Baddeley, 1972), a phenomenon sometimes referred to
as perceptual narrowing or Òtunneling,Ó but there is some doubt about whichstimuli do and do not receive attention when this narrowing occurs (Yates,
1990).  Resolving these and similar theoretical questions that have been

prompted by previous research would facilitate the development of adequate
approaches to training people to function well under stress.One difficulty that has plagued laboratory studies of stress and its ef-fects on performance is the impossibility, for ethical reasons, of exposing
subjects to situations that are threatening in a nontrivial way.  Informed

consent requirements also preclude the element of surprise in experimenta-
tion, inasmuch as subjects must be told the details of the experimental
procedure in advance.  For these reasons, much of the laboratory work on
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT51the effects of stress on performance has limited applicability to the real-world situations that seriously, and often unexpectedly, threaten peopleÕssafety or well-being.Another limitation of most laboratory studies of stress is that even themild stressors used are applied for relatively short periods of time.  It is

very difficult to imagine practically feasible laboratory situations for study-
ing the effects of long-term or chronic stress.  But such stress is as much a

problem as is short-term or acute stress.  As suggested by the work of

Cohen (1980) and Cohen and Spacapan (1978), the effects of chronic stress
hold surprises that seem inaccessible via standard laboratory techniques.Research Needs and OpportunitiesA priority for future research on the effects of stress on cognitive per-formance must be a search for feasible solutions to the limitations of labo-
ratory methods.  If laboratory results are to be generalizable to the real-

world situations of interest, ethical but effective ways must be found to
study the influences of stressors that more closely approximate those in
real-world human-technology systems.  We mention here two strategies that

might be applied to this end:  (a) analyses of naturally occurring incidents

and (b) simulations, including competitive games.  Both of these strategies

are used currently; we recommend that they be exploited more fully and
creatively.Incident analysis could be considerably facilitated by the developmentof formal protocols for use in specific incidents, such as those involving
nuclear power plant operation, aviation, and surgical procedures.  The availability
of such protocols, appropriately evaluated, would make it practical for inci-
dent analyses to be commissioned regularly (e.g., by the Nuclear Regula-
tory Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, and various surgery
review boards) to better understand their causes.  Statistical analyses of

incident-recording databases, such as the Aviation Safety Reporting System
that is maintained by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, is
one means of investigating the effects of stress on performance; nonintrusive
study of people in stressful situations in which they have voluntarily placed
themselves is another.The simulation of stressful situations is a possible approach if simula-tors can be built that create a convincing illusion of stress without actually
putting subjects at risk.  How to build such simulators is itself a research

challenge because of the limitations of our present knowledge of the deter-
minants of stress, but common experience with frightening films, amuse-
ment park rides, and similar emotion-arousing stimuli attest to the possibil-
ity of feeling stressed even while not believing oneÕs self to be in actualdanger.  Virtual reality should offer the possibility of simulating stressful
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHsituations with a high degree of realism without exposing people to physicalthreats.  How best to exploit these possibilities in the study of the effects of

stress on performance is a question that will require some research to an-
swer.In addition to learning more about the effects of stress on cognitiveperformance, a major challenge for human factors research is the develop-
ment of effective ways to counteract the more detrimental of those effects.
Approaches to handling stress include attempting to eliminate stressors or
to lessen their strength, reducing the stress reactions of individuals, select-
ing people with high tolerance for stress for stressful jobs, training people
to function effectively even when stressed, and Òstress-proofingÓ systems sothey will function smoothly even when their operators are stressed.  All of

these approaches are worth pursuing.We know that people differ both in the situations they find stressful andin their ability to function under a given level of stress (see Hockey et al.,
1986, especially Section IV).  And considerable attention has been given to

the question of how to distinguish people who are more and less stress-
resistant (Allred and Smith, 1989; Kobasa, 1979; Parkes, 1986).  We need

to know more about such individual differences in response to stress, but
perhaps even more importantly, we need to be able to predict how individu-
als are likely to be affected by specific stressors in specific situations.Some research has been done on how to train people so that they willbe able to perform their tasks well even under highly stressful conditions,
but more is needed.  It is not clear from the results obtained to date whether

it is better to train people primarily under nonstressful conditions or to give
them a lot of practice under conditions that approximate the stressfulness
under which they may have to function.  It is clear that high degrees of

stress usually impede learning, but it does not follow that, given the need to
be able to function under stress eventually, the training methods that are
most successful in the short run will prove the most efficient from a suffi-
ciently long-range perspective.  There is a need for some systematic re-

search on this problem to explore the range of possible approaches that will
best prepare people to perform under the full spectrum of situations they
could encounter on the job.  These might include hybrid approaches that

would, for example, provide training under nonstressful conditions and Òover-trainingÓ under stress.
Complementing the need to determine how best to train people to func-tion effectively under stress is the need to make systems as stress-resistant
as possible.  The research objective in this case is to determine how to

design human-technology systems so their operational goals will be realized
even when their operators are stressed and more prone to make errors than
normally.  Considerably less is known about effects of stress on the perfor-

mance of groups or person-machine complexes than about the effects ofEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT53stress on the performance of individuals (Davis et al., 1992), so this chal-lenge involves the need to acquire knowledge at a relatively fundamental
level.  In addition, however, there is a current practical need to identify

features that could be designed into systems to safeguard against known
effects of stress on human performance.  To illustrate the point:  because

stress often results in restricting oneÕs range of attention, a system might begiven the capability to force operators, during emergency situations, to ex-
plicitly acknowledge their attention to every item on a checklist designed
for that contingency.Eliminating or reducing high levels of stress in work situations shouldbe a continuing objective of research.  However, prudence dictates the as-

sumption that, no matter how successful we are in this objective, there will
arise from time to time in many modern work contexts stressful situations
that either cannot be anticipated in detail or cannot be precluded.  It is

therefore essential that research seek effective ways to deal with those situ-
ations through personnel selection, training, and system design.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORKThe ProblemAlmost all work is done with the assistance of tools of one sort oranother.  This is true of intellectual as well as physical work.  As computer

technology has become widely available in the workplace, many software
tools have been developed to help people perform intellectual tasks, such as
writing, designing, decision making, and analyzing.  These tools include

electronic dictionaries, thesauruses, spelling verifiers, spreadsheets, design
aids, conferencing systems for group work, models for weather forecasting,
medical diagnostic aids, and systems to help people visualize structures
such as complex molecules or airflow patterns on an aircraft wing.It seems certain that efforts to develop additional and more powerfulaids to intellectual work will continue for the foreseeable future.  This

effort will be driven in part by continuing rapid advances in the enabling
technologies and in part by the promise that such aids hold for increasing
productivity and creativity in the workplace and for enriching peopleÕs in-tellectual experience in many other contexts.The human factors issue of overriding importance is to help ensure thatthe technology really has the effect of enhancing the quality of life on the
whole.  Human factors efforts are needed (a) to evaluate the effectiveness

of such aids, (b) to provideÑthrough task analysesÑa better understandingof what further aids would be useful, and (c) to participate in the design,
implementation, and iterative improvement of future aids.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHPrevious ResearchAlthough many electronic aids to intellectual work have been devel-oped, some of which are used daily in work settings, surprisingly few sys-
tematic studies have been done to evaluate their effectiveness.  The evalua-

tive data that do exist suggest that some aids do not increase productivity
(Attewell, 1994).Studies conducted in the 1970s on the use of dictating equipment illus-trate the importance of checking prevailing beliefs about the difficulty or
effects of introducing new technologies in the workplace against objective
data.  In this case, common assumptions about the difficulty of learning to

dictate effectively, and about the efficiency of dictation as compared with
manual writing for experienced users of dictation equipment, proved to be
wrong (Gould, 1980).  Experimental studies also showed that people found

it easier to compose Òvoice documentsÓ for listening than to dictate docu-
ments to be read.  Such findings were instrumental in shifting the focus of

some developers from dictation systems to voice-message systems (Gould
and Boies, 1983).Other experiments have assessed the effects on productivity of the in-creasing trend among office professionals, including managers, to use text
processing systems to compose and edit text themselves instead of using the
services of a secretary or clerical staff (Card et al., 1984; Gould, 1982).
Again, major savings in time or improvements in product quality were not
always found.Field studies of organizations that have introduced innovative techno-logical aids to intellectual tasks in the workplace have also shown that it is
possible for these aides to increase productivity while lowering employee
morale and job satisfaction (Kraut et al., 1989).  Negative reactions some-

times occur, for example, because using the technological aids changes the
amount of social contact and face-to-face interaction that people have in
their jobs.Recent research has also focused on the development or evaluation ofaids to facilitate collaborative work among the members of a group (Turner
and Kraut, 1992).  Some of this work has been done in the laboratory, some

in real work situations, and some in both (Olson et al., 1992).  The main

conclusion to be drawn from this early work is that much additional re-
search will be needed before firm design guidelines for the development of
aids for intellectual work by groups can be articulated.A few efforts have been made by human factors groups to initiate thedevelopment of one or more aids to intellectual work and to see this through
to implementation in a work setting (e.g., Gould et al., 1993; Harris, 1980;
Landauer et al., 1993).  These are atypical, however; more commonly hu-

man factors researchers have become involved in development efforts onlyEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT55after they are under way, usually in support rather than leadership roles, andoften for the sole purpose of validation testing at the end of a developmen-
tal cycle.Research Needs and OpportunitiesEvaluative studies are needed, not so much to determine the relativemerits of existing aids but to provide the insights required to improve upon
them and to ensure that they accomplish what is intended.  Evaluative re-

search should focus not only on aids, but also on the processes that are used
to develop them.  We need to know what developmental approaches are

most effective and how they might be improved.There is also a need to study the detailed demands of intellectual workin specific settings with a view to identifying how the development of new
tools could aid that work.  It would be useful, for example, to study suc-

cessful physicians diagnosing, nurses providing nursing care, musicians com-
posing, architects designing, and teachers teaching; the aim would be to
identify the intellectual skills involved and develop a theory about the task
demands that would guide the search for new tools to aid performance.
This effort should be conditioned, however, by the recognition that fre-
quently providing new tools results not so much in making the current job
easier to do but in changing the nature of the job by making it possible to
do things that could not be done before.Several studies, using either observational techniques or questionnaires,have been done of how white-collar workers spend their time (Klemmer and
Snyder, 1972; Kraut and Streeter, 1995; Mintzberg, 1973; Panko, 1992).
Although these studies have been valuable, they have not led to the devel-
opment of new intellectual work aids, nor were they intended to do so.
Insights that could lead to such development are most likely to come from
studies designed for that purpose, and this probably means studies that
relate specific activities to personal and organizational goals and that at-
tempt to determine how well the activities serve those goals.  One general

conclusion that all of these studies support is that interpersonal communica-
tion is a major component of most white-collar jobs, so it would seem to
follow that a major opportunity for performance enhancement should lie in
the development of more effective aids to that communication.Human factors researchers can also contribute to the design, implemen-tation, and evaluation of new aids for intellectual work.  They bring to the

process an iterative design philosophy and a unique focus on usersÕ needs
that has proved to be important in the development of systems whose ulti-
mate characteristics were impossible to specify in detail in advance.Some evaluation studies must focus on people in actual work settings,as opposed to laboratory simulations of these settings.  Studies should also
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHfocus on the effects of technological aids on both individuals and organiza-tions.  There is a need to determine the extent to which changes in indi-

vidual productivity translate into similar changes at organizational levels,
and there is a need too to ensure that productivity gains at an organizational
level are not realized at the cost of individual job satisfaction.  Acquiring

reliable information on the long-term effects of the use of specific techno-
logical aids to intellectual tasks in the workplace, especially those intended
to facilitate group work, is likely to require studies of considerably longer
duration than those that are typically conducted (Cool et al., 1992).When a work activity that has been performed one way is suddenlyperformed in a very different way because new technology was introduced,
this can have important but quite subtle effects.  Malone (1983), for ex-

ample, has shown that the arrangement of papers on peopleÕs desks canserve to remind them of what has to be done and in what priority.  When the
desktop is replaced by an electronic file and a video monitor, the traditional
cues are lost, and if the system has not been designed to provide an effec-
tive substitute for them, work may suffer.  One human factors challenge

associated with the design of intellectual work aids is to identify nonobvious
but important aspects of current ways of performing tasks for which some
provision should be made in an electronic aid.For some time, there has been compelling evidence that diagnostic judgmentsbased on actuarial data are, in many contexts, typically more accurate than
judgments made by human diagnosticians without the aid of the actuarial
data (Dawes et al., 1989).  A number of decision aiding systems have been

developed that exploit this fact, but the diagnosticians have generally re-
sisted using them.  Although many reasons have been hypothesized for the

reluctance of experts to use these aids, the situation is still not well under-
stood, and the question of how to get diagnosticians and decision makers to
avail themselves of aids that would improve their performance is a continu-
ing challenge.Successful development and use of new tools to help people performintellectually demanding work will require collaboration among scientists
and engineers from several disciplines.  Human factors researchers have a

critical role to play in this effort.  We believe that they can and should take

the initiative in identifying tasks whose performance could be enhanced
through appropriately designed aids and that human factors researchers have
much to contribute to both the design and the evaluation of these aids.  The

need for interdisciplinary collaboration is itself a challenge, however, to all
the disciplines involved and may require the human factors community to
broaden its conceptualization of what constitutes legitimate research.  In

particular, human factors researchers must be willing, at least in some in-
stances, to take responsibility for initiating and successfully completing
interdisciplinary projects to produce significant aids, with all the burdensEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT57and long-term commitment this entails.  Iterative design with constant on-
going evaluation involving intended users of an aid is an approach that the
human factors community has advocated and with which it has had some
success.CONCLUSIONThis summary report identifies important areas of need and opportunityfor human factors research during the next few decades.  It is the committeeÕshope that this volume will be of use both to sponsors of human factors
research and to people who do human factors research.The committee has not attempted to lay out a research agenda.  It
recognizes that the priorities of different research-sponsoring agencies will
differ depending on the agenciesÕ specific missions and goals and that indi-
vidual scientists and scientists-in-training will be drawn to different prob-
lem areas depending both on funding opportunities and on personal inter-
ests, knowledge, and expertise.  We believe, however, that there are many

opportunities for human factors research to address important national and
global problems, some of which have not been the focus of such research in
the past.  This report and the papers in Part II indicate what, in the committeeÕsview, some of those opportunities are.REFERENCESAllred, K.D., and T.W. Smith1989The hardy personality:  cognitive and physiological responses to evaluative threat.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 56:257-266.
Attewell, P.1994Information technology and the productivity paradox.  Pp. 13-53 in D.H. Harris,
ed., Organizational Linkages:  Understanding the Productivity Paradox
.  Panel on
Organizational Linkages, Committee on Human Factors, National Research Coun-cil.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Baddeley, A.D.1972Selective attention and performance in dangerous environments.  
British Journalof Psychology 63:537-546.
Baker, L.A., A.T. Herlihy, P.R. Kaufmann, and J.M. Eilers1991Acidic lakes and streams in the United States:  the role of acidic deposition.
Science 252:1151-1154.
Ball, K., and C. Owsley1992The useful field of view:  a new technique for evaluating age-related declines in
visual function.  Journal of the American Optometric Association 63:71-79.
Baron, S., D.S. Kruser, and B.M. Huey, eds.1990Quantitative Modeling of Human Performance in Complex, Dynamic Systems.  Panelon Human Performance Modeling, Committee on Human Factors, National Re-
search Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHBaum, A., and J.E. Singer, eds.1981Conservation:  Psychological Perspectives
, Vol. 3.  Advances in EnvironmentalPsychology series.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Belkin, N.J., and W.B. Croft1987Retrieval techniques.  Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 22:109-145.Bell, D.1973The Coming of the Post-Industrial Society.  New York:  Basic Books.
Blair, D.C.1984The management of information:  basic distinctions.  
Sloan Management Review26(1):13-23.Bogner, S.1991Human factors and medicine.  P. 682 in 
Proceedings of the Human Factors Society35th Annual Meeting.  Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
Bowe, F.G.1984Personal Computers and Special Needs.  Berkeley, Calif.:  Sybex Computer Books.Brodner, P.1986Skill-based manufacturing vs 
ÒUnmanned FactoryÓ:  which is superior?  
Interna-tional Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 1:145-153.
Brooks, H.M., P.J. Daniels, and N.J. Belkin1986Research on information interaction and intelligent information provision mecha-
nisms.  Journal of Information Science:  Principles and Practice
 12(1):37-44.
Bureau of the Census1987Statistical Abstract of the United States.  Bureau of the Census.  Washington,
D.C.:  U.S. Department of Commerce.
1989Statistical Abstract of the United States
.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of
Commerce.Bureau of Labor Statistics1988aComparative Real Gross Domestic Product, Real GDP per Capita, and Real GDPper Employed Person, Thirteen Countries, 1950-1987.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S.
Department of Labor.1988bInternational Comparisons of Manufacturing Productivity and Labor Cost Trends.Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of Labor.
Burg, A.1967The Relationship Between Vision Test Scores and Driving Record:  General Find-
ings.  Department of Engineering Report No. 67-24.  Los Angeles, Calif.:  Univer-
sity of California.1968The Relationship Between Vision Test Scores and Driving Record:  Additional
Findings.  Department of Engineering Report No. 68-27.  Los Angeles, Calif.:
University of California.1971Vision and driving:  a report on research.  
Human Factors 13(1):79-87.
Card, S.K.1982User perceptual mechanisms in search of computer command menus.  Pp. 190-196
in CHI Õ82 Conference on Human Factors in Computer Science.  New York:
Association for Computing Machinery.Card, S.K., J.M. Robert, and L.N. Keenan1984On-line composition of text.  Pp. 231-236 in 
Proceedings of InteractÕ84, FirstIFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1.  London, England:  ElsevierNorth Holland.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT59Card, S.K., J.D. Mackinlay, and G.G. Robertson1990The design space of input devices.  Pp. 117-124 in 
CHI Proceedings.  New York:
Association for Computing Machinery.Carlisle, J.H.1975A Tutorial for Use of the TENEX Electronic Notebook-Conference (TEN-C) Sys-
tem on the ARPANET.  Report No. ISI/RR-75-38.  Arlington, Va.:  Defense

Advanced Research Projects Agency.Chen, H., and V. Dhar1991Cognitive process as a basic for intelligent retrieval systems design.  
InformationProcessing and Management 27(5):405-432.
Clarkson, M.A.1991An easier interface.  
BYTE February:277-282.
Coach, J.V., T. Garber, and L. Karpus1979Response maintenance and paper recycling.  
Journal of Environmental Systems8:127-137.Cohen, S.1978Environmental load and the allocation of attention.  Pp. 1-29 in A. Baum, J.E.
Singer, and S. Vallins, eds., Advances in Environmental Psychology.  Hillsdale,
N.J.:  Erlbaum.
1980Aftereffects of stress on human performance and social behavior:  a review of
research and theory.  Psychological Bulletin 88:82-108.
Cohen, S., and S. Spacapan1978The aftereffects of stress:  an attentional interpretation.  
Environmental Psychol-ogy and Nonverbal Behavior 3:43-57.
Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce1990AmericaÕs Choice:  High Skills or Low Wages
.  Rochester, N.Y.:  National Center
on Education and the Economy.Commission on Workforce Quality and Labor Market Efficiency1989Investing in People:  A Strategy to Address America
Õs Workforce Quality.  Wash-
ington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of Labor.
Committee on Human Factors1983Research Needs for Human Factors.  National Research Council.  Washington,
D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Cone, J.D., and S.C. Hayes1980Environmental Problems/Behavioral Solutions.  Monterey, Calif.:  Brooks/Cole
Publishing.Cool, C., R.S. Fish, R.E. Kraut, and C.M. Lowery1992Iterative design of video communication systems.  Pp. 25-32 in J. Turner and R.
Kraut, eds., Proceedings of the Conference on Computer-Supported CooperativeWork.  New York:  ACM Press.
Croft, W.B., and R.H. Thompson1987I
3R:  a new approach to the design of document retrieval systems.  
Journal of theAmerican Society for Information Science 36(6):389-404.
Crossen, P.R., and N.J. Rosenberg1989Strategies for agriculture.  
Scientific American 261(3):128-135.
Davis, J.H., T. Kameda, and M.F. Stasson1992Group risk taking:  selected topics.  Pp. 163-199 in J.F. Yates, ed., 
Risk-TakingBehavior.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Dawes, R.M., D. Faust, and P.E. Meehl1989Clinical versus actuarial judgment.  
Science 243:1668-1673.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHDe Greene, K.B.1991Emergent complexity and person-machine systems.  
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies 35(2):219-234.
Druckman, D., and R. Bjork, eds.1991In the MindÕs Eye:  Enhancing Human Performance
.  Committee on Techniques
for the Enhancement of Human Performance, National Research Council.  Wash-

ington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Druckman, D., and J.A. Swets, eds.1988Enhancing Human Performance:  Issues, Theories, and Techniques
.  Committee
on Techniques for the Enhancement of Human Performance, National ResearchCouncil.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Durding, B.M., C.A. Becker, and J.D. Gould1977Data organization.  
Human Factors 19:1-14.
Durlach, N.I., and A.S. Mavor, eds.1995Virtual Reality:  Scientific and Technological Challenges
.  Committee on Virtual
Reality Research and Development, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:National Academy Press.Elkind, J.I.1990The incidence of disabilities in the United States.  
Human Factors 32:397-405.
Fisher, D.L., E.J. Yungkurth, and S.M. Moss1990Optimal menu hierarchy design:  syntax and semantics.  
Human Factors 32:665-
683.Gagnon, M., C. Sicard, and J.P. Sirois1986Evaluation of forces on the lumbo-sacral joint and assessment of work and energy
transfers in nursing aides lifting patients.  Ergonomics 29:407-421.
Geller, E.S.1986Prevention of environmental problems.  Pp. 361-383 in 
Handbook of Prevention
.New York:  Plenum.
Geller, E.S., R.R. Winett, and P.B. Everett1982Preserving the Environment:  New Strategies for Behavior Change
.  Elmsford,
N.Y.:  Pergamon Press.
Giroux, L., and R. Belleau1986What
Õs on the menu?  The influence of menu content on the selection process.
Behavior and Information Technology 5:169-172.
Goldstein, I.L.1988Tomorrow
Õs workforce today.  Industry Week 41-43.
1992Training in Organizations:  Needs Assessment, Development, and Evaluation
, 3rded.  Pacific Grove, Calif.:  Brooks/Cole.
Goodman, P.S.1979Assessing Organizational Change:  The Rushton Quality of Work Experiment
.New York:  John Wiley & Sons.
Goodman, P.S., and T.L. Griffith1991Process approach to implementation of new technology.  
Journal of Engineeringand Technology Management 8:161-185.
Goodman, P.S., R. Devadas, and T.L. Griffith1988Groups and productivity:  analyzing the effectiveness of self-managing teams.  Pp.
295-327 in J.P. Campbell and R.J. Campbell, eds., Productivity in Organizations.San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Gould, J.D.1980Experiments on composing letters:  some facts, some myths, and some observa-
tions.  Pp. 97-118 in L. Gregg and E.R. Steinberg, eds., 
Cognitive Processes inWriting.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum and Associates.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT611982Writing and speaking letters and messages.  
International Journal of Man-Ma-chine Studies  16:147-171.
Gould, J.D., and S.J. Boies1983Human factors challenges in creating a principal support office system:  the speech
filing system approach.  ACM Transactions of Office Information Systems 4(1):273-298.Gould, J.D., J.P. Ukelson, and S.J. Boies1993Improving application development productivity by using ITS.  International Journalof Man-Machine Studies 39:113-146.  Also available as 
IBM Research Report,1991, RC-17496.Gray, C.L., Jr., and J.A. Alson1989The case for methonal.  
Scientific American 261(5):108-114.
Guzzo, R.A.1988Productivity research:  reviewing psychological and economic perspectives.  Pp.
63-82 in J.P. Campbell and R.J. Campbell, eds., Productivity in Organizations.San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Hackman, J.R., ed.1990Groups That Work (and Those That DonÕt):  Creating Conditions for Teamwork
.San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Hamilton, P., and D. Warburton, eds.1979Human Stress and Cognition.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Harris, D.H.1980Visual detection of driving while intoxicated.  
Human Factors 22(6):725-732.
Harter, S.P., and A.R. Peters1985Heuristics for online information retrieval:  a typology and preliminary listing.
Online Review 9(5):407-424.
Hawkins, F.1988Human Factors in Flight.  Brookfield, Vt.:  Gower.
Heart, F.1975The ARPANET network.  In R.L. Grimsdale and F.F. Kuo, eds., 
Computer Com-munication Networks:  1973 Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study Institute
.Leyden, Netherlands:  Noordhoff International Publishing.
Heart, F., A. McKenzie, J. McQuillan, and D. Walden1978ARPANET Completion Report.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Bolt Beranek and Newman
Inc.Helmreich, R.L.1992Human factors aspects of the Air Ontario crash at Dryden, Ontario.  In V.P.
Moshansky, ed., Commission of Inquiry into the Air Ontario Accident at Dryden,
Ontario:  Final Report
.  Ottawa, Canada:  Minister of Supply and Services.
Hockey, G.R.J., ed.1983Stress and Fatigue in Human Performance.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
1986Changes in operator efficiency.  In K. Boff, L. Kaufman, and J. Thomas, eds.,
Handbook of Perception and Performance, Vol. II.  New York:  Wiley.
Hockey, R., and P. Hamilton1983The cognitive patterning of stress states.  Pp. 331-362 in G.R.J. Hockey, ed.,
Stress and Fatigue in Human Performance.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Hockey, G.R.J., A.W.K. Gaillard, and M.G.H. Coles, eds.1986Energetics and Human Information Processing.  Dordrecht, Netherlands:  MartinusNijhoff.Holahan, C.1986Environmental psychology.  
Annual Review of Psychology 37:381-407.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHHoughton, R.A., and G.M. Woodwell1989Global climatic change.  
Scientific American 260(4):36-44.
Human-Computer Interaction, special 1992 issue.Interacting with Computers, special 1992 issue.Jensen, C.R., and L.A. Anderson1987Comparing three dimensional representation of data to scatterplots.  Pp. 1174-
1178 in Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Human Factors Society.Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
Johnson, C.A., and J.L. Keltner1983Incidence of visual field loss and its relation to driving performance.  
Archives ofOphthalmology 101:371-375.
Johnston, W., and A. Packer1987Workforce 2000:  Work and Workers for the 21st Century
.  Indianapolis, Ind.:
Hudson Institute.Jones, S.G.1993Human factors in incident reporting.  Pp. 567-572 in 
Proceedings of the SeventhInternational Symposium on Aviation Psychology.  Columbus:  Ohio State Univer-
sity.Keinan, G.1987Decision making under stress:  scanning of alternatives under controllable and
uncontrollable threats.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 52:639-644.
Kellso, J.R.1989CIM in action:  microelectronics, manufacturer charts course towards true systems
integration.  Industrial Engineering 21:18-22.
Kelly, R.T., J.R. Callan, T.A. Kozlowski, and E. Menngola1990Human Factors in Self-Monitoring of Blood Glucose.  Task 4 Final Report. FDA/
CDRH-90/60.  Springfield, Va.:  NTIS.
Kerr, E.B., and S.R. Hiltz1982Computer-Mediated Communication Systems:  Status and Evaluation
.  New York:
Academic Press.Khalil, T.M., E. Abdel-Moty, and T.M. Asfour1990Ergonomics in the management of occupational injuries.  Pp. 41-53 in B.M. Pulat
and D.C. Alexander, eds., Industrial Ergonomics:  Case Studies
. Norcross, Ga.:Industrial Engineering and Management Press.Kiger, J.L.1984The depth/breadth trade-off in the design of menu-driven user interfaces.  
Interna-tional Journal of Man-Machine Studies 20:201-213.
Klemmer, E.T., and F.W. Snyder1972Measurement of time spent communicating.  
Journal of Communication 22:148-
158.Knights, D., H. Wilmott, and D. Collinson1985Job Redesign:  Critical Perspectives on the Labor Process.  Brookfield, Vt.:  GowerPublishers.Kobasa, S.C.1979Stressful life events, personality, and health:  an inquiry into hardiness.  
Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology 37:1-11.
Koenig, M.E.D.1990Information services and downstream productivity.  
Annual Review of InformationScience and Technology 25:55-86.
Kornhauser, A.1965The Mental Health of the Industrial Worker.  New York:  Wiley.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT63Kraus, L.E., and S. Stoddard1989Chart Book on Disability in the United States:  An InfoUse Report
.  National
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. De-

partment of Education.Kraut, R.E.1987Technology and the Transformation of White Collar Work.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  LawrenceErlbaum Associates.Kraut, R.E., S. Dumais, and S. Koch1989Computerization, productivity, and quality of work-life. 
Communications of theACM 32(2):220-238.
Kraut, R.E., and L.A. Streeter1995Coordination in software development.  
Communications of the ACM 38(3):69-81.
Kuo W., and J.P. Hsu1990Update:  simultaneous engineering design in Japan.  
Industrial Engineering 22:23-
28.Landauer, T., D. Egan, J. Remde, M. Lesk, C. Lochbaum, and D. Ketchum1993Enhancing the usability of text through computer delivery and formative evalua-
tion:  the SuperBook project.  In C.M. McKnight, A. Dillon, and J. Richardson,

eds., Hypertext:  A Psychological Perspective
.  New York:  Horwood.
la Riviere, J.W.M.1989Threats to the world
Õs water.  Scientific American 261(3):80-94.
Latham, G.1988Human resource training and development.  
Annual Review of Psychology 39:545-
582.Levi, L.1990Occupational stress:  spice of life or kiss of death?  
American Psychologist 45:1142-1145.Liu, Y., and C.D. Wickens1992Visual scanning with or without spatial uncertainty and divided and selective at-
tention.  Acta Psychologica 79:131-153.
Locke, E.A., and G.P. Latham1990A Task Theory of Goal Setting and Task Performance, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:Prentice Hall.MacDuffie, J.P., and J.F. Krafcik1990Integrating Technology and Human Resources for High Performance Manufactur-
ing:  Evidence from the International Auto Industry.  Paper presented at the Trans-
forming Organizations Conference, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Bos-ton.Mackinlay, J.D., G.G. Robertson, and S.K. Card1991The perspective wall:  detail and context smoothly integrated.  Pp. 173-179 in S.P.
Robertson, G.M. Olson, and J.S. Olson, eds., Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems:  Reaching Through Technology
. CHI Õ91.  New York:  Association for
Computing Machinery.Makhoul, J., F. Jelinek, L. Rabiner, C. Weinstein, and V. Zue1990Spoken language systems.  
Annual Review of Computer Science 4:481-501.
Malone, T.W.1983How do people organize their desks:  implications for designing office automation
systems.  ACM Transactions on Office Automation Systems 1:99-112.
Manuso, J.1983The Equitable Life Assurance Society program.  
Preventive Medicine 12:658-662.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHMcDonald, W.I.1984Q
uality control of home monitoring of blood glucose concentrations.  British MedicalJournal 288:1915.
Merwin, D.H., and C.D. Wickens1991Comparison of 2D planar and 3D perspective display formats in multidimensional
data visualization.  Proceedings of the International Society for Optical Engineer-ing.  Bellingham, Wash.:  SPIE.
Miller, D.P.1981The depth/breadth tradeoff in hierarchical computer menus.  Pp. 296-300 in 
Pro-ceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Human Factors Society.  Santa Monica,Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
Mintzberg, H.1973The Nature of Managerial Work.  New York:  Harper and Row.
Mohnen, V.A.1988The challenge of acid rain.  
Scientific American 259(2):30-38.
Moss, J.P., and D.E. Delawter1986Self-monitoring of blood glucose.  
American Family Physician 33:225-228.
Muckler, F.A.1987The human-computer interface:  the past 35 years and the next 35 years.  In G.
Salvendy, ed., Cognitive Engineering in the Design of Human-Computer Interac-tion and Expert Systems, Proceedings of the Second International Conference onHuman-Computer Interaction, Honolulu, Hawaii.  Amsterdam, Netherlands:  Elsevier.Myers, N.1989Deforestation Rates in Tropical Forests and Their Climatic Implications
.  London,
England:  Friends of the Earth.
National Academy of Engineering/National Research Council1991People and Technology in the Workplace.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy
Press.National Commission on Employment Policy1986Computers in the Workplace:  Selected Issues
.  Washington, D.C.:  National Com-
mission on Employment Policy.National Commission on Excellence in Education1983A Nation at Risk:  The Imperative for Educational Reform
.  Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office.National Council on Education Standards and Testing1992Raising Standards for American Education.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Government
Printing Office.National Research Council1977Drinking Water and Health.  Safe Drinking Water Committee, Commission on
Life Sciences.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy of Sciences.
1983Changing Climate:  Report of the Carbon Dioxide Assessment Committee
.  Wash-
ington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
1986Human Resource Practices for Implementing Advanced Manufacturing Technol-ogy.  Manufacturing Studies Board.  Washington D.C.:  National Academy Press.
1990The Improvement of Tropical and Subtropical Rangelands.  Board on Science and
Technology for International Development, Office of International Affairs.  Wash-
ington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
1991Rethinking the Ozone Problem in Urban and Regional Air Pollution.  Committee
on Tropospheric Ozone Formation and Measurement, Board on EnvironmentalSciences and Toxicology.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
1993National Collaboratories:  Applying Information Technology for Scientific Re-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT65search.  Committee on a National Collaboratory:  Establishing the User-Developer
Partnership, Computer Science and Telecommunications Board.  Washington, D.C.:National Academy Press.Newby, G.B.1992An Investigation of the Role of Navigation for Information Retrieval.  ASIS Meet-
ing.Newell, G.R., and V.G. Vogel1988Personal risk factors:  what do they mean?  
Cancer 62:1695-1701.
Norman, K.1991The Psychology of Menu Selection.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Office of Technology Assessment1988Urban Ozone and the Clean Air Act:  Problems and Proposals for Change
.  Wash-
ington, D.C.:  U.S. Government Printing Office.
1990Worker Training:  Competing in the
 New International Economy.  Washington,
D.C.:  U.S. Government Printing Office.
Olson, J.S., G.M. Olson, M. Storrosten, and M. Carter1992How a group-editor changes the character of a design meeting as well as its
outcome.  Pp. 91-98 in J. Turner and R. Kraut, eds., 
Proceedings of the Confer-ence on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work.  New York:  ACM Press.
OÕMalley, K.G., and K.G. Ricca1990Optimization of a PACS display workstation for diagnostic reading.  Pp. 940-946
in Medical Imaging IV:  PACS System Design and Evaluation
.  Proceedings of
SPIE, the International Society for Optical Engineering in cooperation with theAmerican Association of Physicists in Medicine, Vol. 1234. Bellingham, Wash.:
SPIE.Panko, R.R.1992Managerial communication patterns.  
Journal of Organizational Computing 2(1):95-122.Parkes, K.R.1986Coping in stressful episodes:  the role of individual differences, environmental
factors, and situational characteristics.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-ogy 51:1277-1292.
Pickett, R.M., and T.J. Triggs, eds.1974Human Factors in Health Care.  Lexington, Mass.:  D.C. Heath.
Piore, M., and C. Sabel1984The Second Industrial Divide. New York:  Basic Books.
Pool, R.1993Beyond databases and e-mail.  
Science 261(August 13):841-843.
Postel, S.1985Thirsty in a water-rich world.  
International Wildlife 15(6):32-37.
Reason, J.1990Human Error.  New York:  Cambridge University Press.
Repetto, R.1990Deforestation in the tropics.  
Scientific American 262(4):36-42.
Roske-Hofstrand, R.J., and K.R. Paap1986Cognitive networks as a guide to menu organization:  an application in the auto-
mated cockpit.  Ergonomics 29(11):1301-1311.
Rosomoff, H.L., C. Green, M. Silbert, and R. Steele1981Pain and low back rehabilitation program at the University of Miami School of
Medicine.  In K.Y. Lorenzo, ed., 
New Approaches to Treatment of Chronic Pain.NIDA Research Monograph 36. Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHRussell, J.A., and L.M. Ward1982Environmental psychology.  
Annual Review of Psychology 33:651-688.
Saegert, S., and G.H. Winkel1990Environmental psychology.  
Annual Review of Psychology 41:441-477.
Salvaggio, J.L.1989The Information Society:  Economic, Social, and Structural Issues
.  Hillsdale,
N.J.:  Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sanderson, P.M.1989The human planning and scheduling role in advanced manufacturing systems:  an
emerging human factors domain.  Human Factors 31(6):635-666.
Schlesinger, W.H., J.F. Reynolds, G.L. Cunningham, L.F. Huenneke, W.M. Gerrell, R.A. Vir-ginia, and W.G. Whitford1990Biological feedbacks in global desertification.  
Science 247:1043-1048.
Schwartz, S.E.1989Acid deposition:  unraveling a regional phenomenon.  
Science 243:753-763.
Seidler, K.S., and C.D. Wickens1992Distance and organization in multifunction displays.  
Human Factors 34:555-569.
Selye, H.1956The Stress of Life.  New York:  McGraw-Hill.
Senders, J., and N. Moray, eds.1991Human Error:  Cause, Prediction, and Reduction
.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Shneiderman, B.1987Designing the User Interface:  Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interac-
tion.  Reading, Mass.:  Addison-Wesley.
Smith, M.J.1987Occupational stress.  Pp. 844-860 in G. Salvendy, ed., 
Handbook of Human Fac-tors.  New York:  Wiley.
Snowberry, K., S.R. Parkinson, and N. Sisson1983Computer display menus.  
Ergonomics 26(7):699-712.
Soule, M.E.1991Conservation:  tactics for a constant crisis.  
Science 253:744-750.
Sproull, L., and S. Kiesler1991Computers, networks and work.  
Scientific American 265(3):116-123.
Steinhart, P.1990No net loss.  
Audubon July:18-21.
Stern, P.C.1992Psychological dimensions of global environmental change.  
Annual Review of Psy-chology 43:269-302.
Stern, P.C., O.R. Young, and D. Druckman, eds.1992Global Environmental Change:  Understanding the Human Dimensions
.  Commit-
tee on the Human Dimensions of Global Change, National Research Council.
Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Stolarski, R.S.1988The Antarctic ozone hole.  
Scientific American 258(1):30-36.
Stolarski, R.S., R. Bojkov, L. Bishop, C. Zerefos, J. Staehelin, and J. Zawodny1992Measured trends in stratospheric ozone.  
Science 256:342-349.
Strassman, P.A.1985Information Payoff:  The Transformation of Workers in the Electronic Age
.  New
York:  Free Press.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY REPORT67Stubbs, D.A., P.W. Buckle, M.P. Hudson, and P.M. Rivers1983Back pain in the nursing profession, II.  The effectiveness of training.  
Ergonomics26:767-779.Swanson, G.M.1988Cancer prevention in the workplace and natural environment:  a review of etiol-
ogy, research design, and methods of risk reduction.  Cancer 62:1725-1746.
Swets, J.A.1988Measuring the accuracy of diagnostic systems.  
Science 240:1285-1293.
Swets, J.A., R.M. Pickett, S.F. Whitehead, D.J. Getty, J.B. Schnur, J.B. Swets, and B.A.
Freeman1979Assessment of diagnostic technologies.  
Science 205:753-759.
Tannenbaum, S., and G. Yukl1991Training and development in work organizations. 
Annual Review of Psychology41:399-441.Turner, J., and R. Kraut, eds.1992Proceedings of the Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work.  New
York:  ACM Press.
Vachon, R.A.1990Employing the disabled.  
Issues in Science and Technology 6(2):44-50.
Vanderheiden, G.C.1990Thirty-something million:  should they be exceptions?  
Human Factors 32:383-
396.Vigil, P.1985Computer literacy and the two cultures revisited.  Pp. 240-242 in C.A. Parkhurst,
ed., Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science (ASIS) 48thAnnual Meeting.  White Plains, N.Y.:  Knowledge Industry Publications Inc.
Vincente, K.J., and R.C. Williges1988Accommodating individual differences in searching a hierarchical file system.  
In-ternational Journal of Man-Machine Studies 29:647-668.
Walker, C., and R. Guest1952Man on the Assembly Line.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press.
Wallace, D.R.1985Wetlands in America:  labyrinth and temple.  
Wilderness 49:12-27.
Weischedel, R., J. Carbonell, B. Grosz, W. Lehnert, M. Marcus, R. Perrault, and R. Wilensky1990Natural language processing.  
Annual Review of Computer Science 4:435-452.
Wexley, K.1984Personnel training.  
Annual Review of Psychology 31:519-551.
Wickens, C.D.1992Engineering Psychology and Human Performance, 2nd. ed.  New York:  Harper
Collins.William T. Grant Foundation1988The Forgotten Half, Pathways to Success for AmericaÕs Youth and Young Fami-lies.  Commission on Work, Family, and Citizenship.  Washington, D.C.:  William
T. Grant Foundation.Williams, G.M.1991Causes and prevention of cancer.  
Statistical Bulletin of Metropolitan InsuranceCompanies 72:6-10.
Wilson, E.O.1989Threats to biodiversity.  
Scientific American 261(3):108-116.
Wulf, W.1993The collaboratory opportunity.  
Science 261(August 13):854-855.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHYates, J.F.1990Judgment and Decision Making.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:  Prentice Hall.
Zuboff, S.1988In the Age of the Smart Machine:  The Future of Work and Power
.  New York:
Basic Books.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.69PART II
Background PapersEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.711Productivity in Organizations
Paul S. Goodman and Douglas H. HarrisINTRODUCTIONThis chapter identifies specific opportunities for research on productiv-ity in organizations in the following four areas:  implementation of effective
change within the organization; integration of individual productivity into
organizational productivity; congruence of technology, people, and organi-
zations; and integration of the enterprise.  Our focus is on new research to

be conducted by human factors specialists.  We also recognize the need for

coordination and cooperation with researchers in other disciplines who are
involved in addressing issues in organizational productivity.  Consequently,

this chapter is for all researchers interested in gaining a better understand-
ing of productivity in organizations.  We believe it is also relevant to policy

makers and research planners with needs and interests in this area.The Problem AreaAn enterprise consists of technology and people organized to accom-plish some purpose.  The success of an enterprise can be assessed on the

basis of its output and/or the processes and inputs that produce this output.
Productivity, in general terms, is the ratio of the output of the enterprise to
the inputs.  We consider both total factor productivity and labor productiv-

ity (see Mahoney, 1988, for a more intensive discussion of productivity).
In some of the research we review in this chapter, the criterion variable isEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHperformance, not productivity.  Other measures, such as quality, timeliness,
and profitability, will also be considered in this analysis.  To simplify the

exposition, however, we will focus primarily on productivity.The important questions we must now answer are the following:  How
do we identify the major conditions and processes that cause variation in
organizational productivity?  How do we address these factors to increase

organizational productivity?The main focus of human factors research has been on improving indi-vidual task performance.  Researchers have obtained measures of individual

performance, such as speed, accuracy, and time needed to learn, and have
used these to estimate individual productivity.  In some cases they have

measured productivity directly.  The implicit or explicit assumption under-

lying these efforts has been that increased individual productivity will in-
crease organizational productivity.  However, very little research evidence

is available to support this assumption.  Improvements in individual produc-
tivity may not add up to improvements in organizational productivity be-
cause a variety of variables may moderate the effects of the individual
improvements and because the various productivity increases that occur on
an individual level can interact in a complex way.We need to understand the factors that drive organizational productiv-ity.  If the human factors researcher intervenes at the individual or group

level to increase productivity, we need to learn whether these changes affect
productivity at the organizational level.  If researchers intervene at the or-

ganizational level with new technology, decision-making aids, training, and
so on, we still must identify the conditions under which these changes lead
to improvements in organizational productivity.The Importance of Research on ProductivityWe live in an increasingly competitive global economy.  The ability of
companies and countries to enhance the productivity of their resources is
critical for remaining competitive in this environment and, on a national
level, for enhancing the standard of living.The United States has been introducing advanced technologies to en-hance productivity and, hence, our competitive position (National Academy
of Engineering and National Research Council, 1991; National Research
Council, 1986).  The returns from some of these investments, however,

appear to be relatively small.  For example, the data-processing budgets for

corporations in the United States have reportedly been increasing about 12
percent per year.  Productivity increases, however, have been averaging no

more than 2 percent per year (Weiner and Brown, 1989).  Other investiga-

tions of the impact of information technology on productivity have failed toEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRODUCTIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONS73find any increase at all from the more than $100 billion per year that isspent on hardware, software, and computer services (Attewell, 1994).Enhancing productivity is clearly a major national challenge.  As com-
petition increases in the global economy, we need to find new ways to
improve organizational productivity.  The role of researchers is to under-

stand more about the inhibitors and facilitators of organizational productiv-
ity.  As we develop new knowledge in this area, we will be better able to

link new innovations, technologies, organizational structures, and capital to
enhance organizational productivity.We begin our discussion with a review of past research on organiza-tional productivity.  We then describe the 4 areas that need further research

and identify 15 research opportunities within these areas.A STRATEGY FOR IDENTIFYINGRESEARCH OPPORTUNITIESThe purpose of this section is to give the reader a selective review ofproductivity research in organizations.  We draw primarily from the behav-

ioral science literatures (e.g., human factors, industrial psychology, organi-
zational psychology).  Research that has been generated from the fields of

economics and technology are outside this review.  We have also omitted

the methodological issues of productivity measurement and analysis (see
Mahoney, 1988, for a discussion of these issues).Studies of Individuals and GroupsThe bulk of the research completed by industrial/organizational psy-chologists and human factors specialists has focused on interventions de-
signed to increase individual performance or productivity (Campbell et al.,
1988; Pritchard, 1991).  Examples of interventions include training, mea-

surement and feedback of performance, goal setting, work design, and hu-
man-equipment interface design.  Guzzo (1988) assessed what we know

from psychological research about productivity and its improvement and
identified training as the most powerful way to increase individual produc-
tivity.  He further stated that the effect of training was strongest on output

measures of productivity.  Locke and Latham (1990) have provided some

convincing evidence of the positive effects of goal setting on individual
performance.  Research (Guzzo, 1988) has indicated that changes in work

design have improved individual productivity.  What we do not know, how-

ever, is whether or not these individual increases are linked to productivity
increases of the organization.Human factors specialists and industrial engineers have reported nu-merous instances in which the application of appropriate behavioral prin-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHciples to the design of workplaces and human-equipment interfaces resultedin increases in individual productivity.  For example, Harris (1984), in his

presidential address to the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, de-
scribed 30 human factors projects, many of which involved increases in
individual productivity in organizations.  Examples included  production of

microelectronic devices, maintenance of army tanks, investigation of crimi-
nal activity, purification of water, on-the-road detection of drunk drivers,
and military mission planning.  In most cases, however, there was no at-

tempt to study whether the positive effects of these increases in individual
productivity affected group or organizational productivity.Over the last decade, there has been a renewed research interest ingroups.  Particular attention has been paid to the role of autonomous or self-
managing groups.  The findings emerging from this research (Goodman et

al., 1988; Hackman, 1990) are that self-managing teams can increase pro-
ductivity, quality, and worker satisfaction.  However, most of this research

has not conceptually or empirically considered whether increases in group
or team productivity produce increases in organizational productivity.Studies of Systems and OrganizationsAnother source of studies on productivity in organizations comes fromresearchers interested in how the interaction of environment, technology,
organization, and people variables affects organizational productivity (Lawrence
and Lorsch, 1969; Scott, 1987; Thompson, 1967).  Socio-technical analysis

(Trist et al., 1963) provided the early intellectual underpinnings of this
work.One study (MacDuffie and Krafcik, 1990) sought to explain productiv-ity differences in a worldwide sample of automobile assembly plants.  The

critical findings of this study were that the plants with the highest level of
automation were not the most productive.  The most productive plants intro-
duced congruent organizational changes as well as technological changes.
In general, congruency refers to the fit between the type of technology,
specified in this case by levels of interdependence, and the nature of the
organizational arrangements, specified by the flexibility in organizational
arrangements.  Better fit means higher scores in productivity or effective-

ness.Studies in the shipping industry (Walton, 1987) and coal industry (Goodman,1979) also show that high organizational productivity is associated with
congruency among innovation in technology, organizational arrangements,
and people factors.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRODUCTIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONS75The Gaps in What We KnowWe know something about how to increase individual and group pro-ductivity.  However, there is no compelling research evidence that these

changes lead to changes in organizational productivity.  We also know that

congruency among technological, organizational, and people factors can
contribute to organizational productivity.Yet we do not know how changes at the organizational level are relatedto changes in individual or group productivity.  Also, the systems perspec-

tive does not inform us ahead of time how conditions of congruency will be
determined.  There are many gaps in our knowledge of how new forms of

technology, new organizational forms, and changes in a competitive envi-
ronment will impact on rates of changes in a organizational productivity.
Although we have made progress in understanding organizational produc-
tivity, we need to address some of these gaps with new theories and new
methods.FOUR RESEARCH OPPORTUNITY AREASWe will outline the research that is needed to define the processes andconditions that will facilitate this transformation.  Our focus, then, is not on

productivity per se, but on how human factors and other organizational
researchers can develop theories and methodologies to understand the link
between changes in individual, group, and organizational productivity.We organize our discussion of research in terms of four opportunityareas.  We describe the problem and rationale for each of these areas, along

with specific research needs.  Throughout this analysis we consider produc-

tivity a multilevel and multidimensional concept.Implementation of Effective Change Within the OrganizationBillions of dollars have been spent introducing new forms of organiza-tional and technological change in organizations (Bikson et al., 1987; Leonard-
Barton, 1988; National Academy of Engineering/National Research Coun-
cil, 1991).  Implementation deals with the process of effectively introducing

changes in organization.  There is a growing body of evidence (Goodman

and Griffith, 1991) to show that many organizational and technological
interventions, which should inherently improve organizational productivity,
are not successfully implemented.  This means the interventions are re-

jected, resisted, only partially accepted, or only temporarily adopted and
then rejected.If technological and organizational interventions have clear objectivesor inherent benefits but cannot be successfully implemented, then they willEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHnot improve individual or organizational productivity.  Indeed, successful
implementation is key to our analysis of organizational productivity.  For

example, we recently studied the introduction of a vision system into a
sophisticated computer-integrated manufacturing environment (Goodman et
al., 1990).  The purpose of this vision system was to enhance quality through
new forms of monitoring.  By most objective measures, the new technology

dominated current technology for monitoring and improving quality.  How-

ever, the vision systems remained basically unused two years after their
introduction.If we cannot establish improvements through successful implementa-tion at the individual, group, or organizational level we cannot expect to see
productivity gains at the organizational level.  Understanding the process of

successful implementation is therefore the starting point in our analysis of
research opportunities.New Research TopicsOver the last decade there has been an increasing body of research onthe process of implementation.  In much of that work, researchers have

examined how technological-, organizational-, and individual-level variables
affect the implementation of new technologies.  They have paid less atten-

tion to identifying underlying explanatory mechanisms.  Thus, there are

frameworks but no well-defined theories.  Despite the large number of pos-

sible predictor variables, there have been few multivariate studies and few
longitudinal designs to capture implementation over time.Research needs include the following:¥Developing better conceptualizations and measures of implementa-
tion success.  Many studies focus on user satisfaction and frequency of use.

There has been little attempt to link individual and organizational dimen-
sions of implementation success.¥Developing more parsimonious theory.  Much of the research has
used a contingency theory approach.  That is, researchers have tried to

identify a contingent set of variables or conditions (e.g., top management
support or participation) under which technologies will be more effectively
implemented and conditions under which implementations will be less ef-
fective.  Because of the large number of variables that might affect imple-

mentation success, such an approach has great limitations.  Recently, there

has been movement toward a process-oriented theory (Goodman and Griffith,
1991).  The key idea is to develop a better understanding of the mechanisms
that lead to successful implementation.¥Assessing the value of alternative forms of training and learning.
Training is an important part of the implementation process.  It is clear that
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRODUCTIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONS77formal classroom training plays an important role in the successful imple-mentation of new technology.  It is also true that other forms of learning,

such as observation, modeling, and apprenticeship, bear on successful imple-
mentation of new technology or organizational arrangements.  We have

little systematic knowledge of how and under what conditions these alterna-
tive forms of learning affect implementation success.¥Studying the effects of alternative forms of commitment.  Partici-
pation is a common prescription in implementing new changes successfully.
However, the empirical evidence on the effectiveness of participation is
quite mixed (Goodman and Griffith, 1991).  Perhaps we should explore

other ways to enhance commitment: for example, fostering recognition of
the inherent benefits of the new technology or a normative consensus about
the new technology.  Alternatively, we could explore the specific mecha-

nisms evoked by different forms of participation and how they bear on
changing levels of commitment.¥Studying adaptation and redesign.  A significant finding (Leonard-
Barton, 1987) in recent implementation studies is the importance of a rede-
sign function.  That is, as a piece of technology is introduced into an orga-

nization, one needs a mechanism to adapt the technology to changing user
needs and organizational contexts.  We know little about how to design

alternative forms of adaptation mechanisms or the effectiveness of these
mechanisms in different contexts.  This is important if we are going to

understand the successful implementation of new technology and organiza-
tional arrangement.Integration of Individual Productivityinto Organizational ProductivityAlthough there has been considerable research on productivity at theindividual, group, and organizational levels, we know little about how changes
in productivity at one level affect changes in productivity at another level.New Research TopicsResearch opportunities for examining the linkages between individualand organizational productivity are relatively unlimited, given the paucity
of studies in this area.  We recommend examining the different types of

linkages to discover whether increases in individual productivity inhibit or
facilitate increases in organizational productivity.Research needs include the following:¥Studying productivity linkages within jobs.  Jobs are bundles of
linked activities.  Most interventions to improve productivity focus on spe-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHcific sets of activities.  There is some evidence that increasing the produc-
tivity of certain sets of activities within a job can reduce the productivity of
other job activities.  For example, Kraut et al. (1989) examined the impact

of a new computerized information system on the productivity of customer
service representatives.  They learned that productivity increased for rou-

tine tasks, but dropped for nonroutine tasks.  So the net increase in produc-

tivity of that job may be close to zero.  Similarly, increases in productivity

in certain job activities can simply create additional slack, which does not
enhance productivity for the total job or for the organization.  Furthermore,

some job activities are central to core production activities, while others
(e.g., recordkeeping) are more peripheral.  Improving productivity in pe-

ripheral activities is less likely to affect organizational productivity.  We do

not understand the linkages between different activities within a job.  When

will productivity changes in certain activities stimulate positive changes in
other activities?  When will the opposite occur?  We also do not understand

when slack will be generated, when slack can have a positive effect on
productivity, and when slack will mitigate any greater effects of productiv-
ity, given increases in certain job activities.¥Studying productivity linkages between jobs or units.  Jobs in orga-
nizations are interdependent in varying degrees.  Most research has focused

on increasing productivity in individual jobs, but not on the consequences
of this productivity for jobs horizontally or vertically linked to them.  There

is some evidence that productivity increases in a particular job may (1)
reduce productivity in other jobs, (2) simply create slack that does not lead
to productivity in other jobs, or (3) encounter constraints in interdependent
jobs that prevent the productivity increases from having an impact on any
other part of the organization.  The situation is analogous to what occurs

among activities within a job.  Thus, increases in productivity in one job

may decrease productivity in other jobs, leading to a net productivity gain
of zero.  The basic research question is, how do changes in one job posi-

tively or negatively affect other linked jobs?  There is a need for a well-

developed theory or research paradigm to help us predict when increases in
productivity in one job would enhance the productivity in a horizontally, or
vertically, linked job.¥Studying linkages and organizational type.  Organizations differ in
the interdependence and complexity of their linkages.  Some organizations,

for example, have pooled interdependence: different departments are fairly
independent, but the products of all these departments need to be pooled
together to achieve an organizational product.  A department store is an

example of pooled interdependence.  Some organizations have other forms

of interdependence:  an assembly line is a form of serial interdependence; a

hospital might illustrate reciprocal interdependence.  Even organizations

with the same type of interdependence may vary in complexity or simply inEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRODUCTIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONS79the number of different linkages.  Linkages between individual, department,
and organizational productivity in pooled interdependence differ from the
linkages in serial or reciprocal interdependence.  For example, because de-

partment store units are relatively independent, increasing productivity in
one unit should contribute fairly directly to increases in organizational pro-
ductivity.  In contrast, the effect of productivity increases in any unit of an

assembly line depends, to a large extent, on what happens in the other
interdependent units and, hence, will condition the impact of that unit on
organizational productivity (see National Research Council, 1994).  We

need to understand how the mechanisms that translate changes in indi-
vidual-level productivity to organizational-level productivity differ by orga-
nizational type.  These comparative organizational analyses should provide

new ideas about and new insights into the relationship between individual
and organizational changes in productivity.  Although we have defined or-

ganizational type in terms of the form of interdependence, other measures
such as size may be relevant.Congruency of Technology, People, and OrganizationsA growing body of literature indicates that the fit or congruency amongtechnological, organizational, and people factors is the key to understanding
differences in organizational productivity (Goodman, 1979; Walton, 1987).
For example, in a study of auto assembly plants, MacDuffie and Krafcik
(1990) observe that the most productive plants, identified as Òlean produc-tion systems,Ó have (1) a technological system characterized by highly in-
terdependent technology, no buffers, a mechanism that immediately stops
the system when downtime occurs, and no repair areas and (2) an organiza-
tional system characterized by fewer job classifications, workers with multi-
job skills, intensive training in problem solving, teams, fewer status barri-
ers, and contingent reward systems.The critical research question is, why does this configuration of techno-logical and organizational arrangements lead to high productivity?  What

does congruency or fit mean?  An increasing number of studies indicate that

fit makes a difference.  However, we need some before-the-fact explana-

tions for what fit among technology, organization, and people factors means.
This becomes particularly important as new technologies proliferate and
new organizational arrangements evolve.The importance of this research area should be clear.  The future will
bring rapid changes in both technology and organizational arrangements, as
well as new demographic characteristics.  We need to develop theories and

bodies of research findings that will help us understand and predict how
different combinations of these factors will affect organizational productivity.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHNew Research TopicsThere are important, exciting research opportunities concerning the con-gruency among technological, people, and organizational factors as drivers
of organizational productivity.Research needs include the following:¥Identifying the critical processes or mechanisms that explain whycertain configurations among technology, organizations, and people lead to
higher organizational productivity.  Goodman et al. (1994) identify five

critical processes underlying the congruency question:  coordination, prob-

lem solving, focus of attention, organizational evolution or redesign, and
motivation.  Are there other processes?  Should some of these be combined?
To what extent are the processes independent explanations and to what
extent do the processes reinforce one another?  Reward systems at the

organizational level both improve motivation and focus attention on organi-
zational-level outcomes.  How do these processes function under different

technological and organizational arrangements?¥Connecting the issues of linkage and congruency.  A central ques-
tion in this chapter is, how do changes in individual-level productivity lead
to changes in organizational productivity?  This is an important and rela-

tively unresearched area.  Although, as noted above, there is a body of

literature supporting the importance of congruency among technology, or-
ganizations, and people to enhance productivity, there is little theory or
evidence to explain when, how, and why this congruency functions.  Re-

search is needed to integrate the theoretical work on linkages and congru-
ency in some empirical context.  Are there common processes that enhance

both linkages and congruency among technological and organizational sys-
tems?  How do they function?  Where is the synergy?  Research in this area

might, for example, focus on redesign.  The implementation literature points
out that redesign is necessary to adapt new technology to changing organi-
zational factors and user needs over time.  If a successful redesign process

is in place, there is a higher probability that individual productivity can be
sustained and, therefore, a greater opportunity to contribute to organiza-
tional productivity.  Without a redesign process, there is a much lower

probability that individual productivity will affect organizational productiv-
ity.  The redesign process also appears in the literature about highly produc-

tive, congruent systems.  In the high-productivity, lean production systems

discussed above, there was a continuous process of redesigning the organi-
zational and technological systems to ensure better fits and higher produc-
tivity.  It is important to note that the redesign process is central to both

explanations (linkage and congruency) for higher productivity.¥Studying the effects on productivity of dramatic changes in tech-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRODUCTIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONS81nology, organization, and the workforce.  Over the next decade, we expect
to see rapid and dramatic changes in all three areas.  New forms of technol-

ogy will proliferate as tools are created for decision making, communica-
tion, and working across space and time.  On an organizational level, there

will probably be a continuation of the movement toward smaller and more
autonomous units, the structuring of organizations around processes rather
than functions, and increased interest in such processes as organizational
learning.  The characteristics of the workforce will also continue to change,

possibly altering the ÒcontractÓ between the employees and the organiza-
tion.  We need research on how changes in each of three areasÑtechnology,organization, and the workforceÑaffect productivity in the other two.  It
may be helpful to do some of this research in different national contexts.Integration of the EnterpriseDevelopments since the late 1980s point to the need to integrate organi-zational processes better, for example, by computer-integrated manufactur-
ing.  At the same time, there has been a push to integrate external constitu-

encies such as customers and suppliers.  One important question in the

1990s is how to integrate these external activities to improve organizational
productivity.  The broader question is how to integrate internal and external

activities into a total enterprise to improve overall productivity and effec-
tiveness.The design process is a good exemplar of this issue.  Traditionally, the
design process was a serial activity with primarily an internal focus.  It

went from product conception to the design, manufacturing, and marketing
of the product.  Now, the importance of integrating customer needs into the

design process is well understood, and the necessity of moving away from
serial interdependence to a more simultaneous consideration of customer,
designer, and manufacturing needs is becoming more apparent (Clark, 1991).
Integration, both internally and externally, is what makes simultaneous con-
sideration of these multiple needs possible.  The consequences of good

design processes are readily apparent.  Producers with better externally and

internally integrated design processes get goods to the market faster, are
more responsive to customer needs, and produce goods with higher quality
and productivity.Another example of enterprise integration concerns the relationship be-tween an organization and its suppliers and vendors.  Traditionally, this was

an armÕs length relationship.  Now, there are major forces to integrate
suppliers and customers into the daily operation of the organization.  ÒJust-in-timeÓ environments demand a close association between the suppliers
and the focal organization.If our ultimate objective is to better understand organizational produc-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHtivity, we must pay attention to integrating the enterprise.  This is not a
well-researched area.  In the past, much of the work in this area has focused

on specific levels of analysis and on interventions to increase productivity
at specific levels within the organization.  The challenge in the 1990s is to

understand the process of integrating external demands into the internal
processes of the organization.New Research TopicsIncreasing our understanding of the process of integration should in-crease our knowledge of productivity in organizations.  However, this prob-

lem is challenging simply because of the scope of the problem statement.
Enterprise integration focuses on the totality of the organization and all the
relevant constituencies of its environment.  Given the paucity of research in

this area, we have identified research areas that would inform us about the
enterprise integration process.Research needs include the following:¥Investigating the role and consequences of technology.  With the
costs of buying and using computers declining and with the levels of com-
puter power and networking capability increasing, technology will be a
major factor in the integration process.  Much of the early work in enter-

prise integration focused on internal integration of machines.  The new

challenges are using technologies to integrate operational planning and stra-
tegic decision making into a total operating system.  Some of the research

on electronic data interchange shows how certain types of external integra-
tion can improve organizational performance indicators (Kekre and
Mukhopadhyay, 1992; Srinivasan et al., 1991).  An important research en-

deavor will be to document the functional and dysfunctional consequences
of this and other technologies in achieving internal and external integration.
What types of information and transactions are necessary in this integrated
enterprise, and how will electronic communication (versus other forms of
communication) contribute to the productivity and quality of these informa-
tion exchanges?¥Studying the process of coordination.  Implicit in the concept of
integration is the need to coordinate activities across varied constituencies.
The design example, discussed above, involved different groups (customers,
designer, manufacturer) who had different goals and interests.  The tasks

were to identify critical forms of information and to coordinate this infor-
mation so as to optimize all the relevant processes (design, manufacturing,
marketing).  New theory and research on negotiation and coordination seem

to be critical for understanding the broader question of enterprise integra-
tion (Malone and Crowston, 1994).Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRODUCTIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONS83¥Studying the process of developing new partnerships.  The concept
of enterprise integration is not grounded solely in technological solutions.
Customers, suppliers, and firms all have different interests.  Entering a

collaborative arrangement requires some form of organizational change.  These
new organizational forms require new forms of reward, commitment, and
structural relationship.  How to define effective collaboration is an impor-

tant research question that bears on our broader question of enhancing pro-
ductivity in organizations (Kanter, 1991).¥Studying the effects of linking external and internal productivity.We have focused on the need for research on how productivity increases at
the individual level lead to productivity increases at the organizational level.
Our analysis, however, has been within the organization.  Another approach

would be to examine how productivity increases in the customerÕs or supplierÕsorganization leads to productivity increases in the focal organization.  If the

focal organization intervenes in the customer organization to increase pro-
ductivity, how do these productivity increases link back into the focal orga-
nization?CONCLUSIONWe have identified four broad research opportunity areas, describingeach problem area and possible research topics.  We believe that under-

standing these four areas is critical to understanding the general question of
productivity in organizations.  We think there is important and challenging

research to be done in each area.  We derived 15 research needs from these

4 opportunity areas.  Each research need can be a point of departure for

understanding organizational productivity.Although we have focused primarily on productivity, we could haveswitched our focus to other criterion variables, such as quality.  We also

think the research issues generated in this chapter bear equally on many
different organizational forms.  The research questions are relevant to both

manufacturing and service organizations, and to both profit and nonprofit
organizations.REFERENCESAttewell, P.1994Information technology and the productivity paradox.  Pp. 13-53 in D.H. Harris,
ed., Organizational Linkages:  Understanding the Productivity Paradox
.  Panel on
Organizational Linkages, Committee on Human Factors, National Research Coun-cil.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Bikson, T.K., B. Gutek, and D.A. Mankin1987Implementing Computerized Procedures in Office Settings.  Santa Monica, Calif.:
RAND Corporation.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHCampbell, J.P., R.J. Campbell, and associates1988Productivity in Organizations.  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Clark, K.B.1991Product Development Performance:  Strategy, Organization and Management in
the World Auto Industry.  Boston:  Harvard Business School Press.
Goodman, P.S.1979Assessing Organizational Change:  The Rushton Quality of Work Experiment
.New York:  John Wiley & Sons.
Goodman, P.S., and T.L. Griffith1991Process approach to implementation of new technology.  
Journal of Engineeringand Technology Management 8:161-185.
Goodman, P.S., R. Devadas, and T.L. Griffith1988Groups and productivity:  analyzing the effectiveness of self-managing teams.  Pp.
295-327 in J.P. Campbell, R.J. Campbell, and associates, Productivity in Organi-zations.  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Goodman, P.S., T.L. Griffith, and D.B. Fenner1990Understanding technology and the individual in an organizational context.  Pp. 45-
86 in P.S. Goodman and L.S. Sproull, eds., Technology and Organizations.  San
Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Goodman, P.S., F.J. Lerch, and T. Mukhopadhyay1994Individual and organizational productivity:  linkages and processes.  Pp. 54-80 in
D.H. Harris, ed., Organizational Linkages:  Understanding the Productivity Para-
dox.  Panel on Organizational Linkages, Committee on Human Factors, National
Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Guzzo, R.A.1988Productivity research:  reviewing psychological and economic perspectives.  Pp.
63-82 in J.P. Campbell, R.J. Campbell, and associates, Productivity in Organiza-tions.  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Hackman, J.R., ed.1990Groups That Work (and Those That DonÕt):  Creating Conditions for Teamwork
.San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Harris, D.H.1984Human factors success stories.  Pp. 1-5 in 
Proceedings of the Human FactorsSociety 28th Annual Meeting.  Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
1994Organizational Linkages:  Understanding the Productivity Paradox
.  Panel on
Organizational Linkages, Committee on Human Factors, National Research Coun-cil.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Kanter, R.M.1991Improving the development, acceptance, and use of new technology:  organiza-
tional and interorganizational challenges.  Pp. 15-56 in National Academy of En-
gineering and National Research Council, People and Technology in the Work-place.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Kekre, S., and T. Mukhopadhyay1992Impact of electronic data interchange technology on quality improvement and in-
ventory reduction programs:  a field study.  
International Journal of ProductionEconomics 28:265-282.
Kraut, R.S., S. Dumais, and S. Koch1989Computerization, productivity, and quality of work-life.  
Communications of theACM 32(2):220-238.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRODUCTIVITY IN ORGANIZATIONS85Lawrence, P.R., and J.W. Lorsch1969Organization and Environment:  Managing Differentiation and Integration.  Homewood,Ill.:  Irwin.
Leonard-Barton, D.1987The case for integrative innovation:  an expert system at Digital.  
Sloan Manage-ment Review Fall:7-19.
1988Implementation as mutual adaptation of technology and organization.  
ResearchPolicy 17:251-267.
Locke, E.A., and G.P. Latham1990A Task Theory of Goal Setting and Task Performance.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice Hall.MacDuffie, J.P., and J.F. Krafcik1990Integrating Technology and Human Resources for High Performance Manufactur-
ing:  Evidence from the International Auto Industry.  Paper presented at the Trans-
forming Organizations Conference, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Bos-
ton.Mahoney, T.A.1988Productivity defined:  the relativity of efficiency, effectiveness, and change.  Pp.
13-39 in J.P. Campbell, R.J. Campbell, and associates, Productivity in Organiza-tions.  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Malone, T.W., and K. Crowston1994The interdisciplinary study of coordination.  
ACM Computing Surveys 26(1):87-
119.National Academy of Engineering and National Research Council1991People and Technology in the Workplace.   Washington, D.C.:  National Academy
Press.National Research Council1986Human Resource Practices for Implementing Advanced Manufacturing Technol-ogy.  Manufacturing Studies Board.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Pritchard, R.D.1991Organizational productivity.  In M.D. Dunnette and L.M. Hough, eds., 
The Hand-book of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 2nd ed.  Palo Alto, Calif.:
Consulting Psychologists Press.Scott, W.R.1987Organizations:  Rational, Natural, and Open Systems
.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall.Srinivasan, K., S. Kekre, and T. Mukhopadhyay1991Impact of electronic data interchange technology on JIT.  
Management Science40(10):1291-1304.Thompson, J.D.1967Organizations in Action.  New York:  McGraw-Hill.
Trist, E., G. Higgins, H. Murray, and A. Pollock1963Organizational Choice.  London, England:  Tavistock.
Walton, R.E.1987Innovating to Compete:  Lessons for Diffusing and Managing Change in the Work-place.  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Weiner, E., and A. Brown1989Human factors:  the gap between humans and machines.  
The Futurist May-June:9-11.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCH862Training and Education
Joyce L. Shields, Joseph B. Cavallaro, Beverly M. Huey, andHarold P. Van CottINTRODUCTIONThis chapter focuses on the relationship between job-oriented trainingand human factors research.  The underlying premise is that human factors

research can help solve some of the difficult problems confronted by the
people who design, develop, and manage training programs and who deliver
training services to trainees.Education is included as a topic because there are strong links betweengeneral education and training for the workplace.  Education prepares for

job-oriented training and influences it.  To a large extent, the educational

attainment of prospective trainees determines what the training provider can
do and how the training can or should be presented.  In this sense, the level

of educational attainment of the trainee is a parameter in the assembly of
any given training program.In job-oriented training, training and human factors are to some extentreciprocal.  When a new system is being created, the goal is to design the

system so that training requirements are as light as possible.  If there are

design deficiencies, the operators of the system must be trained to over-
come or compensate for them.  Thus, the absence of effective human factors
inputs into the system design process generates technical problems for the
people responsible for the training of operator and maintenance personnel.Human-centered systems design and development also come into theprocess of providing the tools used for training.  The complete ensemble of
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRAINING AND EDUCATION87such tools is itself a system and is, therefore, a reasonable domain for thekinds of systems research carried out by human factors scientists.There are many ways in which human factors research is and continuesto be useful in addressing some of the problems that now are being con-
fronted by the people engaged in providing job-oriented training.  In the

rest of this chapter, we will explore these problems and the current and
potential contribution of human factors to them.NOTABLE PROBLEMSChanging Conditions of WorkThe very nature of work is changing.  Instead of the physical manipula-
tions that formerly characterized most industrial jobs, more and more jobs
are based on the manipulation of symbolsÑwords and numbers.  New tech-

nologies and work processes are shifting skill requirements in some types of
jobs from manual and job-specific to generic, from concrete to abstract.
For example, in many modern factories, the production process is so com-
puterized that many workers no longer physically execute tasks but are now
responsible mainly for monitoring automated processes.  Whereas previ-

ously a machinist adjusted and maintained machinery by hands-on manipu-
lation, today a technician works through a keyboard and CRT display and
consequently has a more distant relationship to both process and product.A direct consequence of computerization is that tangible work out-comes are less evident.  There is some evidence suggesting that spontane-

ous learning and skill transfer do not work as well in highly computerized
environments as in more traditional workplaces.  For example, the differ-

ence in performance between the best and the average appears to be greater
in computerized work than in traditional jobs.  This finding leads to the

conjecture that less incidental or informal learning takes place in work that
involves symbol manipulation.  This conjecture is supported by the fact that

much about symbol manipulation is invisible, unlike the visible actions
involved in object manipulation.  The findings also suggest that John Seely

Brown (1988) and others are correct when they call for new forms of train-
ing such as a Òcognitive apprenticeship,Ó which would somehow make the
mental procedures and decision processes of exemplary performers Òvis-
ibleÓ so that others might learn from them.Changing Workforce Demographics andChanging National PatternsSimilar concerns are expressed about the changing demographics of theworkforce.  In this era of vigorous global competition, rapid technological
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHchange, and shifting economic conditions, trainers must be able to adjust tosuch changes.  In 
Workforce 2000 (Johnston and Packer, 1987), the following
Òdemographic factsÓ are identified as shaping the workforce of the future:
¥There will soon be a slowdown in the growth of the population andthe workforceÑthe greatest since the 1930s.¥The average age of the workforce will rise and the pool of youngworkers will decline.¥More women will enter the workforce, although the rate of increasewill be smaller than in the past.¥Minorities will be a larger share of new labor force entrants.¥Immigrants will represent the largest share of the increase in thepopulation and the workforce since the First World War.Thus, the Ònext decade will usher in a workforce unlike anything CorporateAmerica has ever seenÑteeming with women, minorities, and the elderly,the antithesis of the workforce present at many companies todayÓ (Goldstein,1988).  Employers will soon have to utilize these nontraditional sources of

labor supply in order to sustain outputÑeven if equal opportunity regula-tions are abolished.Human resource implications of demographic shifts are numerous.  For
example, Taylor (1989) lists several training and development issues that
will arise from the Òage waveÓ of older workers, including the need to
recognize and emphasize the contributions that older employees can make
at all levels of the organization.  It will be incumbent on the employer

organization to provide effective training and retraining programs for these
older workers.Because people will remain in the workforce longer, there will be anincreasing need to retrain people who have already reached positions of
some seniority and authority.  Some of these people will be the victims of

the buggywhip scenarioÑtheir jobs will just become obsolete.  For others,
the job will still be there to be done, but it will be done by a robot or a
computer.Older workers might need to be retrained through substantially differ-ent techniques than those used to train true novices.  In some instances, a

highly proficient worker may be required to unlearn some of the skills that
gave status in the original job.  Such skills may actually be counterproduc-

tive in the latest version of some jobs.Discussing the greater numbers of women in the workforce, Johnstonand Packer (1987) predict that the distinctions between males and females
in wage rates and in terms of concentrations in particular jobs will decline
in response to market pressures.  They also predict that the proportion of

Òpart-time, flexible, and stay-at-home jobs will increase, and [that] totalEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRAINING AND EDUCATION89work hours per employee are likely to drop in response to the needs ofwomen to integrate work and child rearing.Ó  On the plus side, training
requirements may become more uniform if both men and women are doing
the same work.  Negatives in terms of increased costs could result from

having more people to train if more jobs are shared by two individuals.The Office of Technology Assessment (1990) discusses the number ofnew workforce entrants who will be coming from minority groups and who
are often disadvantaged because of inadequate basic educational opportuni-
ties.  Furthermore, many young workforce entrants, regardless of their eth-

nic heritage, will confront a daunting challenge if the predicted shift to
more highly skilled jobs within the manufacturing sector takes place (Personick,
1989).  If, as seems likely, a similar shift is taking place in the service

sector as it continues to expand, the country might find itself in the ironic
condition of having large numbers of workers unemployed while there are
labor shortages in relatively well-paying job categories.At the national level, the growing service sector is expected to accountfor over 90 percent of the 18 million new jobs forecasted for the next 10
years.  Much of the growth is expected to occur in the health, education,

business, and food services.  In both the service and manufacturing sectors,

systems analyst and computer programmer jobs will be among the fastest-
growing occupations, and workers in other occupations will need to be
increasingly computer literate.  Improved office technology will continue to

limit the growth of administrative support occupations, which will be among
the slower-growing groups of occupations (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1991).Changing Organizational ArrangementsNumerous changes are also occurring in the nature and structure ofwork at the organizational level.  Changes instituted by organizations in-

clude decentralizing and flattening organizational structures, establishing
work teams, pushing decision-making responsibilities downward through-
out the organization, and streamlining the management ranks through the
elimination of middle- and lower-level managers.Flattened organizational structures reduce the hierarchical flow of in-formation and should accelerate decision making.  Job classifications are

broadening as work teams assume some or all of the responsibilities of the
first-line supervisor such as inspection, quality control, production schedul-
ing, work allocation, and coordination with other departments (Office of
Technology Assessment, 1990).Decentralizing the organizational structure and establishing work teamsincrease the workerÕs autonomy and responsibility.  In a decentralized orga-
nizational structure, fewer layers of management result in managersÕ super-
vising greater numbers of workers.  Managers are unable to manage at the
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHsame level of detail as before, and some of the responsibility and authoritypreviously held by middle managers is delegated to workers in lower levels
of the organization (Kravitz, 1988).The development of cross-functional work teams has also increased theresponsibilities of workers.  Employees no longer perform fragmented tasks,
but have broad responsibility for knowing how to perform all aspects of a
job, a situation that draws greater initiative from workers and increases
their involvement in decision making (Bailey, 1990).  Consequently, social

skills will also become more important as organizational structures change
and as more service jobs are created.  Interpersonal skills, teamwork, and

communication skills will become critical for every employee, from the
chief executive to the line worker (Carnevale et al., 1988).The nature of work is also likely to change owing to developments inareas such as telecommunications (e.g., teleconferencing, voice mail, pic-
ture phones, and facsimile machines) and personal computers (e.g., wide-
area networks, modems, communications software, laptop and notebook com-
puters).  These technologies are making it possible for more and more

workers to work out of the home.  As more people work at home, a variety

of management and organizational questions are raised, including how to
structure teamwork, how to train, and how to measure performance.HUMAN FACTORS CHALLENGESConceptual FrameworkIt seems wise to have some sort of conceptual model to guide theprocess of laying out a research program at the strategic level.  Human

factors researchers are fortunate to have several such models from which to
choose.  One was generated in the 1980s when the Army developed the

policies, procedures, and tools to more fully integrate the inclusion of man-
power, personnel, training, systems safety, health hazards, and human fac-
tors engineering trade-offs into the design of systems (Booher, 1990).  This

program, referred to as MANPRINT (Manpower and Personnel Integration),
successfully refocused the design process on the performance of the total
system in the hands of the user.  The program has led to the design and

redesign of weapon systems with greatly reduced training demands and
enhanced performance capabilities.  Lessons learned in this program have

potential application to the acquisition and design of a wide range of com-
plex systems.Another approach was introduced by Rouse (1991), who provided asystematic framework for ensuring that the concerns, values, and percep-
tions of all participants in a design effort, as well as the ultimate users, are
considered and balanced.  This approach seeks to enhance human abilities,
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRAINING AND EDUCATION91overcome human limitations, and foster user acceptance throughout the de-sign process.  Rouse
Õs method recommends asking the following questionsin the design and evaluation of systems:¥ViabilityÑare the benefits of using a system sufficiently greaterthan its costs?¥AcceptanceÑdo organizations/individuals use the system?¥ValidationÑdoes the system solve the problem?¥EvaluationÑdoes the system meet the requirements?¥DemonstrationÑhow do observers react to the system?¥VerificationÑis the system put together as planned?¥TestingÑdoes the system run, compute, and so forth?From a designerÕs perspective, the process begins with measures of effec-tiveness and then addresses understandability and, finally, compatibility.
From a userÕs perspective, the evaluation begins with compatibility, andgoes on to understandability and then effectiveness (top-down design vs.
bottom-up evaluation).Both of these macro-ergonomic approaches can be applied to the designand development of training systems. However, the field would benefit
from additional competition.  Researchers should be encouraged to develop

additional concepts for this area of discourse.Building Bridges Between Theory and PracticeA major research issue related to designing and implementing effectivetraining is closing the gap between (1) theory and research and (2) applica-
tions.  In an article in 
Human Factors, Cannon-Bowers et al. (1991) ad-dressed the challenge of linking the theory and practice of training.  This is

particularly difficult because research and practitioner communities exist
separately and are not well coordinated.  The authors highlight linkages

between training-related theory and training-related techniques in the areas
of training analysis, design, and evaluation.  This represents a good start in

illustrating the possibilities; however, as the authors note, the current body
of training research does not provide the practitioner with a full comple-
ment of training techniques that are fully grounded in logical principles.
Further, there remains the question of how to enhance the acceptance and
translation of research into practice.Boff and Rouse (1987) emphasized the issue of ensuring an adequatesupply of useful and usable data resources in formats that are specifically
intelligible to design engineers.  Although there is a substantial volume of

research information that has potential value and relevance to systems de-
sign, Boff and Lincoln (1988) found that the data had low usability in termsEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHof accessibility, interpretability, and applicability.  If these data were more
usable, they could greatly enhance the effectiveness of new training sys-
tems; therefore, ways to exploit the existing investment in research findings
need to be developed.This theme is also present in a report by the Office of TechnologyAssessment (1990).  The report indicates that research that could lead to

improvement in the efficiency and quality of training often fails to be inte-
grated into training practices.  The report recommends that federal agencies

(1) develop and disseminate information about best-practice approaches and
technologies and (2) work with industry to develop and implement operat-
ing standards for training technologies and related software.An example of such an approach in the human factors area is the CrewSystem Ergonomics Information Analysis Center (CSERIAC).  The objec-

tive of CSERIAC is to acquire, analyze, and disseminate timely information
on crew system ergonomics.  CSERIAC
Õs principal products and servicesinclude technical advice and assistance; customized bibliographies; written
reviews, analyses, and assessments; workshops, conferences, symposia, and
short courses; and special studies.The challenge to the human factors community is to devise, evaluate,and perfect ways to transfer the methods, data, and principles of human-
centered design into the procedures used by training system designers and
managers.  Human factors scientists should also ensure that feedback from

applications experiences closes the loop between research and practice.Strategic MethodologiesA central methodological problem is the lack of a comprehensive arrayof performance measures that are acceptable to both researchers and practi-
tioners.  The basic premise is that one cannot know whether a training

system or training practice is better than an alternative unless one can (1)
measure system performance reliably and accurately and (2) link such bot-
tom-line measures with specific attributes of the training system.One cause of the problem is that there are so many different tasks in theworld of work, and each task has its own mix of desired outcomes.  Conse-

quently, research that is intended to provide general findings is often not
convincing to the practitioner, who sees a distinction between the suppos-
edly generic laboratory task and the task for which his or her students are
being trained.A closely related methodological problem is the lack of criteria fordoing an overall evaluation of training programs.  Therefore, comprehen-

sive evaluations are rarely conducted, even though their importance is rec-
ognized.  When evaluations are done, about half of all companies and the

vast majority of large, successful corporations use crude measures such asEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRAINING AND EDUCATION93student ratings or inferences drawn from informal follow-up interviews.This may be due in part to the difficulty and expense of specifying better
measures as well as to the concerns of trainers and educators that negative
results may jeopardize future efforts (Goldstein, 1992).  The human factors

community can contribute to the resolution of these issues.An example of such a contribution comes from the work of Kraiger etal. (1992), who presented a theoretically based model of training evaluation
in an attempt to link evaluation to learning objectives and provide a more
conceptual framework for evaluation.  The authors conceive of learning as a

multidimensional process of cognitive, behavioral, and affective change and
believe it is important to move away from the influence of behaviorism in
evaluating training.  They argue that the emphasis on behaviorism has stifled
the development of training as a scientific discipline.  The framework they

present leads to a large number of suggested measures and provides a stimulus
for further research on the development and testing of measures that could
lead to a better understanding of training effectiveness.Toward a similar end, Goldstein (1992) points out that training can becharacterized as attempting to achieve one of four types of validity: (1)
training validity, (2) transfer validity, (3) intraorganizational validity, and
(4) interorganizational validity.  The first two validities are measured by the

performance of the individual trainee at the time of training or on the job.
Both training and transfer validity begin with needs assessment.  But trans-

fer validity is greatly affected by the organizational environment of the
trainee on the job.  Therefore, special consideration has to be given to the

collection and interpretation of the results.The last two types of validity refer to the effectiveness of the trainingprogram for a new group of employees in the same organization or in
different organizations.  In both cases, data should be collected from new

populations of trainees to determine the effectiveness of the training pro-
gram for different trainees and organizations.  Validities can change be-

cause of (1) changes in tasks, people, or the organization; (2) the rigor of
the data collection/evaluation; and (3) changes in the training program.
Carefully planned and executed evaluation programs are clearly required to
assess and demonstrate the value of training.A significant development in evaluation has been the estimation of thedollar value or utility of training interventions (Clegg, 1987).  A variety of

equations have been derived for a variety of situations, from estimations of
return on investment to cost-benefit analyses using organizational levels of
measures of performance (Wexley and Baldwin, 1986; Paquet et al., 1987).
However, only a third of the large, successful companies evaluate bottom-
line improvement to assess training or educational success.It is clear that conducting evaluations of the relevance and effectivenessof education and training programs has been complex and expensive.  The
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHquestions remain:  How can information be collected in an affordable man-
ner to aid decision makers in determining the value of training?  And how

can organizations be encouraged to employ Òbottom-lineÓ methods for as-
sessing their training programs?Evaluation studies would be more logical and convincing if they weretied to a formal assessment of the real needs of the worker and the require-
ments of the job.  A common complaint about existing training programs is

that they are not responsive to these areas.Tannenbaum and Yukl (1991) tend to confirm this allegation.  They
report that comprehensive needs analyses are rarely done in organizations.
Therefore, training program content is not always linked to organizational
strategy or job performance requirements.When needs analysis is attempted, the predominant approach is likely
to be to use the procedures outlined by McGehee and Thayer (1961).  These

link organization, task, and personal attributes in a basic stimulus-response
type of logic structure.  Given the major changes in workplace training in

the last 30 years and the requirements of the modern workplace, the validity
of this needs assessment framework is now problematic.The starting point for specifying the requirements of a job is often atask analysis in which a human factors practitioner focuses on the technical
and procedural portion of the task. Task analysis is a general-purpose method
for describing how tasks are performed.  Devised by Robert B. Miller in

1954, it was first used to specify the characteristics of the displays and
controls needed to enable good operator performance.  The method was

later expanded to identify and document the skills, knowledge, and abilities
(SKAs) that a person must have to perform a task and job effectively.
These SKAs formed a database called qualitative and quantitative personnel
requirements information, which was used to forecast manpower, human
factors engineering, and training needs for new systems.  Task analysis was

subsequently adopted by educators and test construction specialists.The methods of task analysis in general use today assume that thecontent of jobs can be defined by their stimulus and response components.
This assumption is understandable considering that task analysis had its
origin in behavioristic psychology.  Although the stimulus-response ap-

proach may be acceptable for characterizing the psychomotor tasks that
have historically been dominant components of most jobs, it cannot be used
to  identify the cognitive content of jobs.  Our ability to analyze the grow-

ing cognitive elements in everyday tasks has not kept up with events in the
real world.  Consequently, we need methods to handle tasks that may in-

volve more complex cognitive and social skills. Such forward-looking analysis
procedures have been recommended (Tannenbaum and Yukl, 1991) but have
not been tested.One way to broaden the scope of task analysis is to view cognitiveEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRAINING AND EDUCATION95functions as similar to computer programs.  A computer cannot function
without a protocol, a program that tells the computer how to perform a
given application.  Similarly, a protocol is needed to describe the overt and

cognitive tasks that make up a particular job.  Without such a protocol, no

rational basis, other than tradition or intuition, exists for systematically
defining and describing the content of a job training program or the proce-
dures to be followed in performing job tasks.This approach has yet to be fully implemented, and alternative ap-proaches do not exist.  Although several attempts have been made to over-

come the limitations of conventional task analysis (Glaser, 1992), no one
has yet devised a method that is easily learned and acceptable to practitio-
ners as well as researchers.  To be most useful, such a method should allow

for the description of the cognitive, sensory, and motor components of a
task as part of a comprehensive systems and functions analysis.Specific Research Projects and ProgramsTwo major studies conducted recently document the increasing impor-tance accorded to fundamental workplace skills.  One comprehensive study

was a joint two-year project of the American Society for Training and
Development and the U.S. Department of Labor.  Their report, 
WorkplaceBasics: The Essential Skills Employers Want (Carnevale et al., 1990), iden-
tified 16 basic skills within 7 broad skill groups:¥the foundation:  learning to learn;
¥competence:  reading, writing, and computation;
¥communication: listening and oral communication;¥adaptability:  creative thinking and problem solving;
¥personal management:  self-esteem, goal-setting/motivation, and per-sonal/career development;¥group effectiveness:  interpersonal skills, negotiation, and team-
work; and¥influence:  organizational effectiveness and leadership.
Another widely cited study, by the Department of Labor (SecretaryÕs Com-mission on Achieving Necessary Skills, 1991), proposed a set of 14 funda-
mental skills within 3 categories that they regard as the foundation for
effective job performance:¥basic skillsÑreading, writing, arithmetic/mathematics, listening, andspeaking;¥thinking skillsÑcreative thinking, decision making, problem solv-ing, knowing how to learn, and reasoning; andEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCH¥personal qualitiesÑindividual responsibility, self-esteem and self-management, sociability, and integrity.This study is part of a major effort by the U.S. Department of Labor toexamine worker skill requirements and other issues related to work-based
training and the transition from school to work.  The challenge for the

human factors research community is to understand how fundamental skills
relate to the performance of technical tasks, how to design comprehensive
training programs incorporating knowledge of worker skills, and how to
evaluate these skills in the workplace.Training individuals to perform effectively as teams is another area ofincreasing importance and requires greater research attention (Salas et al.,
1992).  Work teams are increasing in frequency in American organizations

as Òtotal quality managementÓ programs are introduced.  The performance
of these teams is critical to organizational success.  Research is needed in

order to develop a greater understanding of work teams and of when and
how they are likely to be most effective.  In addition to training, other

interventions to improve team effectiveness include team building, job re-
design, and group incentive programs.  In designing training programs,

team-building interventions, and other programs for complex systems, hu-
man factors researchers are in a unique position to assist in developing
information on the relationship between team processes and team perfor-
mance over time and on the relationship between task type, stage of team
development, and team performance.The design of educational and training programs to meet these newdemands offers special challenges.  Researchers who have focused on the

more traditional areas of how to design, deliver, and evaluate training and
educational programs will have to integrate research from a number of
fields in order to give trainees the resources they need to develop the skills
required by the changing work environment.  Furthermore, technical train-

ing must increasingly be integrated with a broader set of skills.  Bringing all
this material together in the design and development of training systems is
difficult.  The typical human factors specialist may not be very well versed

in such subjects as group dynamics, which are rarely taught in system de-
sign curricula.  As indicated in a recent publication by the National Re-

search Council (Van Cott and Huey, 1992), although human factors practi-
tioners may learn much about training design and development, they receive
little formal education in these ÒsofterÓ areas.  Therefore, the human factors
research community faces the challenge of developing the research base to
adequately educate and prepare practitioners to develop training systems for
the workplace that meet the demands of improving group rather than indi-
vidual performance.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRAINING AND EDUCATION97Flexible, Individualized TrainingThomas Bailey (1990), working with the National Center for Researchin Vocational Education, reports that the approximately half of U.S. youth
who do not go on to college receive little help in making the transition from
school to work.  The challenge is how to design educational and training

programs to create an active learning environment that can ease this transi-
tion.  Research is demonstrating that individuals have different learning

styles and that the effectiveness of alternative teaching and training meth-
ods corresponds to how well it matches an individualÕs preferred learningstyle (Martel, 1991).  The importance of individual differences in learning

styles also has implications for education and training design.  For example,

Snow and Lohman (1984) found that students of low ability benefited more
from high-structure/low-complexity programs and that for students of high
ability the reverse was true.  Much of this research is for grades K-12; more

research is needed to determine the full parameters of aptitude treatment
interactions and also to determine how to train/educate students so they can
continue to learn in natural settings (Goldstein, 1992).  Goldstein believes

that Òthe processes involved in designing instructional systems and the revolutionfirst described by both Gagne and Brenner in the 1960s has only begun to
be understood.Ó  Research is needed on methodologies to support the design
process, so that training developers can effectively incorporate what is to be
learned with who the learners are and 
what characteristics they possess.
Research in cognitive psychology has also highlighted shortcomings intraditional approaches to teaching.  Cognitive psychology focuses on how

learning occurs by addressing ways the human mind processes and uses
information.  It has shifted the emphasis in learning to the mental opera-

tions and attributes of the learner/trainee and has provided a new theoretical
basis for training and instructional technology.  Cognitive research suggests

that teaching/training should emphasize the development of thinking and
problem-solving skills rather than the learning of facts through expository
lectures (Molnar, 1989).  In addition, much current research is addressing

the effect of context on training and the transfer of information obtained
during training to the situation in which it must be used.  (See Druckman

and Bjork, 1994, for a full discussion of the effect of the training context on
effective transfer to other situations and systems.)  These lines of research

have significant implications for the design of programs that enhance learn-
ing and retention of knowledge and skills, that increase the probability of
transfer of learning from one situation to another, and that support lifelong
learning as well as the roles of teachers and trainers.Cognitive science research has also now embraced the mental modelsconcept (Stevens and Gentner, 1983; Johnson-Laird, 1983), which focusesEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHon the ways in which humans understand systems.  According to Rouse and
Morris (1986), mental models allow a person to understand and to antici-
pate the behavior of a system, which implies that mental models must be
capable of prediction.  These models are domain-, context-, and situation-

specific.  ÒWith respect to training, a number of theorists have hypothesizedthat training that fosters development of accurate mental models of a system
will improve performanceÓ (Cannon-Bowers and Salas, 1990:4).  However,
training in only general principles of system design and function is of lim-
ited utility (e.g., Kieras and Bovair, 1984; Morris and Rouse, 1985).  To

obtain optimal training, guidance is required in how to apply the knowledge
in order to accomplish the task (Rouse and Morris, 1986).Changing Roles of Teachers and TrainersJust as new job-specific and managerial skills are required to meettodayÕs demands, the roles of the teacher and trainer are changing.  Rather
than functioning strictly as lecturers, teachers and trainers will increasingly
need to become facilitators.  The major reason for this change is the expo-

nential growth in information resources.  Teachers can no longer be viewed

as all-knowing sources of information.  Because of the huge and expanding

body of knowledge, teachers cannot possibly remain abreast of information
in all areas (Molnar, 1989).The focus of teachers and trainers is also changing.  They must help
others learn how to access information as needed and be able to do this
themselves.  Research is required on learning to learn and on how to teach

people both how to determine what information is required for specific
tasks and how to access it quickly.  At the same time, research is needed on

the design of job aids to assist teachers and workers in acquiring informa-
tion on demand, as needed.Instructor aids form another area in which technological advances shouldbe promoted and in which potential innovations should be evaluated from a
human factors perspective.  For example, some progress has been made

over the past 15 years or so in the construction of software packages for
desktop computers that aid instructors in composing lesson plans, exercises,
simulation scenarios, and examinations.  These systems appear to vary markedly
in their utility.  Consistently high quality in such aids for training program

managers might be obtained if a properly authorized organization were to
sponsor rigorous evaluations of new products before these products were
released to the market.Engineering ApplicationsA key human factors research issue concerning the use of simulationtechnology in training programs is fidelity.  Technology is available to
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRAINING AND EDUCATION99make simulators realistic, comprehensive representations of a system; how-ever, there is limited knowledge on the relationship of physical and func-
tional fidelity and training effectiveness.  In 1985, a National Research

Council working group on simulation commented (Jones et al., 1985):A comprehensive body of behavioral principles and methods relevant tosimulation does not exist.  Integrative assessments of the research and

operating experience are almost completely lacking for important topicssuch as fidelity . . . .  A result is that there is no history of simulation
research and utilization technology in a readily accessible form that serves
as a guide for the future.That need was partially addressed by Hays and Singer (1989), who providedan extensive review of the literature on simulation fidelity.  However, the

need for a comprehensive body of data on the behavioral principles and
methods for determining the effectiveness of fidelity persists.Despite assertions by human factors specialists that physical fidelityand psychological fidelity may not be equivalentÑand in the absence ofany empirical data to support their viewÑsimulator manufacturers haveincreased simulation fidelity as fast as they were paid to do it and the
developing new technology allowed.  This practice will continue until stud-

ies test this assumption empirically.There is a need for laboratory and field research to address the issue ofhow much and what kind of fidelity is required for cost-effective simulator
training.  This research will become increasingly important as simulation

technology begins to provide some form of augmented reality that can be
used to create training environments.  The relationship between fidelity and

training effectiveness remains unknown.  In truth, the attributes of psycho-

logical fidelity need to be defined first.  A metric is needed that can then be

used to measure and compare psychological fidelity with physical fidelity.
These areas all need attention from human factors research.On a more practical level, studies have compared the cost-effectivenessof alternative training techniques and technologies (Orlansky and String,
1977).  The results showed that simple, low-cost, part-task, and procedural

trainers can be more effective for certain types of training than more costly
full-scale, high-fidelity simulators.  In the 1960s, task analysis and the

systems approach to trainingÑtwo methods for the qualitative definition oftraining objectives and the skill, knowledge, and abilities required for any
job training course to be validÑwere developed.  In the 1970s, new re-
search on team training was initiated.In the 1980s, researchers built on that knowledge to develop crew re-source management training; this technique is now used throughout the
airline industry to train crews in team skills and has recently been extended
to other systems as well.  Also in the 1980s, human factors researchers,
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHfaced with the high costs of conventional training devices and classroominstruction, devised the concept of Òembedded training.ÓEmbedded training, a training capability built into or added onto opera-tional systems, presents an opportunity to practice tasks and skills, espe-
cially those that should be performed automatically under high-stress condi-
tions.  It uses the computer and display capabilities of operational equipment
to provide opportunities for task training, practice, and performance feed-
back on the same equipment that is used in operations.  This approach is

better suited for refresher training than for training in new skills (Oberlin,
1988) and can provide high-quality, standardized, individualized training.
Today, the technique is used to train Army tank gunners, the control room
crews of commercial process control facilities, and people in many other
occupations.Computer networking and telecommunications will also continue to openup new methods of team training.  Simulation networking (SIMNET), the

simulator network developed under the sponsorship of the Defense Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency for training teams in tank warfare, uses
workstations that simulate Army tank workstations to train soldiers in dif-
ferent geographic locations in battle tactics (Thorpe, 1993).  The work-

stations are interactive so that the responses of one tank or tank unit alter
the engagement environment for training participants, allowing trainees to
practice a range of communication and decision-making tasks and roles in a
realistic environment.  The SIMNET concept appears to be generalizable to

other education and training domains that have geographically dispersed
workers.Virtual reality, sometimes called cyberspace or augmented reality, isthe experience of perceiving and interacting through sensors and effectors
in a computer-modeled and computer-generated environment.  A person

who experiences a virtual world is immersed in and surrounded by simu-
lated sight, sound, touch, and feedback of force from simulated objects.
Eventually, as the technology develops, the experience of virtual reality
will become increasingly similar to experience of the real world.  This

technology was recently addressed by the National Research CouncilÕs Committeeon Virtual Reality Research and Development (Durlach and Mavor, 1995).The proper use and exploitation of the potential of virtual reality isfundamentally a psychological rather than an engineering or computer sci-
ence problem.  Engineering and computer science provide the basic tools,

but psychology and human factors will be essential in shaping and using
these tools in productive ways.Since virtual reality is still in its infancy, it is impossible to predict allof the research that will be needed to make proper use of it.  However, some
needs are apparent.  Two of the most basic are (1) the need to study the

transfer of training from a virtual to a real-world environment and (2) theEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRAINING AND EDUCATION101need to understand the psychological as well as the physical basis for trans-fer of training.  The high costs of modeling virtual environments makes

research on transfer of training and fidelity especially important.Other research on virtual reality in training will be required to betterunderstand such questions as the following:¥Do individual differences affect the ability to adapt to and usevirtual reality?¥What methods will be needed to identify the instructional elementsthat will be sufficient to meet stated learning objectives in a learning envi-
ronment and at the same time exclude Òvirtual noiseÓ?¥Can virtual reality systems be used to train teams?¥Does having been immersed in and having adapted to a virtualtraining environment have any negative effects on cognitive or psychomotor
performance in the real world?CONCLUSIONSTraining is sometimes regarded as an alternative to human factors andvice versa.  The role of the human factors specialist has been to design

systems that minimize the need for training.  Success from either perspec-

tive is measured by improved performance, productivity, and efficiency of
individuals and organizations.  The human factors/systems perspective should
not replace or usurp the perspective of the training specialist but can be
constructively supplemental.Among the issues that could benefit from human factors research, thehighest priorities should be given to the design and evaluation of complex
training systems and the design and application of learning technologies.
Human factors scientists can add to the understanding of these issues by
analyzing existing data, synthesizing such data across multiple studies, and
conducting new empirical studies.  Examples of the type of research that is

required include the development of systematic design principles for train-
ing systems, empirical tests of alternative delivery practices, development
and tests of theories to support the understanding and evaluation of training
effectiveness from the systems perspective to the perspective of the indi-
vidual learner, and development and validation of cost-effective means and
technologies to provide training on demand.The issue of performance measurement runs through every portion ofthe literature on training, from basic or scholarly articles to articles for the
teachers in the trenches of vocational education (Fitz-enz, 1994).  The prob-

lem of developing good measurement methods and evaluating these meth-
ods exists on at least two levels.  The easier of the two levels is the mea-

surement of performance gains in a specific task setting.  In such a situation,Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHthe job provides its own criteria.  The main problem with these rather
obvious criteria is that variances between individuals and within the same
person during the learning sequence tend to be small unless the trainee is
put under serious task stresses.  In other words, these obvious measures of

performance are relatively insensitive and may not differentiate between
alternative training procedures that are otherwise very unlike one another.The second level of measurement is at the far end of the outcomesequenceÑthat is, indices of the net impact of a training program on systemor organizational effectiveness.  The obvious difficulty with such measures

is that the connection back to particular manipulations of the training regi-
men are tenuous at best.  The real-world systems tend to be too noisy; too

many factors other than variations in training techniques change during the
course of the training process.  Furthermore, the usual cure for such a noisy

research environment, multiple trials, is out of bounds in the real-world
settings in which impact research must be conducted.A closely related problem that must be pursued at a basic level ofresearch is how to specify skill requirements for specific jobs.  One need

only to contemplate how useful it would be to be able to list a set of
measurable skills for each occupational specialty in the military jobs system
or for each occupational description in the list of occupations used by the
U.S. Department of Labor.  We already have most of the tools for this in the
skill taxonomies developed by human factors specialists.We should also be able to match trainees with training strategies.  In
spite of such programs as MANPRINT, there are still significant gaps in our
ability to fit the training to the learner (Clark and Taylor, 1994).  Individual

variability in learning styles may be a relatively fragile construct, but indi-
viduals do differ in their capabilities and limitations.  Research is badly

needed on how to develop descriptive profiles that can in turn be used for
prescriptive actions in the delivery of the training service to the learner.REFERENCESBailey, T.1990Changes in the Nature and Structure of Work:  Implications for Skill Requirementsand Skill Formation.  Berkeley, Calif.:  National Center for Research in Voca-
tional Education.Boff, K., and W.B. Rouse1987System Design:  Behavioral Perspectives on Designers, Tools, and Organizations
.New York:  North Holland.
Boff, K.R., and J.E. Lincoln, eds.1988Engineering Data Compendium.  Armstrong Medical Research Laboratory.  Day-
ton, Ohio:  Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.
Booher, H., ed.1990MANPRINT:  An Approach to Systems Integration
.  New York:  Van Nostrand
Reinhold.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRAINING AND EDUCATION103Brown, J.S., A. Collins, and P. Duguid1988Situated Cognition and the Culture of Learning.  Technical Report No. IRL88-
0008.  Palo Alto, Calif.:  Institute for Research on Learning.
Bureau of Labor Statistics1991Occupational Outlook Quarterly Fall.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of
Labor.Cannon-Bowers, J.A., and E. Salas1990Cognitive Psychology and Team Training:  Shared Mental Models in Complex
Systems.  Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Industrial and

Organizational Psychology, Miami, Fla.Cannon-Bowers, J.A., S. Tannenbaum, E. Salas, and S. Converse1991Toward an integration of training theory and technique.  
Human Factors 33(3):281-292.Carnevale, A.P., L.J. Gainer, A.S. Meltzer, and S.L. Holland1988Skills employers want.  
Training and Development Journal  42(10/October):22-30.Carnevale, A.P., L.J. Gainer, and A.S. Meltzer1990Workplace Basics:  The Essential Skills Employers Want
.  American Society for
Training and Development/the U.S. Department of Labor.  San Francisco:  Jossey-

Bass.Clark, R.C., and Taylor, D.1994The causes and cures of learner overload.  
Training 31(7):40-43.
Clegg, W.1987Management training evaluation:  an update.  
Training and Development JournalFebruary:65-71.Druckman, D., and R.A. Bjork, eds.1994Learning, Remembering, Believing:  Enhancing Human Performance
.  Committee
on Techniques for the Enhancement of Human Performance, National ResearchCouncil.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Durlach, N.I., and A.S. Mavor, eds.1995Virtual Reality:  Scientific and Technological Challenges
.Committee on Virtual
Reality Research and Development, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:National Academy Press.Fitz-enz, J.1994Yes . . . . you can weigh training
Õs value.  Training 31(7):54-58.
Glaser, R.1992Learning, cognition, and education:  then and now.  Pp. 239-265 in H.L. Pick,
P.W. Van den Broek, and D.C. Knill, eds., Cognition:  Conceptual and Method-
ological Issues.  Washington, D.C.:  American Psychological Association.
Goldstein, I.1988Tomorrow
Õs workforce today.  Industry Week 41-43.
1992Training in Organizations:  Needs Assessment, Development, and Evaluation
, 3rded.  Pacific Grove, Calif.:  Brooks/Cole.
Hays, R., and M. Singer1989Simulation Fidelity in Training System Design:  Bridging the Gap Between Reality
and Training.  New York:  Springer-Verlag.
Johnson-Laird, P.N.1983Mental Models:  Towards a Cognitive Science of Language, Inference, and Con-
sciousness.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press.
Johnston, W., and A. Packer1987Workforce 2000:  Work and Workers for the 21st Century
.  Indianapolis, Ind.:
Hudson Institute.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHJones, E., R. Hennessy, and S. Deutsch, eds.1985Human Factors Aspects of Simulation.  Working Group on Simulation, Committee
on Human Factors, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy
Press.Kieras, D.E., and S. Bovair1984The role of a mental model in learning to control a device.  
Cognitive Science8:255-273.Kraiger, K., J. Ford, and E. Salas1992Integration of Cognitive, Behavioral, and Affective Theories of Learning Into New
Methods of Training Evaluation.  Unpublished paper.  U.S. Naval Warfare Center,
Orlando, Fla.Kravitz, D.1988The Human Resources Revolution:  Implementing Progressive Management Prac-
tices for Bottom Line Success.  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.
Martel, L.1991The Integrative Learning System:  A Review of Theoretical Foundations
.  Hilton
Head Island, S.C.:  National Academy of Integrated Learning.
McGehee, W., and P.W. Thayer, eds.1961Training in Business and Industry.  New York:  Wiley.
Molnar, A.1989Information and communications technology:  today and in the future.  In 
LifelongEngineering Education, Proceedings from a Symposium of the Royal SwedishAcademy of Engineering Sciences, IVA Rapport 365, Stockholm, Sweden.Morris, N.M., and W.B. Rouse1985The effects of type of knowledge upon human problem solving in a process con-
trol task.  IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics SMC-15:698-707.
Oberlin, M.1988Some considerations in implementing embedded training.  
Human Factors SocietyBulletin 31(4):1-4.
Office of Technology Assessment1990Worker Training:  Competing in the New International Economy
.  Washington,
D.C.:  U.S. Government Printing Office.
Orlansky, J., and J. String1977Cost-Effectiveness of Flight Simulators for Military Training. Paper No. 1275,August 1977.  Arlington, Va.:  The Institute for Defense Analyses.
Paquet, B., E. Kasl, L. Weinstein, and W. Waite1987The bottom line:  here
Õs how one company proved the business impact of manage-ment training.  Training and Development Journal May:27-33.
Personick, V.1989Industry output and employment:  a slower trend for the nineties.  
Monthly LaborReview 11(November 2):24-41.
Rouse, W.1991Designing for Success:  A Human Centered Approach to Designing Successful
Products and Systems.  New York:  Wiley.
Rouse, W.B., and N.M. Morris1986On looking into the black box:  prospects and limits in the search for mental
models.  Psychological Bulletin 100(3):349-363.
Salas, E., T. Dickinson, S. Converse, and S. Tannenbaum1992Toward an understanding of team performance and training.  In R. Swezey and E.
Salas, eds., Teams:  Their Training and Performance
.  Norwood, N.J.:  Ablex.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRAINING AND EDUCATION105SecretaryÕs Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills1991What Work Requires of Schools:  A SCANS Report for America 2000
.  Washing-
ton, D.C.:  U.S. Department of Labor.
Snow, R., and D. Lohman1984Toward a theory of cognitive aptitude for teaming from instruction.  
Journal ofEducational Psychology 71:347-376.
Stevens, A.L., and D. Gentner, eds.1983Mental Models.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Tannenbaum, S., and G. Yukl1991Training and development in work organizations.  
Annual Review of Psychology41:399-441.Taylor, S.1989The aging of America.  
Training and Development Journal October:44-50.
Thorpe, J.1993Synthetic Environments Strategic Plan.  Draft 3B.  Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency, Alexandria, Va.Van Cott, H.P., and B.M. Huey, eds.1992Human Factors SpecialistsÕ Education and Utilization:  Results of a Survey.  Committeeon Human Factors, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National AcademyPress.Wexley, K.N., and P.T. Baldwin1986Management development.  
Journal of Management 12(2):277-294.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCH1063Employment and Disabilities
Jerome I. Elkind, Raymond S. Nickerson, Harold P. Van Cott, andRobert C. WilligesINTRODUCTIONIn all aspects of daily life, people with disabilities encounter a multi-tude of problems that limit their ability to live independently, to travel, to
use recreation facilities, and to obtain and perform jobs.  The effect of these

limitations on the individual and their cost to society are great; government,
through various legislative initiatives, has made it possible for people with
disabilities to participate more fully in the activities and opportunities en-
joyed by the population at large.  In addition to prohibiting discrimination

against people with disabilities in the workplace and educational institu-
tions, these initiatives require that equipment, facilities, and even jobs be
designed to be reasonably accessible to disabled people.  The human factors

community can make important contributions to these designs and thereby
enhance the ability of disabled people to fulfill their potential.  This chapter

discusses the nature of these contributions and the research that is needed to
enable them.The disabled population is very large.  According to Census Bureau
data, approximately 30 percent of the U.S. population, about 75 million
people, report having sensory, physical, or cognitive disabilities (Bureau of
the Census, 1987, 1989).  These figures do not correct for the incidence of

multiple disabilities in individuals, but, even with such correction, the num-
bers would be very large.  Table 3.1 shows the incidence of the different

types of disability.  The number of people whose disabilities are sufficientlyEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES107TABLE 3.1  Incidence of Major Types of Disability (1990 estimates)
PercentageDisabilityPersons (000s)of Population
SensoryVisually handicapped8,6003.4
Hearing handicapped22,0008.8
MotorOrthopedic impairments23,4009.6
CognitiveSpecific learning disabilities18,7007.5

Speech impaired2,0000.9
Mentally retarded3,0001.2
Total77,70031.4
severe to interfere with work and other activities is, of course, substantiallyless, but still very large.  Approximately 30 million people have severe

disabilities; their distribution is shown in Table 3.2 (Elkind, 1990).People with disabilities find it much more difficult to be gainfully em-ployed than do people who are able-bodied, and their earning power is
thereby much diminished.  The rate of unemployment among disabled people
who would like to work is several times higher than the national average
(Kraus and Stoddard, 1989).  The percentage of people who live below the

poverty line in the United States is between two and three times greater for
people with a disability that interferes with their ability to work than for the
total working-age population (Vachon, 1990).  As a result, 50 percent of the

disabled population have an annual household income at or below $15,000,
principally derived from social security, public assistance, and other trans-
fer programs.  Almost half of the disabled population live at or near the

poverty level.  Maintenance support programs cost approximately $100 bil-

lion per year, and this has doubled in the last 10 years (Vanderheiden,
1990).  Other economic costs of disability, such as lost productivity, are

even greater.The population of people with disabilities can, however, also be viewedas an underutilized resource for the country.  Although nationwide employ-

ment is relatively high, the workforce is growing much more slowly than it
has in the past (Rauch, 1989; Vaughan and Berryman, 1989).  Some econo-

mists are concerned that, as a consequence of the slowdown in the number
of people entering the workforce and the alarming statistics on school drop-
out rates and academic achievement, the countryÕs workforce could be inad-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHTABLE 3.2  Summary of Severe Impairments (1990 estimates)
PercentageDisabilityPersons (000s)of Population
Sensory   Visual impairment
      Legally blind5800.2

      Severely impaired vision1,5000.6
   Hearing impairments
      Severe to profound bilateral hearing loss2,4001.0
Motor   Disability interfering with work13,3005.3

      Orthopedic impairments
         Back or spine3,3001.3
         Hips and lower limbs4,1001.6

      Severed spinal cord5800.2
Cognitive   Specific learning disabilities6,2002.5
   Impaired speech interfering with work2000.1
   Mental retardation3,0001.2
Total33,16014.0
equate to meet the demands that are likely to be placed on it over the nextdecade or so.  The disabled population, if better utilized, could help make

up for the expected shortfall.Thus, the need to increase employment opportunities for people withdisabilities can be compellingly argued on both equity and economic grounds.
These concerns are responsible for the legislation on accommodations for
the disabled.The great advances made in recent years in computer and communica-tions technologies are making it possible for disabled people to perform the
essential functions of an increasing number of jobs.  Personal computers

have been especially important in making these technologies affordable by
individuals and are fostering a flowering of assistive devices and systems
for people with disabilities (Bowe, 1984).  The combination of computer

and communications technologiesÑtelenetworkingÑmakes it possible totake jobs to people who find it difficult or impossible to take themselves to
jobs (see Chapter 6).  It has great potential for enhancing the possibility of

employment for disabled people and for generally increasing their access to
other people and resources (Nickerson, 1986).Related technologies that have considerable potential for enhancing theEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES109employment opportunities of people with disabilities are robotics and tele-operator systems.  These should be especially germane to the design and

operation of prosthetic and orthotic devices (Sheridan, 1980).PROBLEM DEFINITIONThe term disability encompasses a wide range of conditions that can
affect individuals as a result of a birth defect, an accident, a disease, or as
an accompaniment of aging.  The Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990

(ADA) indicates the scope of the term as it is now being used by those
concerned with public policy.  The act defines a person with a 
disability as
someone with a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one
or more major life activities (or a person with a record of such an impair-
ment, or a person regarded as having such an impairment).  A 
physicalimpairment is defined as any physiological disorder or cosmetic disfigure-
ment or an anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body
systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs, respiratory (including
speech organs), cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genito-urinary, hemic
and lymphatic, and skin and endocrine.  Mental impairment includes mental
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional and mental illness, and spe-
cific learning disabilities.  Major life activities include such things as walk-
ing, talking, seeing, hearing, caring for oneself, and working (Texas Young
Lawyers Association, 1990).Thus, the ADA focuses attention on the interaction between activitiesand disability.  We represent this interaction by the matrix in Figure 3.1.

One axis shows the different kinds of impairments grouped under the gen-
eral categories of sensory, motor, and cognitive.  The other axis shows the

major activities of living grouped under the general categories of work,Functional AbilityTask/ActivitySensoryMotorCognitive
WorkplaceHome
TransportationRecreationSafety/securityFIGURE 3.1  Task/activity:  functional ability matrix.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHhome, transportation, recreation, and safety/security.  This structure is con-
sistent with the definitions in the ADA and is similar to the structure used
in a recent Committee on Human Factors report on aging (Czaja, 1990).The matrix of Figure 3.1 defines a vast problem domain that coversvirtually all the activities and functions that people perform in daily living
and all sensory, motor, and cognitive systems (since any of them might be
impaired).  As is apparent from the title of this chapter, we do not attempt

to discuss human factors contributions to this entire domain.  The commit-

tee decided that focusing on a single activity/function subdomain would
make the scope of the discussion more manageable.  It chose to focus on

employment in recognition of the pivotal role of employment in an individualÕsindependence, self-esteem, and access to a fuller and richer life.  Many of

the techniques, data, and even designs that are used to enhance employment
potential will also be appropriate for life activities in other areas, such as
the home and recreation.  Yet even the topic of employment is huge.
Increased employment for disabled people will have to come largely inthe information-oriented segment of our society.  Already more than 55

percent of the workforce is engaged in information-oriented jobs; this per-
centage has been increasing annually (Strassmann, 1985) and is expected to
continue to increase for the foreseeable future (Kraut, 1987).  Given that so

many jobs and so much growth are in the information sector, an important
challenge is to find ways to make information jobs more accessible to dis-
abled people and to increase their ability to compete for these jobs.  Greater

accessibility can come from making the tools that information workers use
and the environment in which they work less restrictive in terms of the
capabilities of the user.  Competitiveness can be enhanced through training

and rehabilitation, but also through augmentationÑoften computer-basedÑof the capabilities of disabled persons in order to improve job performance.
For these reasons, our discussion will focus on increasing access to com-
puter-based equipment by disabled people and on the use of computer tech-
nology to improve access in general.Let us now consider the problems that people with disabilities encoun-ter in performing jobs for which they are qualified.  The ADA is also

helpful here in providing us with some useful definitions.  The ADA pro-

hibits discrimination against a qualified individual in matters relating to
employment.  It defines a 
qualified individual as one who with or without a
reasonable accommodation is able to perform the essential functions of a
particular job.  Accommodation includes making existing facilities acces-
sible, restructuring jobs, acquiring or modifying equipment or devices, and
modifying work policies.  For the accommodation to be considered 
reason-able, it must not be unduly burdensome because of the difficulty or expenseinvolved.  Accommodation can be made by changing the nature of the job

or the equipment used to perform it or by providing individuals who have aEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES111disability with assistive devices so that they can perform their jobs ad-equately.  The definition used in the ADA allows for a growing set of

reasonable accommodations.  As both technology and our knowledge of

disabilities advance, it will be possible to provide more capable assistive
devices, a wider range of equipment modifications, and better access to
facilities as well as to restructure more jobs to fit individual capabilities at
acceptable costs.The language of the ADA leads us to think in terms of modifyingexisting work environments, equipment, and jobs.  It would be far better if

modification were not necessary because the needs of people with disabili-
ties had been taken into account when the environments, equipment, and
jobs were designed initially.  Given that it is probably not always possible

to accommodate every type of disability at the outset, a second objective of
initial design should be to provide access facilities that allow assistive equipment
to be readily added so that disabled persons can work effectively.  In fact,

this kind of access was the objective of earlier federal legislation, the Reha-
bilitation Act of 1973 as amended in 1986 by Public Law 99-506, which
required equal access for disabled people to office equipment, transporta-
tion, and buildings.  Newell (1995), Vanderheiden (1990), and others argue

that the extraordinary needs of people with disabilities are often only the
exaggerated needs of the able-bodied population, and that taking these ex-
traordinary needs into account produces better and more widely useful de-
sign solutions for everyone.  They argue for designs that both able-bodied

and disabled people can use effectively with no additional modification or,
at worst, with augmentations that are easy to add.We encounter some especially challenging problems when we design tomeet the extraordinary requirements of people with disabilities.  First, de-

sign data on the capabilities and performance of the disabled population are
often not available, and, when available, they are much more limited in
scope than data on the able-bodied population.  Most research over the

years has focused on the able-bodied population and on establishing aver-
age performance characteristics.  Studies of individual differences in per-

formance are the exception (Egan and Gomez, 1985).  Further, it is common
practice to exclude disabled people from studies of population averages, so
that they are not even statistically represented in the results.  Since the

capabilities and performance of disabled people in the areas of their dis-
abilities are, by definition, well outside the range exhibited by the able-
bodied population, the data about the able-bodied and the design assump-
tions used for them do not provide much guidance on how to accommodate
disabilities in design.  This makes designing for disabled people difficult

and the outcome uncertain.  Clearly obtaining a better database about the

capabilities of the disabled population is an important need.Second, the disabled population is not homogeneous but exhibits a wideEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHrange of individual differences, both within a disability subgroup and acrossdisability subgroups.  The variability in performance among individuals

with disabilities is great, and the needs for augmentative support are quite
diverse.  For example, a computer workstation for word processing that is

to be used by people with different types of disabilities should be able to
provide displays in large type for people with visual impairments, speech
output for those who are blind, somewhat differently designed speech out-
put for people with dyslexia, and special keyboards and speech input for
those with motor impairments.  And these are just some of possibilities.

The wide range of individual capabilities has led to a tendency to design to
individual requirements.  While individual design may lead to good results

for the individuals, it is expensive and its cost will constrain the number of
people who can be served.  There is a need to develop generic approaches

to design that are aimed at the major disability subgroups and that allow
tailoring to individual needs.Third, employment is a large and complex domain.  There are many
different kinds of jobs requiring different combinations of skills.  For most

jobs, we do not have either a good characterization of the component skills
required or a good specification of the level of competence required in each
skill area.  Thus, the design problem is not well specified from a require-

ments side.  Furthermore, each work situation must be considered as a

system that involves many different work-related tasks, a set of personal
care and mobility activities, and a variety of interactions with other people
inside and outside the firm.  All of these must be taken into account at a

satisfactory level for there to be a successful work situation.Our discussion concentrates on the technology and on other tangibleaspects of enabling disabled people to obtain employment.  Technology by

itself does not solve the problems of unemployment.  One must also deal

with the sociology of the workplace and with the disincentives to going
back to work.  For disabled people there can be many disincentives to

working, such as lack of social acceptance, difficulty in transportation, and
economic penalties.  Ability to do the work is just one aspect of the prob-

lem, but it is the one to which the human factors community can contribute
most directly, so it is the focus of this chapter.HUMAN FACTORS CONTRIBUTIONSThe unemployment and underemployment of disabled people is a com-plex problem with technical, psychological, sociological, political, and eco-
nomic components.  Disabled people encounter many disincentives to seek-

ing employment, but a key one is inability to function satisfactorily at the
workplace; that is, to perform the tasks required by the job and to take care
of personal needs that arise.  The human factors community is well equippedEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES113Task analysisEvaluation andusability testingHumanperformancedataDesignDesigns for jobs,systems, andassistiveequipmentFIGURE 3.2  Human factors design process.
to address this problem by designing accommodations that lower barriers towork and that enable disabled people to perform the jobs for which they are
qualified.  Moreover, efforts by human factors specialists to accommodate

the needs of the disabled population in equipment design will advance hu-
man factors as a discipline by directing its attention to designs and methods
that will be effective over a much wider range of individual capabilities
(Griffith et al., 1989).This is a classical human factors systems design problem of matchingtasks to human capabilities through analysis and redesign of tasks, design of
work environments, design of equipment used for performing work-related
tasks, and design of assistive devices that enhance individual performance
or that provide special interfaces to equipment.  The design process pro-

ceeds iteratively through the stages illustrated in Figure 3.2 until a satisfac-
tory result is achieved.  The stages of the design process are the following:
¥gathering data about relevant human performance characteristics;¥conducting an analysis of tasks required for successful performanceof the job;¥design of the job, systems for performing work tasks, and assistiveequipment; and¥evaluation of the designs through the use of models, simulationtools, and user experiments.Human Performance Design DataHuman factors design proceeds from a base of knowledge about humancapabilities, capacities, and limitations that is relevant to the design prob-
lem.  A large body of such information is available in databases, design

guides, and models to inform human factors design for able-bodied users
(see, e.g., Boff and Lincoln, 1988).  However, very few data of this kind are
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHavailable for most disabled populations.  Not only does this make informed
design for people with disabilities difficult, but it also gives the human
factors community an opportunity to extend the knowledge base to include
the disabled population (see Kelley and Kroemer, 1990, on the extension of
the anthropometric database to the elderly).Task AnalysisTask analysis is the appropriate starting point for human factors design.Human factors designers draw upon a portfolio of techniques to develop an
understanding of the tasks that people must perform in a system and of the
perceptual, motor, and cognitive capabilities needed to perform them.  These
techniques include observations, video analyses, taxonomies, scenario gen-
eration, timeline, workload, and input/output analyses (Elkind et al., 1990).
In principle, these techniques are directly applicable to designing for people
with disabilities.  Typically, however, jobs and tasks from common work

situations have not often been subject to this kind of detailed examination.
Further, it is necessary to probe beneath the surface of how jobs are per-
formed by their present incumbents, who are for the most part able-bodied,
and extract the essential requirements for effective performance in these
jobs.  Disabled workers may have to perform jobs differently, and it is

important to characterize the jobs at a level that allows restructuring to
accommodate people with specific limitations.  These kinds of analyses are

properly within the domain of human factors.DesignWe are concerned with three types of design:
¥design or redesign of jobs so that disabled people can perform theessential tasks and not be disqualified by inability to perform nonessential
tasks;¥design of equipment and systems so that they are accessible for useby disabled people; and¥design of assistive equipment to enhance the performance of peoplewith disabilities or to allow them to use systems and equipment designed
for the general able-bodied population.There are extensive opportunities and an enormous need for humanfactors contributions to these design efforts.  In most cases, these designs

will be carried out by teams in which human factors specialists work with
specialists from other engineering disciplines.  As with other human-ma-

chine systems design, human factors focuses on the functions users are
asked to perform, user-equipment interfaces, user performance, usabilityEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES115evaluation, and other activities related to the user and the impact of thesystem or device on the user.  The human factors specialist would be ex-

pected to bring knowledge about the special characteristics and require-
ments of the disabled subgroups for whom the design is intended and about
how to customize designs to the particular requirements of individuals within
a subgroup.Of the three types of design activities mentioned above, job design fordisabled people has probably received the least attention from human fac-
tors specialists.  Analysis of jobs often reveals opportunities for redistribut-

ing tasks among members of a team so that the disabled members are given
assignments they can perform or so that the job can be accomplished in
some other way that does not require the use of capabilities that are im-
paired.  An example of redistribution would be reassigning the task of

writing status reports from a person with severe dyslexia to a team member
who does not have this disability.  An example of a different way of accom-

plishing a task would be allowing a mobility-impaired worker to use elec-
tronic and computer technology to do office tasks from home (Williges and
Williges, 1995).A key problem in design of accessible equipment and systems is tomake them usable by both able-bodied and disabled persons without impos-
ing performance penalties on the able-bodied or excessive cost penalty on
anyone.  Much of the attention in this area has been on interface designs

that are usable by people who do not have normal sensory, manipulative, or
communication abilities.  If accessibility by both disabled and able-bodied

people is not possible, then a backup position is to design so that interfaces
are available that allow special assistive devices to be added to make the
original equipment or system accessible.  This problem has received consid-
erable attention (Vanderheiden, 1988).  An example of an accessible system

is one that provides both visual and auditory displays of all information that
is presented so that persons with either impaired vision or impaired hearing
can function as well as persons with normal sight and hearing.Literally thousands of assistive devices have been designed to enhancethe performance of disabled people or to enable them to use systems de-
signed for the able-bodied (ABLE DATA, 1989; Trace Research and Devel-
opment Center, 1988).  Increasingly, these devices are being implemented

with computer hardware and software that provide disabled users with capa-
bilities that they are lacking.  Examples are speech generation devices for

those with severe speech impairments and eye tracking systems as a substi-
tute for keyboard input for those with severe manipulatory impairments.
Many of these devices have had the benefit of human factors contributions,
but many have not.  This is a rich area given the range of disabilities that

must be accommodated, as shown in Figure 3.1, and the variety of tasks,
equipment, and systems that are encountered in the workplace.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHEvaluation Models, Tools, and ExperimentsEvaluation of proposed designs and usability experiments are essentialto the design process.  It is important to conduct user experiments to deter-

mine how well disabled individuals can use both existing and proposed
designs.  Only by careful examination of the shortcomings of existing equipment
is it possible to know where to place the effort on making improvements.
These studies must take a wide range of disabilities into consideration.
Such experimental studies are not easy to conduct and offer an opportunity
for a major contribution from the human factors community, which is skilled
in this area.Not all design evaluation studies need be done with human subjects.  It
is often very effective to use computer models and simulations of human
performance to evaluate alternative designs.  Using such models for evalua-

tion is less expensive and time-consuming than using human subjects.  Se-

lecting and using such models and tools is an area in which human factors
specialists have expertise.  For example, models and design evaluation tools

have become increasingly important to human factors aspects of the design
of aircraft (Elkind et al., 1990).However, most current models describe the normal population and donot encompass disabled populations.  Models need to be extended, and this

will require using and adding to the body of relevant data about the perfor-
mance of disabled populations.  Human factors specialists can assist in

these tasks and help develop models of human performance that represent
the performance of people with specified disabilities.CURRENT STATE OF THE ART ANDHUMAN FACTORS NEEDSHuman Performance Design DataHuman factorsÑwith its focus on applying knowledge about humancharacteristics to the design of tasks, machines, machine systems, and envi-
ronmentsÑrequires a body of systematic and quantitative data about humancharacteristics.  The design references and texts that compose the database

for human factors contain little that directly addresses the characteristics of
disabled segments of the population.  This should not be a surprise since,

until recently, the human factors literature has paid little attention to the
problems of the disabled.  Only a small percentage of the papers in the

journal Human Factors deals with disabilities.  Although this journal has
published two special issues on disabilities, in 1978 and 1990, relatively
little has appeared between the two issues.  Handbooks sometimes include a

chapter on disability (Salvendy, 1987) and sometimes have data relevant toEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES117the elderly (Boff and Lincoln, 1988), but for the most part these areas arenot covered with any degree of completeness.  Vanderheiden (1990) com-

ments that disabilities and other functional limitations are only peripherally
mentioned in textbooks.  Courses on disability in human factors curricula

are rare.  Little or no attention is paid in the standard curriculum to the

needs, characteristics, or design considerations required to accommodate
persons with reduced abilities.In the last few years, human factors researchers have become moreinterested in the problems that disabled people encounter in gaining em-
ployment and in being able to use the facilities that able-bodied people take
for granted.  Federal legislation has been directly responsible for the in-

creased concern for the disabled population on the part of business and their
product designers, and this has influenced the human factors community.  A

1990 Human Factors special issue, 
Assisting People With Functional Im-pairments, a similar Human Factors special issue on 
Aging also in 1990,
and a forthcoming book on disabilities and human computer interaction
(Edwards, 1995) are all indications of the growing interest in this area.  So

there is hope that the body of human factors design data for the disabled
will grow more rapidly in the future, but it will take many years before it
becomes adequate.Other disciplines, however, have been active over the years developinglarge bodies of data about different segments of the disabled population.
There is an extensive literature from the medical, rehabilitation, occupa-
tional therapy, prosthesis, and other specialized communities on the charac-
teristics of various disabled populations.  Not much of this information has

found its way into the human factors literature, in part because it is not well
organized for use in human factors design.The field of aging provides an interesting example of the problem, onethat is relevant to our purposes inasmuch as elderly people who are disabled
compose a major component of the disabled population.  Smith (1990) com-

ments that, although 50 years of laboratory research have provided a large
amount of information about the physical and psychological changes that
occur with aging, there has been little application of this information to
human factors design.  This is because much of the information is not in the

reference works and because the information that is included is largely
prescriptive and not quantitative.  Smith points out that major effort is

required to review the research data on aging, extrapolate from them, fill in
important gaps, and structure the data so that they are useful for human
factors design.The situation for the principal areas of disability is much the same.Therefore, an important research need is to build a more adequate human
factors database for the major disability subgroups and to get these data
included in the standard design references and texts.  Much of this database
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHcan be obtained from the study of existing literature from other fields, butin many areas new laboratory research will almost certainly be required.Given the number of different disabilities and the fact that they canaffect all areas of performance, it will take considerable effort to assemble a
satisfactory body of data and considerable care to organize it into useful
form.  It will be important to segment the disabled population into sub-

groups of individuals with reasonably common characteristics of impair-
ment and to identify parameters of performance that allow representation of
individual differences.  The models and simulations of performance dis-

cussed above provide a directly usable and practical framework for organiz-
ing the data for many areas of disability.  Therefore, it should be kept in

mind that the impaired functions of disabled people are usually not sharply
segmented from those of the able-bodied population.  That is to say, the

distribution of performance is not bimodal.  Therefore it should be possible

to characterize the performance capabilities and limitations of people with
disabilities by performance parameters at the tail of the distribution.Task AnalysisThe state of the art is much better in task analysis for disabilities thanin human factors design data.  In designing for disabled people, human

factors specialists can apply a collection of already well-developed and
widely used analysis techniques. The human factors designers do not need
to develop or extend the techniques themselves but must merely apply them
to jobs and tasks that disabled people are capable of performing.  The lack

of descriptive data may inhibit the use of these techniques, but that is a
problem with the data and needs to be addressed separately, as discussed
above, not a problem with the analysis techniques themselves.Skill Requirements for JobsTask analysis at the job level is clearly important given our focus onincreasing the employment potential of people with disabilities.  Much work
has already been directed toward establishing the skill requirements of dif-
ferent types of jobs to provide a principled method for selecting personnel
to perform these jobs (see Chapter 2).  Much of this work has been in the

context of personnel selection for jobs in the military; a recent example is
the Army Selection and Classification Project (Campbell, 1990; Peterson et
al., 1990).In this approach, existing jobs are examined; the tasks currently com-posing them are identified; the skills of current incumbents are determined;
a set of tests of knowledge, aptitude, and performance is administered toEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES119ascertain skill levels of successful incumbents in these jobs; and the resultsare used to establish criteria for selecting job candidates.  The same ap-

proach has been applied to jobs in the civilian sector, and in particular by
companies that have a large number of people in a single job category, for
example, telephone information operators.  There is a need to carry out this

kind of skills requirements analysis on more jobs in the civilian sector, and
it would probably make sense to do so with a representative sample of jobs
that provides insight about the mismatch between the skills required and the
skills possessed by disabled people in major segments of the economy.There are two problems with applying this approach to disabled people.The most important is that the method analyzes existing jobs and existing
incumbents.  Thus, it assumes that the jobs, which have evolved with able-

bodied workers, will be done in the same way by disabled workers.  Fur-

thermore, it tends to require that disabled workers have the skill levels of
the able-bodied.  It will be necessary to separate the 
essential functions of a
job from the ancillary functions so that it can be determined whether or not
people with a particular type and level of impairment are qualified for such
a job.  (We deliberately use the language of the ADA here.)  The second

problem is that the method takes for granted certain ancillary skills or capa-
bilities, such as mobility, that may be impaired in disabled populations.
Thus, it will be necessary, when applying the method, to cast a somewhat
wider net than is usual when identifying the tasks that compose a job.TaxonomiesWe would like to avoid having to analyze every job in detail and beable to work in terms of broader job types or categories.  To do this, we

need to have taxonomies of functions that workers perform in various types
of jobs.  The notion of taxonomy is simple; it takes effort to develop tax-

onomies for different types of jobs, and as a result coverage is spotty.
Office information work is a particularly important type of job because
more than half the workforce is employed in such jobs, and the number is
increasing (Kraut, 1987; Strassmann, 1985).  There has been some effort to

develop taxonomies of office information work activities, but no generally
accepted, detailed taxonomy exists.  Williges and Williges (1995) provide a

preliminary taxonomy of information tasks and task activities performed in
professional offices, as does Czaja (1987), who identifies and analyzes tasks
such as document preparation, meeting, conferencing, filing and retrieving,
communication, decision making, and transacting.  Taxonomies of meetings

also have been developed (Short et al., 1976).  This is an area that requires

more work.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHTimeline AnalysisTimeline analysis is a detailed unfolding in time of the tasks that aperson performs, the information required for the task, the decisions made,
and the actions taken.  The analysis can be done at increasing levels of

detail and, at the limit, examines individual manipulative motions in the
spirit of time and motion study.  It should not be a surprise to find that

Gilbreth and Gilbreth ([1917] 1973) applied this kind of analysis to the
study of disabled soldiers and how to return them to gainful employment.
Their work provides the intellectual origins for what human factors calls
task analysis, and even for our special interest in the employment of people
with disabilities.Timeline analysis provides a detailed look at job and task requirements,with an emphasis on speed of performance and on competition for cogni-
tive, sensory, and motor resources (Corker et al., 1986).  Slow performance

and competition for reduced resources are common problems encountered
by disabled people.  Timeline analysis is therefore a very useful tool in

determining what kinds of accommodations are required to make jobs ac-
cessible.  Detailed timeline analyses of office and other jobs, especially

when performed by disabled workers, are generally not available.  It would

be valuable to have an analysis of a representative sample of jobs being
performed by people with different kinds of impairments.DesignDesign and Redesign of JobsAn enormous amount of work has been directed toward design for dis-abled people, but almost all of it has focused on equipment and systems
design.  Many assistive devices are described in the technical literature, as

well as in catalogs and product brochures.  There is little in the technical

literature about design or redesign of jobs to accommodate disabled work-
ers.  As part of an interest in communications and computer alternatives to

travel and commuting, Williges and Williges (1995) address this subject in
terms of office information jobs.  It would be very useful to have a collec-

tion of case histories of jobs that have been designed or redesigned to
accommodate specific disabilities.As is pointed out in other chapters of this book (Chapters 2 and 8), theprimary skill requirements of many jobs have been shifting from physical to
cognitive.  This is true not only in the service sector but also in manufactur-

ing and industrial production.  Many jobs have been redesigned to accom-

modate this shift.  To be sure, the redesign has been motivated, for the most

part, by new requirements imposed by the introduction of new technologiesEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES121in the office or plant, and not by the desire to create new work possibilitiesfor people with disabilities.  Nonetheless, the fact that redesign is occurring

on such an extensive scale provides opportunities for rethinking job require-
ments with disabled workers in mind.Another major development is that technology is spawning a growingvariety of aids to the performance of intellectual work (see Chapter 11).
Again, for the most part, these aids were not designed to increase job op-
portunities for disabled people.  Yet some of the aids have the potential for

doing that, and others could, with some adaptation, be used to that end.As a way of maximizing the effective use of limited resources, there ismuch to be said for the strategy of looking for ways to turn technological
developments to the advantage of people with disabilities.  We believe that

many of the technological developments around computer and communica-
tion technologies have the potential to enhance the job opportunities of
disabled people greatly.  Realizing this potential will require some attention

to a variety of human factors issues relating to the adaptation of devices to
special user needs.Design for AccessibilityIt would be enormously beneficial to disabled populations if commondevices, systems, and environments were designed to be accessible to people
with disabilities as well as to able-bodied people.  However, as Vanderheiden
(1990) points out, the disabled population, although large in total, is com-
posed of many subgroups, many of which are small.  It is clearly impossible

to design everything to be accessible to all subgroups, just as it is ineffi-
cient to have distinct product designs for each disability subgroup.  The

sensible path lies somewhere between these extremes.  For most types of

impairments there are economical ways of designing products so that they
are accessible, or at least more accessible, to major segments of the dis-
abled population (Newell, 1995).There are many examples of successful accessible design (Mueller, 1990;Sorensen, 1979).  Public facilities for physically disabled people are the

most visible example.  It is now routine to have cuts in sidewalks so that

wheelchair users and others with mobility impairment can handle street
crossings, toilets in public buildings are routinely designed to accommodate
wheelchairs, and ramps are now provided as an alternative to stairs.  In

general, it is now known how to design buildings so that they accommodate
people in wheelchairs.  This is done in new construction at what is now

considered to be an acceptable cost and, in some areas, at negligible cost.Electronic equipment is not so far along.  Some computer systems do
offer facilities for those with impaired hand control, for example, ÒstickyÓkeys, which allow a command that normally requires simultaneous activa-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHtion of keys to be invoked by sequential activation.  However, computers
have not typically been designed with functionally impaired users in mind
and are simply not accessible to many people with mobility, sensory, or
cognitive limitations.  Many of the capabilities that computer systems need

in order to be accessible to people with sensory and physical impairments
are summarized in a design guide addressing this issue (Vanderheiden, 1988).When it is not possible to include accessibility facilities in a design, itmay still be possible to provide standard interfaces that can be used to
integrate special equipment designed for particular disabilities groups.  Blind
users, for example, need a device that transforms visual images on a com-
puter display into auditory or tactile displays.  It is not economical to pro-

vide such facilities for all users when only a small number will use them.
Yet the data from which the visual display was constructed can be made
available to software and hardware makers, which can implement the alter-
native displays. This is not likely to be a burden on the design (if it is part
of the initial specifications).  Enabling such special adaptations requires

careful design of the interfaces.  Such design, in turn, requires good under-

standing of the kinds of adaptive devices that disabled users will need.
Interface requirements and recommendations to enable the use of devices to
assist blind and physically handicapped people in using computer systems
have also been developed (Vanderheiden, 1988).Clearly more can be done to improve the built-in accessibility of prod-ucts and facilities.  We need more specific data about how to assist people

with different kinds of impairment, and we need to develop new techniques
for providing needed assistance.  This is especially true for cognitive dis-

abilities.  Making fuller provision for the disabled will certainly have an

impact on system design.Design of Assistive Devices and SystemsMany adaptive hardware devices and specially designed software pack-ages have been developed to enable disabled people to use computers (Casali
and Williges, 1990; ABLE DATA, 1989; Trace Research and Development
Center, 1988).  The number of devices available to assist the disabled in

using other kinds of equipment (e.g., automobiles) and devices that replace
or improve upon an impaired function (e.g., eyeglasses, communication
devices) is also large.  New assistive devices and systems that perform

better, offer new functions, or are cheaper continue to be developed.  In

particular, we can expect increased attention to and progress in the develop-
ment of assistive aids to cognitive functions as a result of advances in
computer technology and cognitive science.  This is important because people
with cognitive disabilities are a very large subgroup, one often bypassed in
the development of assistive devices because the impairments are difficultEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES123to address.  The need for better assistive devices remains large and the
opportunities for progress are great.The rich menu of assistive devices and systems raises the problem ofhow to locate and select a particular device that matches the needs of an
individual user.  Large databases catalog the devices that are available (ABLE
DATA, 1989; Trace Research and Development Center, 1988), but these do
not provide detailed information on the characteristics of the devices or the
types of users for which they are best suited.  Obtaining detailed informa-

tion about device or system characteristics is not easy, especially for com-
plex software for which the demands on cognitive ability, and even motor
and sensory abilities, are difficult to determine and even harder to describe.
Without detailed information, the only way to select a device from a set of
candidates is by trial and error.There have been several attempts to provide a systematic method forselecting assistive devices and systems.  For example, Behrmann (1989)

describes an expert system for the selection of a computer input-output aid
that uses subjective ratings by therapists of the suitability of each type of
equipment for persons in each of several disability subgroups.  Casali (1995)
and Rosen and Goodenough-Trapagnier (1989) describe a more comprehen-
sive and quantitative approach to this problem; their approach uses detailed
information about particular types of devices together with a set of tests for
evaluating the residual capabilities of the disabled user, a tool for eliciting
information from the user regarding task needs, a method for integrating
this information to select the appropriate combination of device characteris-
tics, and a test of usability.  Casali addresses computer cursor control de-

vices; Rosen and Goodenough-Trapagnier address augmentative communi-
cation devices.  Theirs is a logical approach, but it requires a large body of

information and the development of efficient tests of capabilities and meth-
ods for integration.  Systematic selection remains a major problem for which
there are only hints of a solution.Evaluation Models, Tools, and ExperimentsDesign is iterative and requires repetitive evaluation of prospective de-signs that eventually converge on a final solution that satisfies the require-
ments.  Evaluation is facilitated by models of human performance and com-

puter tools to run the models, so that it is not necessary to rely entirely on
experiments with human subjects for evaluation.  Models and tools covering
many areas of human performance have been developed.  There are many

gaps in coverage, especially in cognitive functions, but this is an active area
and progress continues to be made.  For example, anthropometric models

have been developed to evaluate cockpit design and layout as well as main-
tenance operations (McDaniel and Askren, 1985; Paquette, 1990).  The
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHNational Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the U.S. Armyare developing a human factors computer-aided engineering facility for the
design of helicopter cockpits (Army-NASA Aircrew/Aircraft Integration program,
Hartzell et al., 1984) that includes models of workload (Corker et al., 1986)
and vision (Larimer et al., 1989; see also Elkind et al., 1990 for a summary
of vision models being considered).  Simple cognitive models have been

developed.  Very important and widely used are the Model Human Proces-

sor and the GOMS model for evaluating human computer interface designs
developed by Card et al. (1983).  Recently, a more comprehensive model of

cognitive function, SOAR cognitive architecture, has been proposed by Newell
(1990).These computer-based tools are potentially directly applicable to thedisabled population, but the models they use provide, at best, only a frame-
work for representing the performance of this population.  The problem is

that these models are derived from psychological research that attempts to
be rigorously grounded and relatively generalÑcharacteristics that are achievedthrough experimental controls and statistical analysis and, thus, at the ex-
pense of richness and detail.  The resulting models, paradoxically, describe

the normal case even if there is not even a single exemplar of that case.
Individual differences dissolve into variance from the mean, or worse, are
considered outside the scope of the model.  Thus, almost by definition, the

capabilities of people with disabilities often lie outside general models.A general model has heuristic value so long as we are willing to modifyit significantly when it fails to adequately describe a specific personÕs con-ditionÑin other words, when we are willing to bend the model to the per-son rather than the person to the model.  The resulting new model can then

be usefully studied to evaluate designs and to produce new designs that are
likely to better address the specific needs of persons with disabilities.  Elkind
and Shrager (1995) applied this method to computer-supported composition
by dyslexic individuals.  It is important to keep in mind that each person

with a disability has specific impairments from a complex class of impair-
ments and must be understood individually.  Assistive devices and systems

must be adjusted for these individual differences.  To adapt general models

so that they represent the characteristics of disabled populations and of
individuals within these populations will require new data from these popu-
lations and probably some model extensions.  This will take considerable

effort.SUMMARY OF RESEARCH NEEDSIn the preceding sections, we have mentioned several areas in whichresearch and technology development are needed.  In this section we sum-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES125marize these needs to provide specific recommendations for a human factorsprogram to enhance employment opportunities for people with disabilities.Human Performance Design DataAn important research need is to build a more adequate human factorsdesign database for the major disability subgroups and to get these data
included in the standard design references and texts.  Much of the needed

database can be obtained from a study of existing literature from other
fields, but in some areas new laboratory research will be required.  Such

data are a prerequisite for a principled methodology for design for disabled
people.Data are required for all major disability subgroups.  A structure must
be developed and key performance parameters identified so that the data
can be applied to disability subgroups that have distinctly different perfor-
mance characteristics and still allow customization to individual perfor-
mance, when required.  An effort should be made to integrate the data into

existing computer models and simulations of human performance in order
to guide the data collection process and to make these models useful for
design for people with disabilities.Task AnalysisA set of interesting representative jobs should be selected (a) as a focusfor efforts aimed at understanding job requirements and (b) to provide a set
of useful case studies.  Given the importance of information work as a

source of employment, this sector should be given priority in selection of
jobs.  Standard skills requirements methods should be applied to these jobs

to establish their requirements, or a body of skill requirements data should
be obtained from the literature.  For each job, essential functions should be

extracted from the total set of requirements and used to identify the disabil-
ity subgroups whose impairment does not disqualify them for that job.Taxonomies of the functions that workers perform in each of the repre-sentative set of jobs should be developed.  An effort should be made to

structure the taxonomies so that a core set of functions is identified that
applies across many jobs.Timeline analyses of the representative set of jobs should be performedwith workers from different disability subgroups.  These analyses should be

used to identify areas where specific disability groups encounter perfor-
mance limitations and resource constraints in order to guide job redesign
and design of assistive devices and systems.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHDesignA set of case histories of jobs that have been designed or redesigned toaccommodate specific disabilities should be developed from actual experi-
ence or collected from the literature.  These will serve as examples to

disabled people and employers.A concerted effort should be made to improve the accessibility of com-puter applications.  The major computer systems used in work situations

should be identified, their accessibility evaluated, and the changes required
to make them accessible to the disabled workforce specified.  Principal

software vendors should be encouraged to implement these changes.  De-

sign guides for achieving accessible designs should be extended to cover a
wider range of applications, systems, and disabilities.These guides should include specification of interfaces required to fa-cilitate integration of assistive devices and software into computer operat-
ing systems.  Special attention should be given to making systems more

accessible to users with cognitive disabilities.  New technologies and im-

provements on existing technologies for assisting disabled users in perform-
ing cognitive functions should be investigated and developed.Continued support should be provided for the development of new andimproved assistive device technology that will enable a larger fraction of
the disabled population to perform a wider variety of jobs effectively.  Sys-

tematic methods for characterizing assistive devices and systems and matching
them to particular users should be investigated and tested.Evaluation Models, Tools, and ExperimentsPerformance data for people with specific disabilities should be incor-porated into existing computer-based performance models and simulation
tools so that they can be applied to designing for people with disabilities.
Where necessary, these models should be extended so that they can repre-
sent the performance of disability subgroups.  They should also be used to

help distinguish between performance aspects of tasks that are essential to
getting the tasks done and those that are not and to help identify ways in
which tasks can be modified so they are more manageable by people with
specific disabilities.  Many of the necessary performance data do not now

exist and will have to be obtained through experimentation.Another kind of tool that could be very useful for people with disabili-ties is an accessible and easy-to-use database that would provide informa-
tion regarding job-related (and other) resources that they can tap into.  Con-

sider the problem that people with specific disabilities currently have in
finding out whether there exist assistive devices that could benefit them,
and if so, where they are, whether they work as claimed, and how to goEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES127about acquiring them.  The establishment of systems that could provide this
kind of information seems to us to be a worthwhile goal.  Clearly, there are

human factors issues involved in ensuring the usefulness and usability of
such systems.One can even imagine a nationwide network-accessible information ex-change tailored to the needs of people with disabilities.  This could provide

up-to-date information not only about assistive devices but also about em-
ployment opportunities, services, training programs, activities of special-
interest groups, recent legislation pertaining to disabilities, and who is do-
ing what in disability-related research and development, as well as suggestions
and advice on the use of specific devices.  Such an exchange would put

disabled people in two-way contact with other individuals and groups with
common problems/interests.  It would permit the asking of 
ÒDoes anybodyknow?Ó questions of the type one commonly finds on electronic bulletin
boards.  And it could serve as a gateway to other network-accessible re-

sources.In our view, one of the attractions of modern telecommunications tech-nology is its potential to enrich the lives of people with disabilities in a
variety of ways.  It is not safe to assume, however, that this potential will

be realized without explicit efforts by technologists, particularly those with
a special interest in the human dimensions of technological change.REFERENCESABLE DATA1989ABLE DATA:  The Resource for Disability-Related Consumer Products. Newington,Conn.:  Adaptive Equipment Center (181 E. Cedar St.).
Behrmann, M.1989Development of an Expert System for Assistive Technology Identification.  Pre-
sentation at Closing the Gap conference, Minneapolis, Minn.Boff, K.B., and J.E. Lincoln1988Engineering Data Compendium, Human Perception and Performance.  Wright-
Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio:  Armstrong Aerospace Medical Research Labora-
tory.Bowe, F.G.1984Personal Computers and Special Needs.  Berkeley, Calif.:  Sybex Computer Books.Bureau of the Census1987Statistical Abstract of the United States. Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of
Commerce.1989Statistical Abstract of the United States. Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of
Commerce.Campbell, J.P.1990An overview of the Army Selection and Classification Project (Project A).  
Per-sonnel Psychology 43:231-239.
Card, S.K., T.P. Moran, and A. Newell1983The Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction.  Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHCasali, S.P.1995A physical skills-based strategy for choosing an appropriate interface method.  In
A.D.N. Edwards, ed., Extra-Ordinary Human-Computer Interaction.  London, En-
gland:  Cambridge University Press.
Casali, S.P., and R.C. Williges1990Data bases of accommodative aids for computer users with disabilities.  
HumanFactors 32:407-422.
Corker, K., L. Davis, B. Papazian, and R. Pew1986Development of an Advanced Task Analysis Methodology and Demonstration forArmy-NASA Aircrew/Aircraft Integration.  Report 6124.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Bolt
Beranek and Newman.Czaja, S.J.1987Human factors in office automation.  Pp. 1587-1616 in G. Salvendy, ed., 
Hand-book of Human Factors.  New York:  Wiley.
Czaja, S.J., ed.1990Human Factors Research Needs for an Aging Population.  Panel on Human Fac-
tors Research Issues for an Aging Population, Committee on Human Factors, Na-tional Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Edwards, A.D.N., ed.1995Extra-Ordinary Human-Computer Interaction.  London, England: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.Egan, D.E., and L.M. Gomez1985Assaying, isolating, and accommodating individual differences in learning a com-
plex skill.  Pp. 173-217 in R.F. Dillon, ed., 
Individual Differences in Cognition,Vol. 2.  Orlando, Fla.:  Academic Press.
Elkind, J.I.1990The incidence of disabilities in the United States.  
Human Factors 32:397-405.
Elkind, J.I., and J. Shrager1995Modeling and analysis of dyslexic writing using speech and other modalities.  In
A.D.N. Edwards, ed., Extra-Ordinary Human-Computer Interaction.  London, En-
gland:  Cambridge University Press.
Elkind, J.I., S.K. Card, J. Hochberg, and B.M. Huey, eds.1990Human Performance Models for Computer-Aided Engineering.  Committee on
Human Factors, National Research Council.  San Diego, Calif.:  Academic Press.
Gilbreth, F.B., and L.M. Gilbreth
[1917] 1973 Applied Motion Study.  Easton, Pa.:  Hive Publishing.
Griffith, D., D.J. Garder-Bonneau, A.D.N. Edwards, J.I. Elkind, and R.C. Williges, eds.1989Human factors research with special populations will further advance the theory
and practice of the human factors discipline.  Pp. 565-566 in 
Proceedings of theHuman Factors Society 33rd Annual Meeting.  Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human
Factors Society.Hartzell, E.J., E.W. Aiken, and J.W. Vorhees1984Aircrew-aircraft integration issues in future U.S. Army helicopters.  In 
AGARDHuman Factors Considerations in High Performance Aircraft.  Moffett Field,
Calif.:  NASA Ames Research Center.
Kelley, P.L., and K.H.E. Kroemer1990Anthropometry of the elderly:  status and recommendations.  Human Factors 32:571-595.Kraus, L.E., and S. Stoddard1989Chart Book on Disability in the United States:  An InfoUse Report
.  National
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research. Washington, D.C.:  U.S. De-
partment of Education.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMPLOYMENT AND DISABILITIES129Kraut, R.E.1987Technology and the Transformation of White Collar Work
.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  LawrenceErlbaum Associates.Larimer, J., A. Arditi, J. Bergen, and N. Badler1989Visibility Modeling Project.  Moffett Field, Calif.:  National Aeronautics and SpaceAdministration.McDaniel, J.W., and W.B. Askren1985Computer-Aided Design Models to Support Ergonomics.  Wright-Patterson Air
Force Base, Ohio:  Harry G. Armstrong Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory.
Mueller, J.1990The Workplace Workbook:  An Illustrated Guide to Job Accommodation and AssistiveTechnology.  Washington, D.C.:  Dole Foundation (available from RESNA Press).
Newell, A.F.1990Unified Theories of Cognition.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press.
1995Extra-ordinary human-computer interaction.  In A.D.N. Edwards, ed., 
Extra-Ordi-nary Human-Computer Interaction.  London, England:  Cambridge University Press.Nickerson, R.S.1986Using Computers:  Human Factors in Information Systems
.  Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.Paquette, S.P.1990Human Analogue Models for Computer-Aided Design and Engineering Applica-tions.  Natick, Mass.:  Army Natick Research and Engineeering Center.
Peterson, N.G., L.M. Hough, M.D. Dunnette, R.L. Rosse, J.S. Houston, and J.L. Toquam1990Project A:  specification of the predictor domain and development of new selec-
tion/classification test.  Personnel Psychology 43:247-276.
Rauch, J.1989Kids as capital.  
Atlantic Monthly August:56-61.
Rosen, M.J., and C. Goodenough-Trapagnier1989The Tufts-MIT prescription guide:  assessment of users to predict the suitability of
augmentative communication devices.  Applied Technology 1(3):51-61.
Salvendy, G., ed.1987Handbook of Human Factors.  New York:  Wiley.
Sheridan, T.B.1980Computers and human alienation.  
Technology Review 83:60-67, 70-73.
Short, J., E. Williams, and B. Christie1976The Social Psychology of Telecommunications.  New York:  Wiley.
Smith, D.B.D.1990Human factors and aging:  an overview of research needs and applications oppor-
tunities.  Human Factors 32:509-526.
Sorensen, R.J.1979Design for Accessibility.  New York:  Wiley.
Strassmann, P.A.1985Information Payoff:  The Transformation of Workers in the Electronic Age
.  New
York:  Free Press.
Texas Young Lawyers Association1990The Americans With Disabilities Act:  An Overview
.  Austin:  Texas Young Law-
yers Association (P.O. Box 12487).Trace Research and Development Center1988Trace Center Resource Book.  Trace Research and Development Center on Com-
munication, Control, and Computer Access for Handicapped Individuals.  Madi-

son:  University of Wisconsin.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHVachon, R.A.1990Employing the disabled.  
Issues in Science and Technology 6(2):44-50.
Vanderheiden, G.C.1988Considerations in the Design of Computers and Operating Systems to IncreaseTheir Accessibility to Persons With Disabilities.  Design Consideration Task Force,Trace Research and Development Center on Communication, Control, and Com-
puter Access for Handicapped Individuals.  Madison:  University of Wisconsin.
1990Thirty-something million:  should they be exceptions?  
Human Factors 32:383-
396.Vaughan, R.J., and S.E. Berryman1989Employer-sponsored training:  current status, future possibilities. 
National Centeron Education and Employment NCEE Brief 4:1-4.
Williges, R.C., and B.H. Williges1995Travel alternatives for the mobility impaired: the surrogate electronic traveler (SET).
In A.D.N. Edwards, ed., Extra-Ordinary Human-Computer Interaction.  London,
England:  Cambridge University Press.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1314Health CareRoberta L. Klatzky and M.M. AyoubINTRODUCTIONIn considering human factors research needs related to health care, weare particularly concerned with new research topics that are likely to reflect
societal and technological developments in the coming decade.  We also

consider more long-standing problems that previous research has failed to
address.  In keeping with the general goals of this volume, our goal is to

highlight problems in which human capabilities and processes play a criti-
cal role and thus to identify areas in which human factors researchers can
make a significant contribution.  Health care consumes a large and growing

proportion of the U.S. gross national product; new developments have con-
sequences for the quality and duration of many lives.  Even a small change

in the effectiveness of workers, medical devices, or care-giving environ-
ments can translate into a large impact on costs and human comfort.Health care has not been a traditional focus for human factors research.This was noted two decades ago in a report on an international NATO
symposium (Pickett and Triggs, 1974), whose goal was to provide examples
of how human factors techniques could be applied to medical issues.  In an

introductory overview to that report, Rappaport cited a variety of contribu-
tions that human factors specialists could make to the health care field (see
also Rappaport, 1970).  He foresaw the increased use of computers in medi-

cine and suggested that human factors specialists might interact directly
with manufacturers of medical equipment to improve designs.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHThese seminal efforts notwithstanding, human factors researchers havenot been greatly involved in the area of health care.  For example, despite

the long-standing concern of human factors specialists with sources of er-
ror, a symposium on human error in medicine held at the 1991 meeting of
the Human Factors Society (Bogner, 1991) appears to have been the first of
its kind (Van Cott, 1991).  The dearth of attention to the potential contribu-

tions of human factors research is unfortunate; the field has much to offer
with respect to designing medical devices, human-machine interfaces, and
medical environments such as operating rooms and laboratories.  Another

area of application is trainingÑnot only of medical personnel but also of
patients and home caregivers who use medical devices.  Further, because of

rapid technological change, the skills of medical personnel and of others
working with medical devices may require frequent updating.While we emphasize new research needs in this chapter, we should notforget that the health-care arena offers ample opportunities to apply already
well-known principles of human factors.  Medical errors point to the need

for such application; there is a huge number of contexts in which error can
and does occur.Operating rooms are one example.  There the medical practitioner mightbe compared to a member of a flight crew, as many of the same human
factors issues apply.  There is a necessity for teamwork, often with critical

timing constraints (Helmreich and Schaefer, 1994; Regnier, 1993).  Good

communication among team members is imperative.  There can be peaks of

high stress, which are likely to coincide with points when timing is particu-
larly important.  The workplace is complex, with multiple instruments giv-

ing independent readings that must be integrated by the user.  And of course,
errors resulting from these sources may have dire consequences.  Bogner

(1991) has cited the substantial number of potentially preventable incidents
in which anesthesia has resulted in brain damage or death.The administration of drugs is another area in which errors frequentlyoccur.  Many medical errors within the home can be traced to inadequate

instruction in the use of medicines or devices or to the complexities of
labeling.  Although steps to reduce such errors could be taken on the basis

of existing human factors principles, it is also important to evaluate the
target context carefully; this may call for further research (Cook, 1991).The plan of the chapter is as follows.  We first discuss some general
technological and societal trends that are likely to have an impact on medi-
cal practices in the future and consider the human factors implications of
these trends.  We then describe, in more detail, several broad areas that are

likely to raise specific issues for human factors research:  enhanced under-

standing of risk factors and its impact on programs for behavioral change
and disease prevention, advances in medical information technology, tech-
nological advances in medical instrumentation, and ergonomic issues thatEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE133arise in health care procedures.  Clearly, we cannot hope to introduce every
potential area of application for human factors research in medicine.  The

sample we do present is intended to demonstrate the importance of in-
creased involvement in the medical field by human factors specialists.  A

recurring theme in this discussion is how technological advances in medical
care create new needs for human factors research.  Although new health

care needs may arise independently from technologyÑfor example, throughdemographic or social trends or through new understanding of requirements
for device designÑresponses to these needs increasingly reflect todayÕshighly computerized environment.NEW TRENDS IN HEALTH CAREA number of trends in medicine indicate ample opportunities for contri-butions from human factors research in the coming decade.  Some of these

trends are related to the development of new health care needs, whereasothers are related to new tools, particularly tools made possible by advancesin electronics.Demographic ChangeAs the relatively numerous post-World War II generation ages, it willinevitably place greater demands on the medical system, and the concomi-
tant increase in demand for health care by that aging population is likely to
raise a number of issues that human factors research can address.  (Human

factors research needs for the aging have recently been reviewed in a publi-
cation of the Committee on Human FactorsÑCzaja, 1990.)Whereas the human factors industry has been extensively concernedwith the design of workplace environments, there is a need for research on
the design of appropriate domestic environments for the aged population.
One goal should be to minimize the risk of accidents, which involve the
elderly disproportionately (Czaja, 1990).  A broader question is how envi-

ronmental design might promote good health, both physical and psychologi-
cal.  The answer should take account of the effects of communal living,

which seems to be increasingly likely in the face of high housing and health
costs.  The goal of constructing a living space that encourages social inter-

action while maintaining individual privacy is a challenging one.  Another

problem is how dwelling designs might encourage exercise in an otherwise
sedentary population without imposing undue physical stress.Aging also introduces problems of compliance with health recommen-dations, for example, difficulty in adhering to an adequate diet or remem-
bering to take pills.  These problems may be significantly ameliorated by

simple external reminder systems that aid what has been called prospectiveEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHmemory.  The human factors area has contributed to research on sensory,
biomechanical, and psychomotor effects of aging (see Small, 1987).  There

are also cognitive changes that can fruitfully be studied from a human
factors perspective with the goal of improving the health practices of an
aging population.It is also important to note that the current population of middle-agedadults is different from its predecessors:  it is healthier, better informed, and
more interested in health care.  Many patients today seek to play an active

role in prevention and medical treatment.  The trend toward increasing

patient participation in medical decision making raises many important questions:
How can we inform patients about risk factors, preventive measures, and
treatment options?  How can we aid their decisions?  We will consider these
issues in more detail below.Societal ChangeAn event of substantial societal impact is the emergence of highly in-fectious and/or untreatable diseases.  The prospect of disease transmission

in the workplace indicates an important problem for the human factors area,
and medical personnel are particularly vulnerable.  Interactions between

patients and health care workers are coming under increasing scrutiny be-
cause of highly publicized cases of disease transmission.  Clearly, there is a

call for measures to safeguard the welfare of both groups, and human fac-
tors research should be fully involved in the development of such safe-
guards.The increasing cost of health care is another trend, one outcome ofwhich is decreased hospitalization and, concomitantly, increased home care.
More and more frequently, home care incorporates medical devices that
may be quite complex to maintain and operate.  Human factors concerns

should include the design of these devices, the nature of instructions, how
individuals are trained to use them, and how stress might alter user compe-
tence.For a substantial number of individuals in the United States, neitherhome care nor hospitalization is an alternative.  Homeless people combine a

high propensity for medical needs with a low ability to pay for treatment.
They may be shut out of the medical system, and when those who find
medical help are given recommendations for treatment, they may be unable
to purchase needed drugs or conform to medical regimens.  What human

factors research can contribute is less clear in this area than in others such
as workplace or instrument design.  Yet it is in keeping with the goals of

this volume that we mention the need to create avenues for diagnosis and
treatment among those least able to seek help.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE135Technological AdvancesTechnologically advanced tools for health care include not only instru-ments for treatment of disease and trauma, but also systems for communica-
tion among medical researchers, practitioners, and supervisory agencies.
Computer technology has created such diverse phenomena as new methods
for medical imaging, large-scale databases related to patients and treat-
ments, on-line bibliographies, automated decision aids, and computer-con-
trolled surgical devices.  As was noted above, new medical devices also

make home treatment possible for patients who would once have required
care in a health facility.  New technology for assisting and retraining the

disabled is discussed in Chapter 3.As is generally the case, technological advances have produced newtools faster than research can be done on human factors related to their use.
We need to understand how to make new techniques and devices as effec-
tive and accessible as possible.RISK ASSESSMENT AND PREVENTIVE PRACTICESIn both the United States and abroad, individuals are increasingly seek-ing control of health care practices.  This reflects a growing knowledge of

risk factors and greater interest in taking preventive steps.  The computer

has had significant impact on peopleÕs knowledge of health risks, a devel-opment that is in keeping with our general theme of research needs based
on technological advances.Risk AssessmentOne role of the computer in medicine has been to provide data aboutpatient populations, giving rise to assessments of risk factors and prognostic
factors in disease.  For example, a very large database has been compiled by
the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program of the
National Cancer Institute.  Combined with data from the National Center

for Health Statistics, which provides mortality rates, the SEER data provide
direct assessment of cancer incidence and mortality over time.  These data

have been used to study a variety of issues related to etiological factors in
cancer.  Another example of a significant data source is the Breast Cancer

Detection Demonstration Project (BCDDP), with over a quarter of a million
participants.  Data from the BCDDP have led to a technique for absolute

risk assessment in breast cancer (Gail et al., 1989).  Numerous databases

are available from epidemiological surveys and experimental studies in the
United States and abroad.It is increasingly clear that behavioral, demographic, and familial char-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHacteristics are predictors of the risk of incurring disease.  Among the most
significant risk factors that have been identified are behavioral characteris-
tics, including whether an individual smokes and how much dietary fat he
or she consumes.  For example, it has been estimated that approximately 75

percent of deaths from cancer are attributable to lifestyle (Williams, 1991).
Cessation of smoking could reduce lung cancer deaths by over 75 percent;
modification of diet could reduce cancer deaths by over 25 percent (Newell
and Vogel, 1988).Health risks arise not only from personal behaviors and attributes; risksdue to substances found in the workplace and natural environment are being
identified by both experimental and epidemiological techniques (see Swanson,
1988).  On-the-job exposure to radiation is a health risk.  Vibration may

cause damage to the circulatory and nervous systems and to bones and
joints.  Increasingly, occupational stress is being considered a risk factor

(Levi, 1990; Smith, 1987).Some newly encountered risk factors pose formidable challenges.  Theseinclude the risk of AIDS transmission to health care workers from needle
sticks or handling of bodily fluids.  In communities with particularly high

rates of HIV infection, it has been estimated that dental workers may have
risk levels equivalent to those of homosexuals (Morris and Turgut, 1990).
In one survey of medical residents in training during 1989, more than half
those surveyed had HIV patients under their care, and 9 percent reported
having been exposed to HIV from a needle stick (Hayward and Shapiro,
1991).  Hepatitis B virus is an even greater occupational risk for the medi-

cal community, whose members have a risk of infection up to 10 times that
of the public (Hadler, 1990).Communication of Risk FactorsAn approach known as Òhealth risk appraisalÓ began some two decades
ago in an effort to make use of risk information (for a general review, see
Health Services Research, 1987).  The general idea behind the approach is
that risk factors can be measured for a person (objectively or by self-re-
port), and an estimate of that personÕs risk of disease can then be derived. Ahealth professional would then communicate this personalized estimate to
the patient, along with information about what factors are contributing to
risk and what possible lifestyle changes he or she can adopt in response.  If

the person decides to make the suggested changes, the risk factors should be
altered and risk should accordingly be reduced.Each of the basic assumptions underlying health risk appraisal has beencriticized.  The adequacy of risk-factor assessment has been questioned,

relying as it does on the patientÕs ability to retrieve personal data and his orher inclination to report them accurately.  The models used to derive risk
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE137have also been criticized for making statistical assumptions that may besimplified or inaccurate.  In addition, there is still not a great deal of evi-

dence for the effectiveness of risk assessment in inducing risk-reduction
behaviors.These criticisms have not, however, prevented the public from beingintensely interested in risk factors and disease prevention.  Public interest in
reducing cholesterol, for example, has considerably altered dietary habits in
the United States.  National agencies have used known risk factors such as

familial incidence and age to adjust recommended regimens of screening
tests for diseases.  It seems clear that risk assessment (population and per-

sonalized), along with attendant recommendations for behavioral change,
will increasingly be part of the American health scene.Prevention Programs in the Workplace and CommunityOnce people are informed of risk factors, preventive practices may takevarious forms, including controlling toxic substances, designing environ-
ments that reduce local exposure, and promoting risk-reducing behaviors.
Of these interventions, design of the physical workplace has been a tradi-
tional focus of human factors and will continue to be important in reducing
exposure to risk factors and occupational hazards.  A less obvious contribu-

tion to be made by human factors is in helping to change the behaviors of
individuals.  In particular, an important vehicle for behavioral change is the

institution of educational and motivational programs for groups.Group prevention programs have taken place in educational, commu-nity, and work environments.  For example, the Pawtucket Heart Health

Program attempted to treat obesity in an entire community (Lasater et al.,
1991; Carleton et al., 1991).  Components of the program included a monthly
citywide Òweigh in,Ó  labeling of items in grocery stores and on menus,
blood-cholesterol screening, a student cook-off, and church programs, all
facilitated by enlisting a large number of community volunteers.  Substan-

tial reductions in serum cholesterol were observed in the initial pilot study.
Another example is the ÒKnow Your BodyÓ project, funded by the National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the National Cancer Institute.  This

attempted to modify risk-inducing behaviors in schoolchildren and was found
to be successful in reducing the rate of cigarette smoking several years later
(Walter, 1989).  Community screening for breast cancer is another success

story (Paryani et al., 1990).  The movement toward risk-prevention and

screening programs in the workplace is growing (Breslow et al., 1990).One scenario for the creation of a community or workplace preventionprogram is to begin with controlled trials that demonstrate the effectiveness
of a preventive behavior, followed by extensive dissemination of results to
enhance public awareness.  This has been done in the case of the link
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHbetween reduced blood cholesterol and decreased incidence of heart dis-ease.  Following one well-publicized prevention study, there was a substan-

tial increase in public acceptance of the beneficial effects of cholesterol
reduction (Schucker et al., 1987).  This undoubtedly created a receptive

audience for community interventions like the Pawtucket program.Human Factors Challenges Related to Risk Assessmentand Preventive PracticesThere is a clear need for further human factors research on how infor-mation about risk and its reduction should be communicated and how these
communications are interpreted.  Risk communication is complex, as a re-

cent National Research Council publication attests (National Research Council,
1989).  Even when the effects of a risk factor can be reasonably estimated,

the nature of the risk may be communicated in different ways.  Should we

be told that a risk is 5 percent for a year or (equivalently) 0.4 percent for a
month?  Is it more meaningful to know the risk of death or the expected

reduction in years of life expectancy?  Does it help to have a standard of

comparison, for example, to know that the risk of HIV to surgeons perform-
ing 25 operations on infected patients is about the same as that of death on a
Louisiana oil rig over the course of a year (Orient, 1990)?  Once communi-

cated, risk statistics are subject to cognitive reasoning processes that may
introduce other sources of error or distortion.  For example, whether a risk

is framed in terms of the probability of positive or negative outcomes will
affect an individualÕs response (Tversky and Kahneman, 1981).  Another
problem is that the small probabilities associated with many medical risks
may be difficult for people to interpret.  Perhaps that is why having per-

sonal knowledge about someone who contracts a disease has such a potent
effect.  For example, the national incidence of tests for breast and colon

cancer increased dramatically after Nancy and Ronald Reagan incurred these
diseases.Becker and Janz (1987) have provided a theoretical analysis of healthrisk appraisal that points to some other relevant issues.  One is whether

personalized risk estimates are more effective than population estimates,
and if so, why.  Another is how to motivate risk-reducing behavior, for

example, by promoting belief in the alterability of risk factors or by in-
creasing the awareness of risky behavior.  The introduction of warnings on

cigarette packages is an example of public policy intended to increase risk
awareness.The design of group programs to increase positive health practices isanother area in which human factors research can make important and wide-
spread contributions.  Programs aimed at reducing smoking, decreasing fat

intake and increasing fiber, reducing recreational sun exposure, and induc-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE139ing compliance with screening programs for such diseases as breast andcolon cancer are among those that promise to have very beneficial results
(Fink, 1987).  Research to increase the effectiveness of such programs would
be of considerable societal value.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGYThe computer can not only store data but also deliver data directly tomedical practitioners and patients.  The general area concerned with infor-

mation encoding, representation, and communication in medicine is called
medical informatics.  Chapter 7 discusses medical informatics in the broader
context of information systems.  In this section we consider a number of

medical contexts in which information delivery is critical and the implica-
tions of these contexts for human factors research needs.On-Line Information RetrievalSeveral databases are directly available to medical workers and, in somecases, patients as well.  Examples are MEDLINE, which provides titles and

abstracts of recently published articles in the medical literature and was
developed by the National Library of Medicine, and CANCERLIT, a simi-
lar bibliographic system with a narrower range of citations.  MEDLINE is

available on CD-ROM from several companies and can be accessed by
modem.The National Cancer Institute has developed Physician Data Query (PDQ),a computer database for information about advances in cancer treatment and
clinical trials (see Hubbard et al., 1987).  Protocols of currently active

clinical trials are entered into PDQ and are indexed by disease and eligibil-
ity criteria.  In addition, PDQ provides state-of-the-art information about

disease characteristics and prognosis.  There has been considerable effort to

make PDQ available to the medical community.  The system can be ac-

cessed at thousands of medical libraries and centers, and several commer-
cial vendors have been licensed to distribute PDQ via networks and CD-
ROM.Decision Aids and Expert SystemsInformation delivery can be extremely helpful in medical decision mak-ing.  Computer programs variously known as knowledge-based systems,

decision aids, and expert systems are meant to facilitate the many medical
decisions that must be made by both medical workers and patients.  Whether
these programs succeed depends in part on how well they are tailored to the
humans who use them.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHAutomated decision systems emerged at least three decades prior to the1990s (Ledley and Lusted, 1961).  These systems generally have two com-

ponentsÑa knowledge base of facts, often in the form of rules, and proce-dures for using the facts, sometimes called the inference engine.  When

applied to a specific problem, the system also requires data about its charac-
teristics.  Expert systems are so called because the underlying knowledge is
derived from experts.  The term 
decision aid suggests a program that pro-
vides some of the information that is useful in decision making, often quan-
tified or structured data, but that leaves other elements to the user.  In

practice, an expert system generally functions as a decision aid in that it
contributes to decision making rather than governing it.One of the best-known expert systems is MYCIN (Shortliffe, 1976),which is designed to identify the source of a bacterial infection and to
recommend treatment.  MYCIN has been augmented by instructional pro-

grams that train potential users.  Recently the National Library of Medicine

has developed AI/RHEUM, a diagnostic system for rheumatologic diseases
(Kingsland et al., 1986).  This program features an extensive help system

that incorporates video images as well as text.The range of application of knowledge-based systems is now very wide,including, for example, diagnosis, prescription, causal interpretation of data,
medical consulting, and selection of adjuvant therapies.  When one consid-

ers that each of these areas can be appled to many specific diseases or
problem areas, it is clear that the number of potential programs is immense.
Commercially available shells, which specify a format for the knowledge
base and provide an inference engine, are intended to simplify the develop-
ment of new systems.Computerized decision aids are attractive in part because of evidencethat human decision making is far from ideal.  People have been character-

ized as subject to heuristics and biases that introduce error (for review in a
medical context, see Dowie and Elstein, 1988).  People
Õs decisions differdepending on the way problems are presented (framing effects), how much
has been expended on a solution in the past (sunk costs), what sample
solutions are provided (anchoring and adjustment), and the extent to which
they can retrieve past solutions from memory (availability).  Medical deci-

sions are complex; the computer can facilitate decision making by provid-
ing as much relevant data as possible, along with a content-free objective
decision process.Human Factors Challenges Related to Information TechnologyPast human factors research in several areas has intersected with needsin medical informatics.  Relevant research topics include modeling of deci-

sion making and design of usable interfaces for expert systems.  We suggest
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE141here, then, not so much new substantive topics as specific applications thatpresent new research needs.A traditional goal of human factors research has been to improve theaccessibility of tools.  This goal is critical to the successful application of

systems for information delivery, as Chapter 7 discusses at length.  A need

for increased accessibility of medical information systems is clear in that
the explosion of information available to medical practitioners has not nec-
essarily resulted in widespread use.  The National Cancer Institute recently

conducted a formal evaluation of the PDQ system (Czaja et al., 1989).
Despite intensive publicity about the system and efforts to make it maxi-
mally available to health care workers, fewer than 50 percent of physicians
in cancer specialties were aware of it, and only about half these physicians
reported using it.  Use by community physicians who were not in oncological
specialties was termed Òvery low.Ó  The greatest use was by employees of
the Cancer Information Service, who provide information to the public.The low level of PDQ use was attributed in part to physiciansÕ discom-
fort with computers.  The primary use of computers in a clinical practice

tends to be for administration and word processing rather than for access to
information or for automated decision facilitation.  There are also problems

with negative attitudes about computers.  For example, only 5 percent of

non-oncologists in the PDQ review indicated that computerized data re-
trieval was very important.It seems clear that there is a yawning gap between the availability oftechnological toolsÑwhich provide data about disease risk, diagnosis, prog-nosis, and treatment as well as automated aids for decision makingÑandthe use of these tools.  Human factors research can play an important role in

bridging this gap.  Some of the problems that must be considered are the

following:¥The user interface.  It is by now a given that the success of a
computer program designed for general use depends on its Òuser friendli-ness.Ó  Because the designers of PDQ were aware that medical practitioners
might be unfamiliar with computers, PDQ software offers menus as well as
direct commands; some instructions are also given on-line.  The evaluation

suggests, however, that these measures are insufficient to promote wide-
spread use.¥Medical training.  Medical schools do not currently include exten-
sive training in medical informatics in their curricula, although efforts to
increase such training are under way (Ball and Douglas, 1990).  The Na-

tional Library of Medicine has created an elective medical informatics course
for advanced medical students, which is intended to create a Òseed cropÓ of
researchers in this area (National Institutes of Health, 1991).  Given the

demands of the medical curriculum, any such training must be highly effi-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHcient; it is unlikely to receive a substantial portion of overall educationtime.  Postgraduate training in the use of specific programs
Ñconducted, forexample, in connection with professional meetingsÑmay be a way to in-crease computer fluency.Medical schools also do not currently provide extensive training inepidemiology and statistics (Klatzky et al., 1994); again, it is unclear that
such training can be justified in the general curriculum.  Yet the evaluation

of retrieved information is critical, and this may depend on an understand-
ing of the statistical measures and models that were used to derive it.  Klatzky
et al. suggested that one approach to this problem is to provide on-line
introductions to basic statistical concepts as part of a database retrieval
program or decision aid.¥Attitudes about technological aids.  Negative attitudes about the
usefulness of computerized data retrieval were cited as a potential barrier to
the use of PDQ by practicing physicians.  More generally, discomfort with

decision aids such as computer-guided diagnoses or treatment plans may
preclude their use.  Efforts to bring technological aids to the practicing

clinician should include attitude change as a goal.  It should be made clear

that computer programs can greatly assist the physician in acquiring rel-
evant data and putting them to use.It should not be forgotten that patients, too, play a role in decisionmaking.  There has been relatively little effort to provide data to patients or

to assist them in making decisions about treatment.  Research is needed to

ascertain the extent to which patients wish to play a decision-making role as
well as to determine what resources might aid them.  A straightforward

approach is to construct patient-oriented databases of general information
about diseases and appropriate references.  The question then becomes how

to maximize the accessibility of the information.Patients often make decisions under considerable stress.  Research needsrelated to the effects of stress on cognition are reviewed in Chapter 10, but
it is important to note here that there has been little research on the stress
induced by diagnosis of disease.  In some diseases, for example, breast

cancer, a range of treatment options are available.  Typically, patients make

decisions about treatment shortly after diagnosis, when stress is likely to be
greatest.  Meyerowitz (1980) suggests that the psychological impact of breast
cancer diagnosis and treatment may be as threatening as the disease itself.
Human factors researchers could address such questions as the effects of
stress on decision making in this context and the potential role of automated
data retrieval and decision aids.  The prevalence of breast cancer suggests

that it could provide a useful paradigm for research on stress among medi-
cal patients.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE143MEDICAL INSTRUMENTATIONThe continued presence of the familiar blood-pressure cuff notwith-standing, the computer has virtually revolutionized medical instrumenta-
tion.  Bioinstrumentation is a term that has been applied to the combination
of electronic and biological technology (Wise, 1990).  Bioinstruments in-

clude, for example, biomedical imaging systems that take advantage of the
computer for gathering, enhancing, and displaying data; electrochemical
sensors that incorporate whole living cells in their construction; artificial
sensing devices such as tactile sensors based on force-sensitive polymers;
and transducers such as cochlear implants.As is the case with any technological change, advances in medicalinstrumentation lead to problems in mastering the new technology and cre-
ate needs for human factors research.  The pace of advance means that

researchers must Òenter the loopÓ quickly.  This has frequently not been the
case.  Here we briefly describe examples of new developments in instru-

mentation and consider related human factors needs.Medical ImagingMedical imaging is a century old; the X-ray was discovered in 1895.The fundamental requirements for an imaging system remain the same.  What
is needed is some means of acquiring information about the imaged site and
some means of displaying that information.  However, technological ad-

vances have greatly expanded the ways to meet both of these requirements
and have added other capabilities, particularly new means of analyzing,
enhancing, and interpreting the data.A variety of techniques for acquiring information about a targeted siteare in widespread use today.  Two-dimensional images like that provided by
the X-ray are the basis for computed tomography, in which a contiguous
sequence of cross-sectional images is used to synthesize a three-dimen-
sional representation.  Magnetic resonance imaging relies on the activity of

atoms when placed in a magnetic field to construct a two-dimensional im-
age.  Positron emission tomography uses the distribution of radioactivity to

produce two-dimensional slices that can then be used to construct a three-
dimensional model.  Still other methods are thermography, which measures

the distribution of temperature, and ultrasound.The resulting data are often subjected to a number of pre-processingalgorithms that, for example, detect edges, compute regions, reduce noise,
and extract and enhance critical features.  The data are then displayed in

various ways.  Multiple slices from different planes and at different depths

are often displayed simultaneously.  A three-dimensional surface descrip-

tion can be displayed as a high-quality two-dimensional projection onto aEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHviewing screen.  There is also the possibility of fully three-dimensional
display techniques such as holograms or a display through stereoscopic
viewers.  Color can be used to differentiate regions, especially when there

is no direct counterpart between acquired data and a visual feature (e.g.,
oxygen consumption or temperature).New techniques are increasingly expanding the ways medical imagesare displayed as well as how they are intepreted with the aid of knowledge-
based systems.  The potential usefulness of automated interpretation is sub-

stantial, given the density of the imaged information and the complexity of
the mapping between diagnostically relevant attributes of the body and vi-
sually apparent aspects of the image.  Swets et al. (1991) have described a

two-part interactive decision aid that first prompts the user to rate a given
image according to a series of scales and then uses the obtained scale values
to estimate the probability of malignancy, which is then communicated to
the user.  An analysis of breast-cancer diagnoses with and without the

decision aid revealed a clear advantage for using the aid, an advantage that
increased with the difficulty of the diagnosis.The use of film-based radiological images is expected to decrease, ow-ing to the advent of digital environments (Arenson et al., 1990).  A rapidly

developing tool is the picture archiving and communication system (PACS),
a digital workstation that will allow physicians to call up and display stored
images.  The 1990 meeting on medical imaging of the International Society

for Optical Engineering had 15 paper sessions and a poster session devoted
to PACS (Dwyer and Jost, 1990).  Among its many positive aspects, PACS

offers the possibility for on-line image enhancement and interpretation aids;
however, a negative aspect is the potential degradation in image quality due
to digital display.Techniques derived from perception and decision science have beenwidely used to evaluate the relative merits of imaging methods, as well as
to assess the effectiveness of enhancement techniques and the degradation
under systems like PACS.  In particular, an analysis using the area under

the relative operating characteristic (ROC; in the context of signal detection
theory, this is also called the receiver operating characteristic) has proven
highly effective.  The ROC plots the proportion of true positive responses

as a function of the proportion of false positives in a diagnostic test.  The

ROC measure is independent of the decision criterion and the frequency of
diagnosed events (Metz, 1989; Swets, 1988).  For example, Swets et al.

(1979), using this measure, found computed tomography to be more accu-
rate than radionuclide scanning in diagnosing brain lesions.Much attention has already been given to human factors considerationsin the design of medical imaging workstations (OÕMalley and Ricca, 1990).A key to physician acceptance of these systems seems to be perceived
savings in time and effort.  In one survey study of factors influencing the
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE145acceptance of PACS systems by radiologists (Saarinen et al., 1989), speedof information delivery was found to be the primary concern.  Thus, a

particularly positive aspect was the time that might be saved in traveling to
and from the site where radiological files were stored.  Physicians also

favored a system that would eliminate the need for multiple trips to retrieve
films that had been misplaced or temporarily checked out by others.  On the

negative side, physicians were concerned with the possibility of significant
downtime for the system.  Somewhat surprisingly, interest in PACS was not

affected by the age of the physician and was only slightly affected by prior
experience with computers.BiosensorsA biosensor is a device that places a transducer in close contact withmolecules of a biological substance in order to produce an output that is
correlated with concentration of the substance.  The general sequence by

which the sensor operates is that the measured substance interacts with a
Òbiological mediatorÓ (e.g., one or more enzymes, antibodies, or bacteria),
leading to an output (e.g., electrochemical, optical, or calorimetric) that can
be transformed into an electrical signal (Mascini et al., 1990).  Reviews of

biosensor technology can be found in Claremont (1987), Higgins and Lowe
(1987), and Wilkins (1989).  Schultz (1991) traces the modern biosensor to

two antecedents:  information technology, particularly the development of

miniaturized components, and molecular biology, which identifies biomolecules
that can serve as the mediators for recognizing the target substance.The field of biosensor technology is now burgeoning at both basic andapplied levels.  Attractive features of this technique include its speed, the

need for low-volume samples, and the possibility of in situ measurement
and long-term implantation.  The potential variety of biosensors is very

large; sensors have been developed to measure such substances as urea,
cholesterol, proteins, alcohol, and penicillin.   These devices have wide-

spread application beyond health care; for example, they are used in the
food industry to measure contaminants.One of the first areas of health care application of biosensors, andprobably the most developed, is sensing of glucose concentrations (e.g.,
Ross et al., 1990; Schaffar and Wolfbeis, 1990).  This has obvious impor-

tant benefits to diabetics.  For decades, diabetics have done home glucose

monitoring by using visual assessment of color changes on reagent strips
dipped in urine or blood.  These methods have a high potential for error,

and, particularly with urine testing, there is considerable temporal lag be-
tween a change in blood glucose and the ability to detect it.  Subjective

visual monitoring and urine tests for diabetes have given way to blood
glucose monitors, pocket-sized electronic devices that assess the level ofEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHglucose from a blood sample by sensing results of its interaction with anenzyme.  By performing periodic measurements and adjusting insulin injec-

tions or diet accordingly, diabetic patients can maintain acceptable glucose
levels with minimal fluctuation.Biosensors not only make possible more direct and accurate evaluationbut also provide the possibility of long-term implantation.  An implanted

glucose sensor is critical to the development of an artificial pancreas that
would monitor glucose levels and adjust insulin injections automatically;
most of the components for such a system now exist.  Expert-system tech-

nology can also be combined with glucose sensing to regulate glucose lev-
els (Lougheed et al., 1987).Medical Devices for Home CareAs was mentioned above, a clear trend in health care is to dischargepatients after shorter hospitalizations, necessitating increased home care.
Often, this is made possible by sending the patient home with a medical
device.  For example, ventilators may be placed in the home for patients

with respiratory problems (Bach et al., 1992; Thompson and Richmond,
1990).  Patients may receive medication at home with infusion pumps, elec-

tronically controlled devices used to regulate the flow of drugs along lines
implanted in the body, for example subcutaneous catheters or venous access
ports.  These devices are used to supply antibiotics, drugs to reduce pain,

and chemotherapy (New et al., 1991; Reville and Almadrones, 1989; Storey
et al., 1990).  Some patients receive 
Òtotal parenteral nutrition,Ó their entire
daily calorie requirement, intravenously at home (Bisset et al., 1992; Viall,
1990).  Home dialysis machines now enable kidney patients to undergo

dialysis even while they sleep (Delano and Friedman, 1990; Health De-vices, 1991).  Although these devices have considerable benefits, not only
economically but also in terms of patient welfare and satisfaction, they also
put responsibility on home caregivers and patients alike.Human Factors Challenges Related to Medical InstrumentationThe contributions that human factors researchers can make to the devel-opment and use of medical imaging seem enormous.  New techniques for

acquiring, displaying, and evaluating images call for increased interaction
between the human user and the computer.  User options for image en-

hancement and display adjustment increase the complexity of these sys-
tems.  The same points apply as those that emerged in the evaluation of the

PDQ system.  The effectiveness of these systems will substantially depend

on the extent to which the interface renders technology accessible, given the
attitudes and training of physicians and technical staff.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE147Human factors researchers can also play a role in developing and evalu-ating systems for image enhancement and knowledge-based interpretation.
Each new modality creates anew such questions as, which imaged features
are most useful for diagnosis?  Currently, the discovery of relevant features

may be a piecemeal process taking several years; systematization of this
process is badly needed (Swets, personal communication).Advances in medical instruments to be used in hospitals and homes alsocreate a substantial need for human factors research.  Of course, any new

instrumentation calls for training of operators and appropriate design of
machine interfaces.  The increased use of medical devices at home carries

with it additional problems.One is the adequacy of training.  Written instructions and warnings
should obviously be very clear, and hands-on training is likely to be neces-
sary for all but the simplest devices.  Lack of education and language skills

by home users may hamper training efforts, as may advanced age.  Another

consideration is that stress from an incident such as machine malfunction
could undermine the effects of training.  Although the effects of long-term

stress imposed on home caregivers and patients have received some atten-
tion (e.g., Smith et al., 1991; Wegener and Aday, 1989), the cognitive
effects of acute stress merit more study.  Clearly, patients and caregivers

should have access to support personnel outside the home.  Often, pharma-

cists are the ones responsible for advising patients about a device when they
themselves have inadequate training (Kwan and Anderson, 1991).Training is but one concern.  Another is that the home environment
may not be well suited for the device in, for example, the type and reliabil-
ity of its power supply, the proximity of water and electrical connections,
and the space available for the equipment and appendages like oxygen tanks.
Ambient temperature may affect device function, and the home may not be
adequately equipped to control it.  Home use often demands that patients

follow a regular schedule, indicating a need to provide records of past
administration and to signal the next application.  As was mentioned previ-

ously, the elderly may in particular need reminder systems to trigger self-
care.Glucose measurement devices have been closely evaluated from a hu-man factors perspective (e.g., Kelly et al., 1990; McDonald, 1984; Moss
and Delawter, 1986) and hence provide a test bed with which to evaluate
home care more generally.  Kelly et al. found a number of problems with

even such a relatively simple device.  In evaluating the instructional materi-

als provided with blood glucose monitors, most diabetes educators judged
them inadequate and believed that additional instruction was necessary.  User
error was identified in nearly three-fourths of reported problems.  Patients

often failed to clean the device or to calibrate it properly, possibly in order
to reduce the time spent in operating it, and errors occurred at virtuallyEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHevery stage of operation.  In efforts to cut costs, some patients split test
strips so they could be used twice, with potentially adverse effects on sens-
ing accuracy.The case of the blood glucose monitor serves to emphasize the need forhuman factors research related to home use of medical devices.  Whereas

blood glucose monitors are simple devices and have been designed for pa-
tient use, other devices that are sent to the home may be far more complex
and may have been designed for hospital use only (e.g., for ventilators, see
Health Devices, 1988).  These devices are even more likely to have inad-
equate written documentation for home caregivers and it is likely that any
in-hospital training prior to discharge will be devised on an ad hoc basis.ERGONOMICS ISSUES INHEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEMSIn this section we discuss some of the biomechanical problems encoun-tered in health care, the magnitude of these problems, and the research
topics they raise.  Traditional concerns of human factors research, including

design of the workplace, design and implementation of devices, and perfor-
mance modeling, have substantial potential for application in medical contexts.Physical Stress to Nursing PersonnelIn any work system, including the health care delivery system, stressesare imposed on the body. These stresses can be (a) mechanical, involving
the musculoskeletal system; (b) physiological, involving the cardiopulmo-
nary system; or (c) psychological.  Physically demanding tasks often pro-

duce mechanical stress for the musculoskeletal system, particularly the spine,
resulting in low back injury.  In health care delivery systems, handling of

materialsÑparticularly the handling of patientsÑresults in high spinal stresses.Back injuries account for approximately one of every five injuries andillnesses in the workplace (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1982).  Nursing aides
and licensed practical nurses ranked fifth and ninth, respectively, in com-
pensation claims for back injuries (Klein et al., 1984).  Available statistics

indicate that nursing personnel are as likely to suffer from a compensable
back injury as are workers in occupations with heavy load-handling tasks
(Jensen, 1987).  Back injuries are the result of large stresses imposed on the

spine.  High levels of biomechanical stress imposed on the musculoskeletal

system, particularly the spine, have been reported in tasks performed by
nursing personnel (Gagnon et al., 1986;  Stubbs et al., 1983; Torma-Krajewski,
1986).  According to Lloyd et al. (1987), efficient and safe patient transfer

practices should be based on sound biomechanical considerations.
     Nursing personnel
Ñand nursing aides in particularÑoften lift, move,Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE149and transfer patients whose weights range from 37 kg to over 100 kg.These weights are higher than the capacity of most females (National Insti-
tute for Occupational Safety and Health, 1981).  Gagnon et al. (1986) re-

ported that the compressive forces on the L5/S1 disc ranged from 5.74 to
7.95 kilonewtons (kN) for a single person handling a 72 kg mannequin.
These values and the estimated compressive forces for handling a patient
using two persons are approximately 4.44 kN; the values are significantly
higher than the recommended National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health safe compression limits of 3.4 kN.Physical RehabilitationThe management of chronic pain and disability after an injury has al-ways been considered the exclusive domain of medical professionals.  Ergo-
nomic involvement in the pre-injury (prevention) and post-injury (rehabili-
tation and return-to-work) stages has been shown to contribute significantly
to the successful control and management of overall prevention and reha-
bilitation and the avoidance of disability recurrence (Khalil et al., 1985,
1988; Rosomoff, 1987; Rosomoff et al., 1981).  Important issues in the

rehabilitation of individuals with certain disabilities are measurement of
their functional performance, accurate and objective examination and as-
sessment of their capabilities and limitations, and quantitative descriptions
of them in terms of human performance profiles (HPP) (Abdel-Moty, 1991).In the evaluation of HPP, specific areas of interest are the following:(a) physical characteristics of the patient such as strength, flexibility, endur-
ance, and posture; (b) functional capacity of the patient in performing cer-
tain activities such as lifting and walking; and (c) work-related capacities
such as the ability to perform specific job tasks under prescribed conditions.
In evaluating patients with chronic pain or certain physical disabilities, it is
very important to use objective measurement of specific abilities (Khalil et
al., 1990).  The HPP can then be compared with that of healthy persons of

equivalent age, sex, and work category in order to determine functional
capacity.Biomechanical ModelingTo enhance biomechanical research in health care delivery systemsÑparticularly for back disordersÑbiomechanical modeling research can beinvaluable.  As representations of the real system, models can be useful in

examining the behavior of the system under consideration (in this case, the
human body) without exposing the body to a variety of hazardous condi-
tions.  Ergonomic models are discussed in another publication of the Com-

mittee on Human Factors (Kroemer et al., 1988).Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHHuman Factors Challenges Related to Ergonomic Issuesin Health Care Delivery SystemsIn order to reduce and control back injuries in health care deliverysystems, a major research effort is needed to evaluate handling of patients
to reduce stress on the spine.  The research must focus on several areas:  (a)

the training of personnel in methods of handling patients to reduce spinal
stresses; (b) the evaluation of facility designsÑwhich include beds, wheel-chairs, and other devices to facilitate patient handlingÑfor all systems,whether they use manual methods, assistive devices, or both; and (c) the
evaluation of existing design and the ultimate redesign of assistive devices
used in patient handling to reduce spinal stresses.  The research should also

consider several other variables related to spinal stress.  These are (a) the

time it takes to perform the handling activity, (b) patient comfort and safety,
and (c) patient characteristics (Garg et al., 1991).  Furthermore, it is impor-

tant that the research pay careful attention to the differences between labo-
ratory environments and the actual work site; laboratory results must be
carefully evaluated (Garg et al., 1991) prior to field application.
The evaluation of the functional capacity of patients in need of physicalrehabilitation is another area in which human factors research can play a
role.  Currently several techniques are being used to assess functional ca-

pacity.  Some of these are quite subjective and rely heavily on data obtained

through observation; others are more objective and gather data through quantitative
measurement of such factors as mobility and strength.  Even when the more

objective measures are employed, there is a need to integrate and translate
these measurements into functional capacity values. Therefore, research in
the development and use of objective measures for the evaluation of func-
tional capacity is sorely needed.  This will make it possible to determine

more accurately the level of individual abilities, which in turn can help
determine the optimal program of rehabilitation (Abdel-Moty and Khalil,
1988; Abdel-Moty et al., 1989, 1990).Research in biomechanical modeling is also needed.  The current bio-
mechanical models are quite basic at best and cannot adequately deal with
the complicated structures of the musculoskeletal system.  Three-dimen-

sional biomechanical models that include, for instance, the effects of soft
tissue and the individual muscle tension generated in performing typical
patient handling could provide important insights into handling methods
and design of work areas and equipment to minimize the stresses on the
spine.  In addition, good biomechanical models can be helpful in develop-

ing manual handling methods that minimize stresses on the body, particu-
larly the spine.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE151CONCLUDING REMARKSThe primary aim of this chapter has been to call attention to the sub-stantial contributions that could be made by human factors researchers in
the area of medical care.  This will be at least an initial step toward redress-

ing the underutilization of human factors researchers in medical contexts.
The topics that we have described include some traditional concerns but
also point to a broad spectrum of relatively novel research needs that arise
as a result of our changing societal and technological environment.  Many

of these problems will require that human factors personnel work with ex-
perts in other disciplines.  We have identified a large number of research

opportunities in the hope that their diversity will attract a larger number of
researchers to the area.  We suspect that many of these problems, unfortu-

nately, will not be dealt with in the next decade.Particularly important research goals noted in this chapter are the fol-lowing:¥to identify and eliminate sources of error arising from the medicalworkplace and medical devices;¥to design health-promoting environments for the aged;¥to identify health risks in the workplace;¥to determine techniques for effective risk communication;¥to develop health risk reduction and illness prevention programsfor groups;¥to design user-appropriate interfaces for new medical devices, suchas decision aids, imaging systems, and biosensors;¥to identify ways to facilitate access to health information by medi-cal personnel;¥to identify barriers to effective use of medical devices in the homeand to redesign devices and home environments so as to promote effective
home care;¥to identify and eliminate sources of biomechanical stress on themusculoskeletal system from health care practices;¥to develop techniques for measuring functional capacity of candi-dates for rehabilitation; and¥to develop biomechanical models to assist in determining potentialhealth hazards.As we indicated at the outset, the research needs that are reviewed hereare far from exhaustive, and new technological developments are likely to
expand the list.  Additions will only reinforce the important role that human

factors can play in fitting health care practices to those in need of care.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHACKNOWLEDGMENTSWe would like to acknowledge the help of John Swets and Sue Bognerwith this chapter.REFERENCESAbdel-Moty, E.1991Ergonomics issues in low back pain:  intervention strategies.  
Proceedings of theHuman Factors Society 35th Annual Meeting.  Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human
Factors Society.Abdel-Moty, E., and T.M. Khalil1988Ergonomic considerations for the reduction of physical task demands of low back
pain patients.  Pp. 959-967 in F. Aghazadeh, ed., 
Trends in Ergonomics/HumanFactors, Vol. IV.  Amsterdam, Netherlands:  North-Holland, Elsevier Science
Publishing.Abdel-Moty, E., T.M. Khalil, S.S. Asfour, M. Howard, R.S. Rosomoff, and H.L. Rosomoff1989Effects of pain on psychomotor abilities.  Pp. 465-471 in A. Mital, ed., 
Advancesin Industrial Ergonomics and Safety.  New York:  Taylor and Francis.
Abdel-Moty, E., T. Khalil, S. Asfour, M. Goldberg, R. Rosomoff, and H. Rosomoff1990On the relationship between age and responsiveness to rehabilitation.  Pp. 49-56 in
B. Das, ed., Advances in Industrial Ergonomics and Safety, Vol II.  New York:
Taylor and Francis.Arenson, R.L., D.P. Chakraborty, S.B. Seshadri, and H.L. Kundel1990The digital imaging workstation.  
Radiology 176:303-315.
Bach, J.R., P. Intintola, A.S. Alba, and I.E. Holland1992The ventilator-assisted individual:  cost analysis of institutionalization vs. reha-
bilitation and in-home management.  Chest 101:26-30.
Ball, M.J., and J.V. Douglas1990Informatics programs in the United States and abroad.  
MD Computing 7:172-175.
Becker, M.H., and N.K. Janz1987Behavioral science perspectives on health hazard/health risk appraisal.  
HealthServices Research 22(4):537-551.
Bisset, W.M., P. Stapleford, S. Long, A. Chamberlain, B. Sokel, and P.J. Milla1992Home parenteral nutrition in chronic intestinal failure.  
Archives of Disease inChildhood 67:109-114.
Bogner, S.1991Human factors and medicine.  P. 682 in 
Proceedings of the Human Factors Society35th Annual Meeting.  Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
Breslow, L., J. Fielding, A.A. Herrman, and C.S. Wilbur1990Worksite health promotion:  its evolution and the Johnson & Johnson experience.
Preventive Medicine 19:13-21.
Bureau of Labor Statistics1982Back Injuries Associated With Lifting.  Work Injury Report, Bulletin #2144:1.
Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of Labor.
Carleton, R.A., L. Sennett, K.M. Gans, S. Levin, C. Lefebvre, and T.M. Lasater1991The Pawtucket Heart Health Program:  influencing adolescent eating patterns.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 623:322-326.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE153Claremont, D.J.1987Biosensors:  clinical requirements and scientific promise.  
Journal of MedicalEngineering and Technology 11:51-56.
Cook, R.I.1991How to do that voodoo that you do so well:  medical human factors in the explicit
context of use.  P. 684 in 
Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 35th AnnualMeeting.  Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
Czaja, S.J., ed.1990Human Factors Research Needs for an Aging Population.  Panel on Human Fac-
tors Research Issues for an Aging Population, Committee on Human Factors, Na-tional Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Czaja, R., C. Manfredi, D. Shaw, and G. Nyden1989Evaluation of the PDQ System:  Overall Executive Summary.  Report to the Na-
tional Cancer Institute under Contract No. N01-CN-55459. Survey Research Labo-ratory, University of Illinois, May.Delano, B.G., and E.A. Friedman1990Correlates of decade-long technique survival on home hemodialysis. ASAIO Transactions36:337-339.Dowie, J., and A. Elstein1988Professional Judgment:  A Reader in Clinical Decision Making
.  Cambridge, En-
gland:  Cambridge University Press.
Dwyer, S.J., III, and R.G. Jost, eds.1990Medical Imaging IV:  PACS System Design and Evaluation.
  Proceedings of SPIE,
the International Society for Optical Engineering in cooperation with the Ameri-
can Association of Physicists in Medicine, Vol. 1234, parts 1 and 2.  Bellingham,
Wash.:  SPIE.
Fink, D.J.1987Preventive strategies for cancer in women.  
Cancer 60:1934-1941.
Gagnon, M., C. Sicard, and J.P. Sirois1986Evaluation of forces on the lumbo-sacral joint and assessment of work and energy
transfers in nursing aides lifting patients.  Ergonomics 29:407-421.
Gail, M.H., L.A. Brinton, D.P. Byar, D.K. Corle, S.B. Green, C. Schairer, and J.J. Mulvihill1989Projecting individualized probabilities of developing breast cancer for white fe-
males who are being examined annually.  Journal of the National Cancer Institute81:1879-1886.Garg, A., B. Owen, D. Beller, and J. Banaag1991A biomechanical and ergonomic evaluation of patient transferring tasks:  bed to
wheelchair and wheelchair to bed.  Ergonomics 34:289-312.
Hadler, S.C.1990Hepatitis B virus infection and health care workers.  Vaccine 8(March Supplement):S24-S28; discussion:S41-S43.Hayward, R.A., and M.F. Shapiro1991A national study of AIDS and residency training:  experiences, concerns, and
consequences.  Annals of Internal Medicine 114:23-32.
Health Devices1988Portable volume ventilators.  
Health Devices 17(4):107-131.
1991Hemodialysis machines.  
Health Devices 20(6):187-232.
Health Services Research1987October issue 22(4).
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHHelmreich, R.L., and H.G. Schaefer1994Team performance in the operating room.  Pp. 225-254 in M.S. Bogner, ed.,
Human Error in Medicine.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Higgins, I.J., and C.R. Lowe1987Introduction to the principles and applications of biosensors.  Philosophical Transactionsof the Royal Society of London 316:3-11.
Hubbard, S., J.E. Henney, and V.T. DeVita, Jr.1987A computer data base for information on cancer treatment.  
New England Journalof Medicine 316:315-318.
Jensen, R.1987Disabling back injuries among nursing personnel:  research needs and justifica-
tions.  Research in Nursing and Health 10:29-38.
Kelly, R.T., J.R. Callan, T.A. Kozlowski, and E. Menngola1990Human Factors in Self-Monitoring of Blood Glucose.  Task 4 Final Report.  FDA/
CDRH-90/60.  Springfield, Va.:  NTIS.
Khalil, T.M., S.S. Asfour, E. Abdel-Moty, R.S. Rosomoff, and H.L. Rosomoff1985New horizons for ergonomics research in low back pain.  Pp. 591-598 in R.E.
Eberts and C.G. Eberts, eds., Trends in Ergonomics/Human Factors.  Amsterdam,
Netherlands:  North-Holland, Elsevier Science Publishing.
1988Quantitative assessment of outcome of a low back pain rehabilitation program.
Abstracts of the International Conference on the Study of the Lumbar Spine.  Mi-
ami, Fla. April 13-15.Khalil, T.M., E. Abdel-Moty, and T.M. Asfour1990Ergonomics in the management of occupational injuries.  Pp. 41-53 in B.M. Pulat
and D.C. Alexander, eds., Industrial Ergonomics:  Case Studies
.  Norcross, Ga.:
Industrial Engineering and Management Press.Kingsland, L.C., III, D.A.B. Lindberg, and G.C. Sharp1986Anatomy of a knowledge-based system.  
MD Computing 3:18-26.
Klatzky, R.L., J. Geiwitz, and S.C. Fischer1994Using statistics in clinical practice:  a gap between training and application.  Pp.
123-140 in S. Bogner, ed., Human Error in Medicine.  Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Klein, B.P., R.C. Jensen, and L.M. Sanderson1984Assessment of workers
Õ compensation claims for back strains/sprains.  
Journal ofOccupational Medicine 26:443-448.
Kroemer, K.H.E., S.H. Snook, S.K. Meadows, and S. Deutsch, eds.1988Ergonomic Models of Anthropometry, Human Biomechanics and Operator-Equip-ment Interfaces.  Committee on Human Factors, National Research Council.  Washington,D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Kwan, J.W., and R.W. Anderson1991Pharmacists
Õ knowledge of infusion devices.  
American Journal of Hospital Phar-macy 48:10 Suppl 1, S52-S53.
Lasater, T.M., L.L. Sennett, R.C. Lefebvre, K.L. DeHart, G. Peterson, and R.A. Carleton1991Community-based approach to weight loss:  the Pawtucket 
Òweigh-in.Ó  AddictiveBehaviors 16:175-181.
Ledley, R.S., and L.B. Lusted1961Medical diagnosis and modern decision making.  Pp. 117-157 in 
Proceedings ofSymposia in Applied Mathematics, Vol. 14.  Providence, R.I.:  American Math-
ematical Society.Levi, L.1990Occupational stress:  spice of life or kiss of death?  
American Psychologist 45:1142-1145.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE155Lloyd, P., C. Tarling, J.D.G. Troup, and B. Wright1987The Handling of Patients:  A Guide for Nurses
, 2nd ed.  London, England:  The
Royal College of Nursing.Lougheed, W.D., A. Schiffrin, and A.M. Albisser1987Stabilizing blood glucose with a novel medical expert system.  
Biosensors 3:381-
389.Mascini, M., D. Moscone, and G. Palleschi1990Biosensor applications of continuous monitoring in clinical chemistry.  Pp. 1429-
1460 in D.L. Wise, ed., Bioinstrumentation:  Research, Developments and Appli-
cations.  Stoneham, Mass.:  Butterworth.
McDonald, W.I.1984Q
uality control of home monitoring of blood glucose concentrations.  British MedicalJournal 288:1915.
Metz, C.E.1989Some practical issues of experimental design and data analysis in radiological
ROC studies.  Investigative Radiology 24:234-245.
Meyerowitz, B.E.1980Psychosocial correlates of breast cancer and its treatments.  
Psychological Bulletin87:108-131.Morris, R.E., and E. Turgut1990Human immunodeficiency virus:  quantifying the risk of transmission of HIV to
dental health care workers.  Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology 18:294-
298.Moss, J.P., and D.E. Delawter1986Self-monitoring of blood glucose.  
American Family Physician 33:225-228.
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health1981Work Practices Guide for Manual Lifting.  NIOSH Technical Report No. 81-122.
Washington, D.C.:  National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
National Institutes of Health1991Clinical Electives Program for Medical and Dental Students 1992-1993.  NIH
Publication No. 91-499.  Bethesda, Md.:  National Institutes of Health.
National Research Council1989Improving Risk Communication.   Committee on Risk Perception and Communica-
tion.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
New, P.B., G.F. Swanson, R.G. Bulich, and G.C. Taplin1991Ambulatory antibiotic infusion devices:  extending the spectrum of outpatient therapies.American Journal of Medicine 91:455-461.
Newell, G.R., and V.G. Vogel1988Personal risk factors:  what do they mean?  
Cancer 62:1695-1701.
OÕMalley, K.G., and K.G. Ricca1990Optimization of a PACS display workstation for diagnostic reading.  Pp. 940-946
in Medical Imaging IV:  PACS System Design and Evaluation
.  Proceedings of
SPIE, the International Society for Optical Engineering in cooperation with theAmerican Association of Physicists in Medicine, Vol. 1234.  Bellingham, Wash.:

SPIE.Orient, J.M.1990Assessing the risk of occupational acquisition of the human immunodeficiency
virus:  implications for hospital policy.  
Southern Medical Journal 83(10):1121-
1127.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHParyani, S.B., T.A. Marsland, P. Faucher, E. Fontanelli, M. Freeman, H. Johnston, W. Morrow,P. Prabhu, M. Stearman, and F. Vines1990Breast cancer screening project in northeast Florida.  
Journal of the Florida Medi-cal Association 77:29-31.
Pickett, R.M., and T.J. Triggs, eds.1974Human Factors in Health Care.  Lexington, Mass.:  D.C. Heath.
Rappaport, M.1970Human factors applications in medicine.  
Human Factors 12:25-35.
Regnier, S.J.1993Symposium underscores value of OR teamwork.  
American College of SurgeonsBulletin 78:73-81.
Reville, B., and L. Almadrones1989Continuous infusion chemotherapy in the ambulatory setting:  the nurse
Õs role inpatient selection and education.  Oncology Nursing Forum 16:529-535.
Rosomoff, H.L.1987Comprehensive pain center approach to the treatment of low back pain.  Pp. 78-85
in Low Back Pain:  Report of a Workshop
.  Rehabilitation Research and Training
Center, Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation.  Charlottesville, Va.:  University
of Virginia.Rosomoff, H.L., C. Green, M. Silbert, and R. Steele1981Pain and low back rehabilitation program at the University of Miami School of
Medicine.  In K.Y. Lorenzo, ed., 
New Approaches to Treatment of Chronic Pain.NIDA Research Monograph 36.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services.Ross, D., L. Heinemann, and E.A. Chantelau1990Short-term evaluation of an electro-chemical system (ExacTech) for blood glucose
monitoring.  Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice 10:281-285.
Saarinen, A.O., G.L. Youngs, and J.W. Loop1989The Attitude of Referring Physicians Towards PACS:  A Pre-Installation Assess-
ment.  Report to the MITRE Corp.  DIN/PACS Evaluation Project Contract N55-
200.  Department of Radiology, University of Washington DIN/PACS Evaluation
Project, November 30.Schaffar, B.P., and O.S. Wolfbeis1990A 
fast responding fibre optic glucose biosensor based on an oxygen optrode.  Biosensorsand Bioelectronics 5:137-148.
Schucker, B., K. Bailey, J.T. Heimbach, M.E. Mattson, J.T. Wittes, C.M. Haines, D.J. Gordon,J.A. Cutler, V.S. Keating, and R.S. Goor1987Change in public perspective on cholesterol and heart disease:  results from two
national surveys.  Journal of the American Medical Association 258:3517-3531.
Schultz, J.S.1991Biosensors.  
Scientific American 265(2)64-69.
Shortliffe, E.H.1976Computer-Based Medical Consultations:  MYCIN
.  New York:  Elsevier.
Small, A.M.1987Design for older people.  Pp. 495-504 in G. Salvendy, ed., 
Handbook of HumanFactors.  New York:  Wiley.
Smith, C.E., C.K. Giefer, and L. Bieker1991Technological dependency:  a preliminary model and pilot of home total parenteral
nutrition.  Journal of Community Health Nursing 8:245-254.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE157Smith, M.J.1987Occupational stress.  Pp. 844-860 in G. Salvendy, ed., 
Handbook of Human Fac-tors.  New York:  Wiley.
Storey, P., H.J. Hill, Jr., R.H. St. Louis, and E.E. Tarver1990Subcutaneous infusions for control of cancer symptoms.  
Journal of Pain andSymptom Management 5:33-41.
Stubbs, D.A., P.W. Buckle, M.P. Hudson, and P.M. Rivers1983Backpain in the nursing profession, II:  the effectiveness of training.  
Ergonomics26:767-779.Swanson, G.M.1988Cancer prevention in the workplace and natural environment:  a review of etiol-
ogy, research design, and methods of risk reduction.  Cancer 62:1725-1746.
Swets, J.A.1988Measuring the accuracy of diagnostic systems.  
Science 240:1285-1293.
Swets, J.A., R.M. Pickett, S.F. Whitehead, D.J. Getty, J.B. Schnur, J.B. Swets, and B.A.Freeman1979Assessment of diagnostic technologies.  
Science 205:753-759.
Swets, J.A., D.J. Getty, R.M. Pickett, C.J. DÕOrsi, S.E. Seltzer, and B.J. McNeil1991Enhancing and evaluating diagnostic accuracy.  
Medical Decision Making 11:9-18.Thompson, C.L., and M. Richmond1990Teaching home care for ventilator-dependent patients:  the patients
Õ perception.
Heart and Lung 19:79-83.
Torma-Krajewski, J.1986Analysis of Lifting Tasks in the Health Care Industry.  Paper presented at the
University of Washington Symposium on Occupational Hazards to Health CareWorkers.  Seattle.
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman1981The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice.  
Science 211:453-458.
Van Cott, H.P.1991Human Error in Medical Devices.  Paper presented at the Symposium on Human
Factors and Medicine, 35th annual meeting of the Human Factors Society.  San
Francisco, September.Viall, C.D.1990Daily access of implanted venous ports:  implications for patient education.  
Jour-nal of Intravenous Nursing 13:294-296.
Walter, H.J.1989Primary prevention of chronic disease among children:  the school-based 
Òknowyour bodyÓ intervention trials.  
Health Education Quarterly 16:201-214.
Wegener, D.H., and L.A. Aday1989Home care for ventilator-assisted children:  predicting family stress.  
PediatricNursing 15:371-376.
Wilkins, E.S.1989Towards implantable glucose sensors:  a review.  
Journal of Biomedical Engineer-ing 11:354-361.
Williams, G.M.1991Causes and prevention of cancer.  
Statistical Bulletin of Metropolitan InsuranceCompanies 72:6-10.
Wise, D.L., ed.1990Bioinstrumentation:  Research, Developments and Applications.  Stoneham, Mass.:Butterworth.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCH1585Environmental ChangeRaymond S. Nickerson and Neville P. MorayTHE PROBLEM OF ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGEThe subject of detrimental environmental change has received muchattention in the news media for some time.  Scientists, policy makers, and

the public have become increasingly concerned about the threat that such
change, if it continues unabated, poses for the future.  Growing numbers of

scientists from a variety of disciplines have been systematically studying
specific aspects of this change and attempting to identify effective strate-
gies for preventing or mitigating potentially catastrophic effects.Human factors researchers have not focused much attention on this areain the past. Perhaps it has been assumed that the discipline has little to offer
toward the solution of environmental problems. We believe it does have
something to offer.  This chapter represents an effort to stimulate and con-

tribute to a dialogue that will help identify what some of the possibilities
are.Dimensions of the ProblemSome earth and atmospheric scientists have been documenting an in-creased concentration of carbon dioxide and other Ògreenhouse gasesÓ in
the atmosphere and have been attempting to better understand how a con-
tinuing accumulation will affect the future world climate (Houghton and
Woodwell, 1989; National Research Council, 1983).  Others have been studyingEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE159such phenomena as Òacid rainÓ and its effects on lakes and streams, forests,
and materials (Baker et al., 1991; Mohnen, 1988; Schwartz, 1989), air pol-
lution and urban smog (Gray and Alson, 1989; National Research Council,
1991; Office of Technology Assessment, 1988), and the thinning of ozone
in the stratosphere (Stolarski et al., 1992; Stolarski, 1988).  Studies have

focused on the contamination and depletion of fresh-water supplies (la Riviere,
1989; National Research Council, 1977; Postel, 1985), on the depletion of
the worldÕs forests (Myers, 1989; Repetto, 1990) and wetlands (Steinhart,1990; Wallace, 1985), and on the worldwide loss of arable land (Crossen
and Rosenberg, 1989; National Research Council, 1990; Schlesinger et al.,
1990).  Biologists have been documenting the loss of wildlife habitat and

the accompanying decrease in biodiversity (Soule, 1991; Wilson, 1989).
More detailed discussions of the many facets of the problem are readily
available (Gore, 1992; Nickerson, 1992; Stern et al., 1992).Behavioral Causes of Environmental ChangeMany of the most readily identified causes of these changes are humanactivities.  Major contributors to the accumulation of greenhouse gases in

the atmosphere include the burning of fossil fuels for heating and energy
generation and the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) as coolants and aero-
sols.  The burning of fossil fuels is also a major cause of acid rain, which is

formed when airborne sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides combine with
water vapor.  Air pollutants include ozone, carbon monoxide, lead, sulfur

dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, and particulatesÑall by-products of industrialand energy-generation processes.  Stratospheric ozone thinning is believed

to be a direct consequence of the accumulation of CFCs in the upper atmo-
sphere.Major threats to clean, fresh-water supplies include contamination notonly from precipitation of chemical emissions that have accumulated in the
atmosphere but also from agricultural runoff containing pesticides and fer-
tilizers, from waste discharges into rivers, from salt used for highway de-
icing, from hazardous wastes disposed of improperly, and from leachate
from municipal dumps.  Deforestation is the consequence both of convert-

ing forests to farmland and residential and business areas and of overhar-
vesting timber.  Wetland loss results from the 
ÒreclamationÓ of wetlands for
commercial development.  Desertification, the transformation of arable land

into land on which crops will no longer grow, has a variety of causes,
including overgrazing and the salinization of soil from excessive irrigation.Since the human activities that are implicated in detrimental environ-mental change are aimed at satisfying human needs and desires, those ac-
tivities can only be expected to increase as the population grows.  And

population growth, worldwide, is expected to continue for the near future atEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHleast, at something like its current rate, which would yield a doubling of thecurrent number of about 6 billion before the middle of the twenty-first
century.  Moreover, if present trends continue, the pressures on the environ-

ment are likely to grow faster than the population.  During the twentieth

century, worldwide energy consumption has increased by a factor of about
15 and the total population has increased by a factor of about 3.5, which is
to say that, compared with 1900, there are about 3.5 times as many of us
now and each of us uses, on average, 4 times as much energy (Gibbons et
al., 1989).  There is now an enormous disparity between the per capita use

of energy in the industrialized world and in developing countries; we can
expect that the desire of the developing countries to close this gap will
create a strong impetus to increase the average use worldwide.In short, there is much evidence that human behavior can adverselyaffect the natural environment in a variety of ways and that the forces that
motivate environmentally detrimental behavior are likely to become even
stronger in the future.  There is a need to better understand the coupling of

behavior and environmental change and how to mitigate the undesirable
effects.POSSIBLE APPROACHES TO THE PROBLEMThe problem of detrimental environmental change is broad in scope andconsiderably beyond the ability of the human factors research community to
solve. But human factors researchers can contribute greatly by working
toward the goal of finding effective ways to modify, or mitigate the effects
of, the human behavior that is a major cause of such change. It is useful to
make a distinction between attempting to modify behavior directly and at-
tempting to modify it indirectly by changing technology so that its use will
be less detrimental to the environment.Direct Behavioral ChangePossible ways to directly induce behavioral change include the use ofcoercion (legislation and regulation, backed up with the threat of civil or
criminal sanctions), incentives (tax and other monetary incentives, public
recognition, and awards), education (making people aware of problems and
what can be done about them), and persuasion (appeals to moral responsi-
bility or altruismÑor the possibility of embarrassment or shame).  All of
these methods have been tried, many times in some cases, and in numerous
variations.Psychologists have done a considerable amount of research to assessthe effectiveness of various strategies for behavior modification in the con-
text of environmental concerns (Holahan, 1986; Russell and Ward, 1982;Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE161Saegert and Winkel, 1990; Stern, 1992).  Illustrative of this work are stud-
ies of the use of incentives, rewards, education and information campaigns,
persuasion, and other techniques to motivate conservation in the use of
energy or water, participation in recycling programs, decrease in waste gen-
eration and littering, and other behavior that would be desirable for envi-
ronmental preservation (Baum and Singer, 1981; Coach et al., 1979; Cone
and Hayes, 1980; Geller et al., 1982; Geller, 1986).  This work has demon-

strated that behavior can be changed with the use of incentives and other
types of inducements, but the changes that have been effected have been
modest in magnitude and have tended not to persist much beyond the dura-
tion of the experimental intervention.Without questioning the need to continue this line of research, we notethat behavior modification is not the only approach that can be taken to the
problem of detrimental environmental change.  Moreover, even assuming

that much more effective means of changing behavior in desired ways will
be discovered than have so far been found, it may be unrealistic to expect
the problem to be solved by this approach alone.  Effective and lasting

behavior modification has proven very difficult to achieve.  Efforts to effect

behavioral change are unlikely to be very successful so long as the tech-
nologies and the products of technology that we use make it easy to behave
in environmentally harmful ways (Crabb, 1992).Changing TechnologyOne may work on the goal of water conservation by trying to persuadepeople to use less water when taking showers by, say, taking shorter show-
ers, keeping the tap less than wide open, or keeping the tap closed while
actually washing.  Alternatively, or in conjunction with efforts to change

behavior, one can attempt to design shower heads that automatically con-
serve water by limiting the flow when the tap is fully open but that still
provide adequate water for showering.  Ideally, one would like a water-

miser shower head whose spray is preferred by users, who then will be
motivated to use this head whether or not they are concerned about environ-
mental change.Finding ways to change the technology so that it is equally effective, ifnot more so, while doing less harm to the environment is a complementary
alternative to attempting to modify behavior directly.  This is the motiva-

tion for the concerted efforts to develop environmentally benign alterna-
tives to the burning of fossil fuels for energy generation and for many other
current research activities in the physical and biological sciences.We wish to argue that human factors research has much to contribute tothe goal of shaping technology so that the natural consequences of its use
for human ends will be more environmentally benign.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHHUMAN FACTORS AND ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGETo date, human factors, as a profession, has not focused much on theproblem of environmental change, at least as that problem is conceived
here.  What is sometimes referred to as 
Òenvironmental ergonomicsÓ has
tended to focus on how oneÕs immediate environmentÑtemperature, hu-midity, noisinessÑaffects oneÕs bodily and cognitive functions and perfor-mance.  The interests of the Human Factors Society
Õs Technical Group onEnvironmental Design (Human Factors Society, 1991:38), for example, Òcenteron the human factors aspects of the constructed physical environment, in-
cluding architectural and interior design aspects of home, office, and indus-
trial settings.Ó  The Applied Experimental and Engineering Psychology is-
sue of PsycSCAN has 
ÒenvironmentÓ as one of six major topics under which
the abstracts are organized.  But each of the 12 subtopics in this section

deals with the effects of some environmental factor (altitude, heat, noise) on
human beings (performance, safety, or comfort).  In general, the subject of

the implications of human behavior for environmental changeÑas distinctfrom the effects of environmental variables on human behaviorÑhas notbeen a focus of attention of the human factors community.There is one major exception:  the interest the field has shown in study-
ing industrial accidents and near accidents, especially in the nuclear power
industry, and in developing ways to decrease the probability and severity of
such accidents (Reason, 1990; Senders and Moray, 1991).  With this excep-

tion, most of what psychologists have done that relates directly to the prob-
lem of detrimental environmental change has not been done within the mainstream
of human factors research, and the results of that work have not been pub-
lished in the journals most strongly associated with human factors research.
The problem of environmental change has not captured the imagination of
the human factors research community as a whole.As to why this is the case, we can only speculate.  One possibility is
that human factors researchers believe they have little to offer in this area.
We think that human factors does have something to offer, and the main
purpose of this chapter is to make that point.Another possibility is that human factors researchers have assumed thatthe best way for the discipline to address the problem of environmental
change is indirectly, through work on more generic problems, such as the

design of displays, of person-machine interfaces, of work situations, and so on.This view has considerable merit.  When one designs a better interface
for a computer system, or when one discovers and articulates principles that
can help designers produce interfaces that are better suited to human use,
one is facilitating the work of anyone who uses systems with these inter-
faces, including earth and atmospheric scientists working on the problem ofEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE163global warming, modelers developing source-receptor models for predictingthe dispersion of sulfur dioxide emissions, and agronomists attempting to
balance variables in a plan for a sustainable-agriculture approach to the
production of crops.Similarly, when one designs an information-management systemÑordiscovers characteristics of human beings as information processors that
have implications for the design of such a systemÑone is contributingindirectly to the work of anyone who makes use of such a system, including
a variety of people working on environmental problems.  Just as it is not

necessary for the materials scientist to have the building of better automo-
biles in mind in order to affect the automotive industryÑby, for example,developing a new lightweight superstrong compositeÑone need not focusexplicitly on the environment in order to have a beneficial impact on work
on environmental problems.This being said, we believe it is important to raise the question ofwhether there are opportunities for the human factors community to make
more direct and explicit contributions to work on the problem of environ-
mental change than it has done in the past.  A major purpose of this chapter

is to stimulate thought and discussion about this question.RESEARCH NEEDSWe believe that the extremely important problem of detrimental envi-ronmental change represents a major challenge and opportunity for human
factors research and that such research has something of value to contribute,
especially when it is directed to the question of how technology might be
developed so as to serve its human purposes without affording the means of
environmental degradation.In what follows, we suggest a few specific research questions that webelieve deserve attention from the human factors community.  We focus

primarily on problems that fit reasonably well within human factors, as
defined by the work that has traditionally been done in this field.  The

possibilities become more numerous when one considers problems that fall
within the domain of applied psychology, broadly defined.We offer our suggestions not as an agenda for research but as points ofdeparture for further discussion.  The most pressing need in this area is for

human factors researchers who are concerned about environmental change
to begin exchanging ideas about the problem and how the human factors
profession might help address it.  We believe that such discussion would

identify many ways in which the community can productively involve itself
in this important area.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHEnergy Production and UseThe production and use of energy effect environmental change throughthe methods used to extract energy sources from the earth, through the
depletion of natural resources, and through the by-products of energy trans-
duction and utilization.  The per capita demands for energy vary greatly in

different parts of the world.  Not surprisingly, they are much greater in

countries that are highly industrialized than in those that are not, but even
within the industrialized world, there are large differences in energy use.
There is a need to better understand why these differences exist.  Some, but

not all, of the difference can be attributed to differences in industrial pro-
ductivity and in standards of living.  There is a growing sense that atti-

tudesÑabout efficiency and waste, about public versus private transporta-tion, about personal conveniences and the public goodÑare important factorsin the equation, but their role is not well understood.There are numerous specific questions relating to energy use and envi-ronmental change that deserve the attention of human factors researchers.
What determines when working from home or a satellite office can be an
acceptable, if not a preferred, alternative to commuting to a centralized
workplace?  Under what conditions can teleconferencing be effectively sub-

stituted for face-to-face meetings?  How can the effectiveness and accept-

ability of teleconferencing systems be increased?As we noted earlier, human factors professionals have involved them-selves in energy generation and use primarily by studying human error in
power plant operations and developing methods to decrease the probability
of mishaps and the potential severity of their effects.  This research is of

undoubted importance and should continue to be priority.Improving Public Transportation FacilitiesThe personal automobile is, by far, the preferred mode of travel in theUnited States (Gray and Alson, 1989).  This is due to a number of factors,

but chiefly to the great convenience of the private auto, compared with
other types of transportation in many parts of the country.  Using private

autos, however, puts a greater burden on the environment than does using
public mass transit.  An environmentally beneficial objective, therefore, is

to enhance the attractiveness of public transportation so that it will more
often be the preferred means of transport, especially in major urban areas.This is, in part at least, a human factors problem.  We need to better
understand why people choose the modes of transportation they do when
other modes are also available. Such knowledge could be applied to making
public transportation more attractive, and, to the extent that the preference
for private transportation is based on a lack of understanding of the prosEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE165and cons of the alternatives, it could be used to guide programs aimed atinforming the public in this regard.Substituting Resource-Light for Resource-Heavy TechnologiesTo the extent that needed or desired services can be provided by tech-nologies that make relatively light demands on energy and other resources,
the interests of environmental preservation will be well served by using
such technologies.  In particular, when the transmission of information can

be substituted for the transportation of people and material, the environment
benefits in a variety of ways.Finding ways to substitute resource-light technologies for resource-heavytechnologies is especially desirable in view of the rapidly increasing de-
mands that underdeveloped countries are expected to put on resources by
attempting to catch up, economically, with the more developed parts of the
world (Stern et al., 1992).  To the extent that these countries could be

enabled to adopt energy- and resource-efficient methods of delivering de-
sired goods and services, without first appropriating inefficient methods
that have been utilized in much of the industrialized world, the benefits
would be global as well as regional.Telecommuting and TeleconferencingTelecommunications technology has the potential to make it possiblefor more people to work, at least part of the time, from their homes rather
than commute to offices.  It also has the potential, via teleconferencing

facilities, to reduce the need for travel to meetings.  Although these possi-

bilities were recognized by the earliest promoters of teleconferencing and
telecommuting (Bavelas et al., 1963; Nilles et al., 1976), they have not yet
been realized as much as might have been expected.  Why that is so is not

entirely clear, but there can be no doubt that many human factors issues are
involved in the question of how to make these technologies attractive and
effective from the userÕs point of view.Electronic Substitutes for PaperSubstituting electronic means of storing and distributing informationfor methods that depend on the use of paper is one instance of the substitu-
tion of resource-light for resource-heavy technologies that deserves special
attention.  Paper and paper products account for about one-third of all solid

waste in the United States.  A considerable fraction of paper waste is from

newspapers (whose daily circulation is about 63 million according to the
Bureau of the Census, 1990) and magazines.  Given that most buyers of
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHnewspapers are interested in only a fraction of the information that is inthem, that buyers discard newspapers immediately after reading them, and
that printing and distributing them are energy-intensive processes, this method
of information distribution is extremely inefficient relative to technologi-
cally feasible alternatives.  Similar observations apply to magazines.
Despite many predictions that less paper would be used as a result ofthe increasing use of electronic information exchange systems, there is little
evidence of any such reduction.  It may even be that computer technology

has stimulated the use of more paper than ever before.  Nevertheless, the

potential remains for decreasing the use of paper by making more effective
use of electronic information storage and distribution.  Significantly realiz-

ing this potential would have the doubly beneficial effect of conserving the
energy and natural resources used in the production of paper and of reduc-
ing the generation of solid waste.The technology exists for distributing news and information electroni-cally rather than in traditional newspapers and magazines; to date, however,
that technology is not sufficiently widely installed in homes to be a feasible
basis for replacing paper media.  It seems highly likely, however, that in the

not-distant future most homes will have the means of making electronic
newspapers and magazines practical.  There are likely to be nontechnical

obstacles to their acceptance and use by the public, stemming from the fact
that video displays, even if made to look something like a book, are very
different from the types of print media with which people are familiar.  It

would be useful to know what would make electronic books, newspapers,
and periodicals acceptable to people as replacements for their paper coun-
terparts.This is not to suggest that realization of the potential of informationtechnology for reducing the need for paper awaits only a better understand-
ing of the psychological deterrents to the use of electronic media.  The

practical usability and the actual use of communication facilities also de-
pend on the existence of an adequate infrastructure, pricing policies that
provide incentives for use, and general access to the critical facilities.  User

acceptability, however, is likely to be a key determinant of the extent to
which this technology is appropriated when other impediments to its exploi-
tation no longer apply.Simulation and Virtual Reality TechnologyOther special cases of substituting resource-light for resource-heavytechnologies involve the use of simulated aspects of reality for a variety of
purposes.  Simulators have been used for flight training for many years.

This was motivated in part by safety considerations, and in part by the fact
that operating a simulator is much less expensive than operating real aircraftEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE167for training purposes.  A major reason is that it requires less expenditure of
energy and other resources, a fact that benefits the environment as well.The development and use of SIMNET, the armyÕs simulation systemfor training tank teams, illustrates what is possible by way of network-based
systems that are capable of simulating situations involving many people and
machines interacting in complex ways (Thorpe, 1993).  A SIMNET-based

training exercise is not only much less expensive than a comparable exer-
cise involving real tanks but also much easier on the environment.  How to

ensure the effectivenss of this approach to team training remains a chal-
lenge.Virtual reality technology carries simulation, in theory at least, to a newplateau.  The goal of developing this technology is to simulate objects and

situations in such a way that people can perceive and interact with the
simulated realities very much as they would with whatever it is that is
simulated, except without the inconvenience or, sometimes, the danger that
would be involved in interacting with the real thing.  There are many human
factors questions relating to the development and use of virtual reality tech-
nology that represent challenges for research; the National Research Coun-
cil has completed a study of some of these questions (Durlach and Mavor,
1995).Recycling and Waste HandlingImproving the Technology of RecyclingRecycling of waste materials is a relatively new technology.  It seems
reasonable to assume that, as with any new technology, its effectiveness and
efficiency could be improved.  In particular, inasmuch as the energy re-

quired for some recycling operations limits their utility (Georgescu-Roegen,
1976), there is a need to find more efficient methods for processing re-
cyclable materials, for example, new ways to separate trash into unrecyclable
and the several recyclable categories and new ways to transform the re-
cyclable types into reusable materials.A major problem of waste recycling is getting sustained citizen partici-pation in recycling programs (Geller et al., 1982).  Education and advertis-

ing campaigns have not been very effective (Coach et al., 1979; Geller et
al., 1975).  Efforts to motivate people to recycle have sometimes met with

modest short-term success but have not managed to effect lasting change
(Geller, 1987; Humphrey et al., 1977).  And in some cases, simple positive

reinforcement schemes have even produced unwanted behavior (Geller, 1981).
Planning and executing recycling programs that will effect the lasting changes
in attitudes and behavior that are essential to make real progress on the
problem of waste remains a significant unmet challenge.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHRadioactive and Toxic Waste HandlingRadioactive and toxic wastes represent special problems and requiresome innovative approaches.  Given that about a dozen U.S. nuclear reac-

tors are ready for decommissioning now and about 50 will be ready for
retirement in the Western world before the end of the century (Shulman,
1989), the problem of handling nuclear wastes will be getting much more
attention than it has in the past.  Because very few nuclear reactors have yet

been dismantled, the technology for this undertaking is still being devel-
oped.Much attention will be focused on the cleanup of the Hanford site in thestate of Washington, where weapons-grade radioactive materials have been
produced since the days of the Manhattan Project in the early 1940s.  This

cleanup project alone is planned to take 30 years to complete.  It is also

expected to require resolution of many human factors issues.  Among these

will be issues having to do with the design of control facilities for a vitrifi-
cation plant in which liquid wastes will be solidified and issues relating to
the design and use of tele-operator systems for remote handling of radioac-
tive materials.  Because of the industry
Õs limited experience with disman-tling and cleanup operations, there will need to be some innovative thinking
about the allocation of functions to people and machines and the design of
person-machine interfaces for this purpose (Wise and Savage, 1992).Designing for Error PreventionHuman error is known to be a major cause of industrial accidents.  The
accident at Chernobyl occurred because of an interaction of poor plant de-
sign, poor management decisions, and violations of procedures (Reason,
1990).  The Bhopal incident was caused by a combination of operator error,

poor training, and bad policies, including the policy of storing large quanti-
ties of hazardous materials, thus increasing the chances that an accident,
should it occur, would be on a very large scale (Hazarika, 1986).  At Three

Mile Island, inadequacies in training, operating procedures, control room
interface design, and maintenance practice were all seen to be contributing
factors.  More generally, analyses of industrial accidents have revealed a

great variety of human errorsÑin system design, regulation, operation, main-tenance, communication and management (Rasmussen and Batstone, 1989;
Reason, 1990).Inasmuch as industrial accidents can haveÑand have hadÑserious en-vironmental consequences, work on the problem of designing industrial control
stations and operating procedures so as to minimize the possibility of hu-
man error is very much in the spirit of what this chapter is intended to
promote.  The most difficult challenge here is to identify vulnerable points

in an industrial process before any disastrous errors occur.  Although the
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE169occurrence of a disaster should always be a stimulus to research on how toprevent a recurrence, the greatly preferred objective is to prevent the initial
disaster from happening.  Unfortunately, the successful prevention of acci-

dents of a type that has never occurred is likely to go unrecognized; until an
accident has happened, people tend to be unaware of its possibility.It has become increasingly evident that the traditional ergonomics ofcontrol room design is insufficient to prevent large-scale accidents.  Acci-

dents occur because of complex interactions among people at all levels of
an organization and between people and plant hardware; they occur despite
regulations, training, and operating procedures that are intended to mini-
mize accident potential.  Attitudinal variables may play a more important

role than has been realized.  Management
Õs interest in developing a ÒsafetycultureÓ within a company plant is also a key factor.  To understand the
causes of accidents and how to prevent them, we need to understand the
psychology of a system in its entirety, from the ergonomics of design to the
social dynamics of Òwhistle blowing.ÓAutomation is sometimes seen as a solution to the problem of humanerror because it removes human operators from the scene.  But automation

does not necessarily reduce the probability or severity of accidents.  When

highly skilled operators are removed from an industrial system, the system
sometimes loses the protection against design errors that the workersÕ skill
may provide, and the hazardous implications of those design errors may be
very difficult to discover before an actual incident.  In automated systems,

the day-to-day role of humans tends to be the performance of maintenance,
and we know that accidents can occur because of faulty maintenance.  Zuboff
(1988) has described how automation, if not introduced in an appropriate
way, can reduce quality of performance.Designing for Longevity, Recyclability, and DisposabilitySafety and usability have long been major objectives of human factorsengineers in equipment design.  Other objectives that have implications for

the management of environmental change include maintainability, repair-
ability, recyclability, and disposability.  Such design objectives should in-

crease in importance if environmental issues become of greater concern.
The special challenge to human factors is to find ways to satisfy the envi-
ronmentally oriented objectives without compromising the traditional focus
on user safety and convenience.NEED FOR NEW PERSPECTIVESHuman factors concepts and methods can be applied to societal prob-lems at many levels.  One aid to thinking in these terms is the abstraction
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHhierarchy proposed by Rasmussen (1986; see his Figure 4.1).  At the lowest
level of this hierarchy the focus is on Òphysical form.Ó  Examples of the
application of ergonomic design at this level include switches that cannot
be turned the wrong way, toilet handles that make it easy to use different
amounts of water following urination or defecation (a design that is com-
mon in Australia where there is a chronic water shortage), and the interlock
that requires one to cover the gas tank filler hole with a cap in some states
so as to reduce vapor loss to the environment.At RasmussenÕs next level, Òphysical function,Ó the emphasis is on
localized systems.  Designing for energy efficiency and resource conserva-

tion is a possibility at this level.  An electrical system that automatically

turns lights off when a room is unoccupied is one example of such a system.
A central heating system that (except when overridden by manual control)
adjusts temperature in different parts of a house according to patterns of use
is another.The next level, Ògeneral form,Ó would include things like automated
guideways for automobile traffic in specific locations and intelligent navi-
gation systems that can reduce fuel consumption by optimizing travel routes.
A fourth level, Ògeneralized function,Ó would include the design of com-
plete living and communication systems, including Òsmart houses.Ó At this
level the application of information technology has the potential to change
in fundamental ways how people work, travel, communicate, and live.The top level concerns relatively global problems and goalsÑthe controlof global climate change would be a case in point.  At this level, issues of

politics, ethics, and perhaps philosophical or religious beliefs are likely to be
encountered.  (Several articles in 
Science in the 1960s cited instances in
which people were given tractors and other equipment that would enable
them to produce two harvests a year or to till more land; the advantages did
not follow, because the dominant view in the culture was that fate, not tech-
nology, determines the provision of lifeÕs necessities).  Difficulties occur
because sometimes measures would benefit one country or region of the
world at the expense of others.  Ethical complications arise because people

have different ideas about such questions as the moral responsibility of hu-
man beings toward other species and of this generation to future generations.We have sketched RasmussenÕs taxonomy here to make the point thatdifferent levels of problems require different kinds of approaches.  This fact

should be recognized in any consideration of how human factors might be
applied to the problem of detrimental environmental change and the host of
subsidiary problems that it subsumes.  Traditionally, human factors has

dealt primarily with problems at the level of the design of specific devices
and person-machine systems.  This will continue to be important, and such

efforts can have significant environmental implications.  There is, however,
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE171also a need to broaden the perspective and to attempt to find ways to ad-dress problems at more general and global levels.PREDICTING THE BEHAVIORAL EFFECTSOF INTERVENTIONSA generic problem is the difficulty of predicting the effects of efforts tochange human behavior in the interest of environmental preservation, either
directly or through the modification of technology.  Actual effects often

turn out to be different from what was desired.  This point is illustrated by

the consequences of some efforts to modify traffic patterns.  Bypasses and

beltways have been built to take traffic away from congested streets by
providing alternative routes so that drivers do not have to go through the
center of the city.  Sometimes, however, these have increased traffic not

just in the existing areas of congestion but in new areas as well.  The

provision of new roads has encouraged more people to drive into the city,
and the appearance of large, empty roads has stimulated the development of
housing to make use of them.Highway safety provides another example of how an effort to reduce anundesirable effect of human behavior can itself have unanticipated conse-
quences for human behavior.  When antilock brakes were put into cars, the

assumption that driving safety would be improved was sufficiently credible
that insurance premiums were reduced for automobiles with this feature.
Empirical evidence gathered by a taxi company in Munich indicated no
significant decrease in accident frequency but a significant increase in driv-
ing speed (there is no speed limit on the autobahn) and in speed changes
(Aschenbrenner et al., 1986).  Apparently, people drove faster because they

believed their braking systems were safer and that as drivers they would be
able to cope more effectively with emergencies.  As a result of this study,

insurance implications were reconsidered.The general problem was discussed in terms of cybernetic theory al-most 40 years ago by Ashby (1956).  The problem involves whether to treat

self-organizing systems as deterministic or stochastic.  It is very difficult to

predict how a complex system will evolve if it has many self-organizing
characteristics; this complicates the task of the planning of interventions
involving such systems.  ÒSelf-organizingÓ here does not imply a conscious
or purposive response by the system to the inputs of the planners; it simply
connotes a system for which the list of states that can be entered changes
suddenly and ÒspontaneouslyÓ from time to time or a system in which the
transition probabilities from one state to another are not constant.  In gen-

eral, very large, complex, and tightly coupled systems with many subsystemsEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHshow such self-organizing properties in response to disturbances, and suchresults may not be predictable, even stochastically (Moray, 1963).From the above examples, one might draw the conclusion that the ef-fects of countermeasures identified from a causal analysis may be offset by
the effects of boundary-seeking human adaptation.  The implication, for

present purposes, is that anyone attempting to make design changes in a
person-machine system to compensate for a pattern of behavior with unde-
sirable environmental consequences should be aware that the design changes
may evoke unanticipated changes in human behavior that could also have
undesirable environmental consequences.  This problem deserves more study
than it has received; it is especially important for efforts to modify human
behavior that harms the environment.CONCLUDING COMMENTSMany of the most troublesome aspects of environmental change are thedirect consequence of human behavior, so it is appropriate that changing
that behavior should be high on the list of goals for any program of environ-
mental preservation.  But behavior is seldom changed significantly or for

very long simply in response to scolding, admonishment, pleading, or even
rational explanation of why change is required.  Describing what the envi-

ronment could be in 100 years has little effect on people who feel little or
no responsibility toward unborn generations.  Systems must be designed

that make it difficult to behave in ways that will make things worse.We have focused here on how human factors research might contributeto shaping technology so that the natural consequences of its use for human
ends will be more environmentally benign.  We have pointed to a few

examples of the kinds of specific research issues that should be addressed.
Human factors research can be applied to the goal of reversing undesirable
trends in environmental change in other ways as well.  It can help extend

our understanding of how human behavior causes environmental change;
and it can contribute to the development of more effective tools for use in
the study of environmental change; and it can help assess the effectiveness
of efforts to modify undesirable current trends.  Finally, it may be able to

contribute in ways that will become clear only when a significant number of
human factors researchers turn their attention to this area.A major challenge for the design of environmentally benign systems isinducing people to see constraints less as constraints than as ways to afford
something else.  The constraint that we all drive on the same side of the

road is recognized as an opportunity for safe travel.   The constraint on the

voltages available in domestic power supplies is an opportunity for safe and
efficient use of appliances.  Often, however, when constraints are intro-

duced for safety or health purposes, people react negatively to what theyEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE173see as encroachments on their freedom of choice.  Mandatory seat-belt and
motorcycle-helmet laws have sometimes been repealed despite conclusive
evidence that seat-belt and helmet use prevents death and serious injury on
the highways.  Laws prohibiting smoking in public places encountered enormous
initial resistance despite the evidence that smoking, including breathing
secondhand smoke, is injurious to health.  Dealing effectively with these

kinds of issues is, at least in part, a human factors problem.Detrimental environmental change is becoming perceived, by both thescientific community and the general public, as one of the most serious
problems that is now facedÑand that will continue to be faced for theforeseeable futureÑnot only by individual nations but by the world as awhole.  Because this problem has global implications, it should present

unusual opportunities for international collaboration among researchers in
many countries.  If such collaboration is to be effective, the researchers

must acquire some new skills and perspectives.  It is not safe to assume that

what works in one country or culture will work equally well in another.  We

must learn how to collaborate effectively if we are to have any hope of
making real headway on problems that are global in extent.  Otherwise, we

run the risk of designing the behavioral analogs of very tall smokestacks
and exporting various forms of cultural acid rain to other cultures in our
efforts to help our own society.A considerable amount of human factors research has addressed thequestion of how environmental variables affect human performance; how-
ever, the problem of environmental deterioration has not been a prominent
focus of human factors research.  Human factors, as a discipline, has much

to offer to efforts to find solutions to various aspects of this problem.  And

the problem is sufficiently urgent that even a small probability of making a
useful contribution justifies the attempt.REFERENCESAschenbrenner, K.M., B. Biehl, and G.M. Wurm1986Antiblockiersystem und Verkehrssicherheit:  Ein Vergleich der Unfallbelaestung
von Taxen mit und ohne Antiblockiersystem. (Teilbericht von die Bundesanstaltfur Strassenwesen zum Forschungsproject 8323.)  Mannheim, F.R. Germany.  Citedin Wilde, G.S. (1988).  Risk homeostasis theory and traffic accidents:  proposi-

tions, deductions, and discussion in recent reactions. Ergonomics 31:441-468.
Ashby, W.R.1956An Introduction to Cybernetics.  London, England:  Chapman and Hall.
Baker, L.A., A.T. Herlihy, P.R. Kaufmann, and J.M. Eilers1991Acidic lakes and streams in the United States:  the role of acidic deposition.
Science 252:1151-1154.
Baum, A., and J.E. Singer, eds.1981Advances in Environmental Psychology, Vol 3.  Energy in Psychological Perspec-tive series.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHBavelas, A., T. Belden, E. Glenn, J. Orlansky, J. Schwartz, and H.W. Sinaiko1963Teleconferencing:  Summary of a Preliminary Research Project
.  Study S-138.
Arlington, Va.:  Institute for Defense Analysis.
Bureau of the Census1990Statistical Abstract of the United States.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Department of
Commerce.Coach, J.V., T. Garber, and L. Karpus1979Response maintenance and paper recycling.  
Journal of Environmental Systems8:127-137.Cone, J.D., and S.C. Hayes1980Environmental Problems/Behavioral Solutions.  Monterey, Calif.:  Brooks/Cole
Publishing.Crabb, P.B.1992Comment:  effective control of energy-depleting behavior.  
American Psychologist47:815-816.Crossen, P.R., and N.J. Rosenberg1989Strategies for agriculture.  
Scientific American 261(3):128-135.
Durlach, N.I., and A.S. Mavor, eds.1995Virtual Reality:  Scientific and Technological Challenges
.  Committee on Virtual
Reality Research and Development, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:National Academy Press.Geller, E.S.1981Waste reduction and resource recovery:  strategy for energy conservation.  Pp.
115-154 in A. Baum and J.E. Singer, eds., Advances in Environmental Psychology,Vol 3.  Energy:  Psychological Perspectives
 series.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
1986Prevention of environmental problems.  Pp. 361-383 in 
Handbook of Prevention.New York:  Plenum.
1987Environmental psychology and applied behavior analysis:  from strange bedfel-
lows to a productive marriage.  Pp. 361-388 in D. Stokols and I. Altman, eds.,

Handbook of Environmental Psychology. New York:  Wiley.
Geller, E.S., J.L. Chafee, and R.E. Ingram1975Promoting paper-recycling on a university campus.  
Journal of EnvironmentalSystems 5:39-57.
Geller, E.S., R.R. Winett, and P.B. Everett1982Preserving the Environment:  New Strategies for Behavior Change
.  Elmsford,
N.Y.:  Pergamon Press.
Georgescu-Roegen, N.1976Energy and Economic Myths:  Institutional and Analytical Essays
.  New York:
Basic Books.Gibbons, J.H., P.D. Blair, and H.L. Gwin1989Strategies for energy use.  
Scientific American 261(3):136-143.
Gore, A.1992Earth in the Balance:  Ecology and the Human Spirit
.  New York:  Penguin.
Gray, C.L., Jr., and J.A. Alson1989The case for methanol.  
Scientific American 261(5):108-114.
Hamilton, D.P.1992Envisioning research with virtual reality.  
Science 256:603.
Hazarika, S.1986Bhopal:  The Lessons of a Tragedy
.  London, England:  Penguin.
Holahan, C.1986Environmental psychology.  
Annual Review of Psychology 37:381-407.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE175Houghton, R.A., and G.M. Woodwell1989Global climatic change.  
Scientific American 260(4):36-44.
Human Factors Society1991Human Factors Society 1991 Directory and Yearbook.  Santa Monica, Calif.:
Human Factors Society.Humphrey, C.R., R.J. Bord, M.M. Hammond, and S.H. Mann1977Attitudes and conditions for cooperation in a paper recycling program.  
Environ-ment and Behavior 9:107-124.
la Riviere, J.W.M.1989Threats to the world
Õs water.  Scientific American 261(3):80-94.
Mohnen, V.A.1988The challenge of acid rain.  
Scientific American 259(2):30-38.
Moray, N.1963Introduction to Cybernetics.  London, England:  Burns and Oates.
Myers, N.1989Deforestation Rates in Tropical Forests and Their Climatic Implications.  London,
England:  Friends of the Earth.
National Research Council1977Drinking Water and Health.  Safe Drinking Water Committee, Commission on
Life Sciences.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy of Sciences.
1983Changing Climate:  Report of the Carbon Dioxide Assessment Committee
.  Wash-
ington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
1990The Improvement of Tropical and Subtropical Rangelands.  Board on Science and
Technology for International Development, Office of International Affairs.  Wash-

ington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
1991Rethinking the Ozone Problem in Urban and Regional Air Pollution.  Committee
on Tropospheric Ozone Formation and Measurement, Board on EnvironmentalSciences and Toxicology.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Nickerson, R.S.1992Looking Ahead:  Human Factors Challenges in a Changing World
.  Hillsdale,
N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Nilles, J.M., F.R. Carlson, P. Gray, and G.J. Hanneman1976The Telecommunications-Transportation Tradeoff.  New York:  Wiley.
Office of Technology Assessment1988Urban Ozone and the Clean Air Act:  Problems and Proposals for Change
.  Wash-
ington, D.C.:  U.S. Government Printing Office.
Postel, S.1985Thirsty in a water-rich world.  
International Wildlife 15(6):32-37.
Rasmussen, J.1986Information Processing and Human-Machine Interaction:  An Approach to Cogni-
tive Engineering, Vol. 12.  New York:  North Holland.
Rasmussen, J., and R. Batstone1989Why Do Complex Organizational Systems Fail?  Summary proceedings of a cross-
disciplinary workshop in safety control and risk management.  Washington, D.C.:

World Bank.Reason, J.1990Human Error.  New York:  Cambridge University Press.
Repetto, R.1990Deforestation in the tropics.  
Scientific American 262(4):36-42.
Russell, J.A., and L.M. Ward1982Environmental psychology.  
Annual Review of Psychology 33:651-688.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHSaegert, S., and G.H. Winkel1990Environmental psychology.  
Annual Review of Psychology 41:441-477.
Schlesinger, W.H., J.F. Reynolds, G.L. Cunningham, L.F. Huenneke, W.M. Gerrell, R.A. Vir-
ginia, and W.G. Whitford1990Biological feedbacks in global desertification.  
Science 247:1043-1048.
Schwartz, S.E.1989Acid deposition:  unraveling a regional phenomenon.  
Science 243:753-763.
Senders, J., and N. Moray, eds.1991Human Error:  Cause, Prediction, and Reduction
.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Shulman, S.1989When a nuclear reactor dies, 98 million dollars is a cheap funeral.  
Smithsonian20(7):56-69.Soule, M.E.1991Conservation:  tactics for a constant crisis.  
Science 253:744-750.
Steinhart, P.1990No net loss.  
Audubon July:18-21.
Stern, P.C.1992Psychological dimensions of global environmental change.  
Annual Review of Psy-chology 43:269-302.
Stern, P.C., O.R. Young, and D. Druckman, eds.1992Global Environmental Change:  Understanding the Human Dimensions
.  Commit-
tee on the Human Dimensions of Global Change, National Research Council.Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Stolarski, R.S.1988The Antarctic ozone hole.  
Scientific American 258(1):30-36.
Stolarski, R.S., R. Bojkov, L. Bishop, C. Zerefos, J. Staehelin, and J. Zawodny1992Measured trends in stratospheric ozone.  
Science 256:342-349.
Thorpe, J.1993Synthetic Environments Strategic Plan.  Draft 3B.  Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency, Alexandria, Va.Wallace, D.R.1985Wetlands in America:  labyrinth and temple.  
Wilderness 49:12-27.
Wilson, E.O.1989Threats to biodiversity.  
Scientific American 261(3):108-116.
Wise, J.A., and S.F. Savage1992Human factors in environmental management:  new directions from the Hanford
site.  Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 36th Annual Meeting.  Santa
Monica, Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
Zuboff, S.1988In the Age of the Smart Machine:  The Future of Work and Power
.  New York:
Basic.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1776Communication Technology and
Telenetworking
Raymond S. NickersonINTRODUCTIONAmong the more significant events in the recent history of long-dis-tance communication have been the building of computer-based communi-
cation networks and the development of technologies that have made pos-
sible the implementation and exploitation of these networks.  In this chapter

we focus on these technologies and on the challenges and opportunities for
human factors research that they present.We begin with a brief historical overview of computer-communicationsnetworking technology.  We then focus on current trends, especially the

phenomenon of Òglobal connectivityÓ that networking is coming to repre-
sent and some of the implications this could have.  In the remainder of the

chapter we discuss some of the human factors issues and research needs that
relate to networking and its future development and applications.HISTORICAL OVERVIEWNetworks that link computers from different geographical locations area relatively recent phenomenon.  Since the first such networks were imple-

mented, the technology has advanced rapidly.  It appears that this rapid

advance will continue and that applications of the technology will become
increasingly widespread over the near term.The first experimental networks connecting independent, nonhomogeneous,Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHgeographically distributed computers were established in the mid-1960s (Daviesand Barber, 1973; Marrill and Roberts, 1966).  The ARPANET, which was

to become the largest operational network in the world and to remain so for
many years, was started as a four-node system by the Advanced Research
Projects Agency of the U.S. Department of Defense in 1969 (Heart, 1975;
Heart et al., 1978). According to Pool (1993), its successor, the Internet,
connected about 1.7 million host computers and between 5 million and 15
million users as of 1993, and the numbers have been doubling annually.The establishment and proliferation of computer networks have beenaccompaniedÑindeed made possibleÑby an ever-increasing blurring of thedistinction between computer and communication technologies.  The Internet
and the many smaller networks that connect to it depend on computing
resources for all aspects of their operation and for the provision of the
various services, such as electronic mail and bulletin boards, teleconferenc-
ing, information utilities, and the many others that they offer.Today there are several types of networks: local networks, long-dis-tance networks that use telephone lines, satellite networks that communi-
cate by radio transmission, and network complexes that use a variety of
means of transmission.  Some networks are designed to connect only the

terminals in a single building or office complex; at the other extreme are
those that connect facilities in different countries and regions of the world.
Networks have been established to serve the interests of government agen-
cies, business corporations, educational institutions, and the general public.Not only have networks been rapidly increasing in number and size; thebandwidth or ÒthroughputÓ capacity of the individual links of which they
are composed has been expanding greatly as well.  Wide-area networks now

typically operate at 1.5 megabits (million bits) per second, and many local-
area networks have transmission rates of 10 megabits per second.  Systems

that use optical fibers as the transmission medium support rates of 100
megabits and, in a few cases, 1 gigabit (billion bit).TECHNOLOGY TRENDS AND EXPECTATIONSNetwork enhancements will come from the development of increasinglypowerful computing devices, many of which are especially designed for
network applications, as well as from improvements in the methods for
transmitting information from point to point and from the development of
new network configurations and new ways of linking networks together.Rapidly Increasing BandwidthProbably the most significant predictable trend in networking is a con-tinuing increase in network bandwidths at all levels of network operations.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING179Systems with transmission rates of 10 gigabits per second could be in placeby the end of the century or soon thereafter (Kahn, 1987); and there is
already speculation that terabit (trillion bit) capacity systems might be fea-
sible in the not-distant future (Partridge, 1990).Optical fiber will become increasingly used as the information conduitfor future systems (Bell, 1989; Desurvire, 1992); it is expected that most
homes will have access to broadband fiber networks within 10 to 20 years
(Shumate, 1989).  Wireless terminals, foreshadowed by cellular telephone

technology, will also become more generally available, as will high-resolu-
tion color terminals with three-dimensional graphics capability.If network bandwidth continues to increase at anything like its recentrate, it will soon be feasible to transmit enormous amounts of data (includ-
ing digital voice and video) at very low cost. As more and more systems
acquire the capacity to transmit high-quality speech with little or no com-
pression, digital voice seems certain to be an increasingly practical mode of
communication between one person and another through computer networks,
and between people and computers (Makhoul et al., 1990).  Speech recogni-

tion technology is also becoming sufficiently mature to be useful in a vari-
ety of contexts (Waldrop, 1988).Although bandwidth limitations have been a problem for digital speechtransmission, the consequences of these limitations have been more severe
for picture transmission.  Trying to transmit pictorial information through a

channel that can handle, say, 50,000 bits per second is a little like trying to
fill a swimming pool through a straw.  But again, if network bandwidths

increase at rates close to those experts have been predicting, digital video
transmission will become a practical reality for many applications reason-
ably soon.This is not to suggest that there will not be a desire for still greaterbandwidth; to date the appetite for increased bandwidth has always man-
aged to stay ahead of the technologyÕs ability to deliver, and there is littleevidence that this will change right away, if ever.  For present purposes, the

important point is that the technology is advancing rapidly, its applications
and potential applications multiplying apace.Global ConnectivityOne way to characterize what is happening in telecommunications is tosay that the degree to which people everywhere are connected, or could be
connected, to other people and to information resources of all kinds, inde-
pendently of location, is rapidly increasing.  The National Research CouncilÕs(1988) Computer Science and Technology Board has recently called for the
development of an integrated national computer network system that would
permit communication between any two computers in the country.  This callEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHhas been echoed in legislative proposals to make the establishment of high-speed data highways a matter of national priority (Gore, 1991).  There is

similar interest in the establishment of national networks in other countries
around the world.  Such networks could be linked by Internet gateways.
The evolving macro-system of interlinked networks can be thought ofas one enormous global nexus that has the potential to increase by many
orders of magnitude the degree to which individuals and information re-
sources all over the world are interconnected and therefore accessible to
each other.  Some technologists envision, within the next decade or two, a

single worldwide integrated services digital network that would be capable
of handling digitally encoded information of any type (data, facsimile, voice,
graphics, motion pictures) and that would link offices, schools, and homes
to information resources of various sorts (libraries, museums, national and
international data banks) throughout the world (Denning, 1989b; Forester,
1987).What the continuing development of computer networking and the glo-bal connectivity it represents will mean is very difficult to say at this point,
but it seems a safe bet that the implicationsÑtechnological, political, so-cialÑwill be profound.  Denning (1989b) believes an emerging worldwide
network of computers, which he refers to as ÒWorldnet,Ó could be a perva-
sive reality by the year 2000, and he has argued that such a facility would
quickly become indispensable to businesses that wish to remain competitive
in a networked world.  One suspects that the implications for education, for

recreation, for politics, and for daily life will be equally great.Access to Information and to PeopleA global wideband network has the potential to give individuals un-precedented access to information and information resources independently
of their location.  Such access will be used to provide the ability to browse

through the worldÕs libraries, dial up movies for home viewing, consultinteractive encyclopedic information services (including process simulations
and manipulable microworlds), make ÒvirtualÓ visits to museums and other
places of interest, study in classrooms without walls (including using inter-
national collaboratives for educational purposes), participate in instanta-
neous polls and referenda, enjoy interactive media (Òtell [or show] me moreÓnews and entertainment), and undoubtedly take advantage of possibilities
that we cannot now imagine.The kind of connectivity that computer networks are expected to pro-vide in the future will increase not only access to information and informa-
tion resources but also access to people, independently of their location.  It

is to be expected that new patterns of interpersonal communication will
emerge from the widespread use of this technology.  Already electronic
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING181mail, which accounts for a very substantial fraction of the total traffic overcomputer networks (Denning, 1989a), has significantly changed the com-
munication patterns of many people who use it.Unlike the telephone, radio, and television, computer networks are usedfor both point-to-point and broadcast communications.  Electronic mail tends
to be used for person-to-person communication; that is to say, messages are
sent to specified individual recipients although they can also be readily sent
to groups of recipients.  Electronic bulletin boards are used to post mes-

sages that can be read by anyone who has access to the boards on which
they are posted.  Often this means a fairly large number of people.
New Methods of Information DistributionThe idea of electronic information repositories accessible to the generalpublic is not new.  For decades, forward-looking technologists have given

visionary accounts of what interaction with such systems could be like
(Bush, 1945; Licklider, 1965; Parker, 1973).  Parker, for example, envisions
the ability of the reader of an electronic newspaper to call up a biblio-
graphic sketch of an individual who is the subject of a news story, to get
tutorial information on a topic that is in the news, to do an automatic search
of advertisements for items of interest, and, in general, to access informa-
tion resources that could transform the reading of the news into a much
richer experience than it now is.Advantages of electronic communication of information include speedÑinformation is communicated to everyone within a community of interest
essentially instantaneouslyÑand representational versatilityÑconventionaltext can be supplemented with animations and process simulations, includ-
ing those with which the user can interact.  In addition, the technology

could provide users with a variety of tools and capabilities for working with
very large information stores and getting what they want from them, with-
out being burdened with a mass of data in which they have no interest.Despite the considerable interest in the idea of electronic newspapers,magazines, and journals, not much has been done along these lines to date
(although a great deal of ÒprepublicationÓ information and data are ex-
changed among scientists via computer networks and much debate of topi-
cal scientific questions takes place on electronic bulletin boards that serve
specific user communities).  One wonders why the idea has not caught on

more rapidly.  One possibility is that not enough people have the terminal

equipment and network access that is needed to make electronic distribution
feasible on a large scale.  Other impediments to the widespread use of

electronic media for the distribution of news and technical information may
be general resistance to change, distrust of (lack of confidence in) the me-
dium, unacceptability of the quality of visual displays (as compared withEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHconventional print media), and the intangibility of the medium (peopleÑespecially authorsÑmay see printed pieces as more ÒrealÓ than electronic
ones).  Research on the question of why people often object to reading print

on visual display terminals as opposed to print on paper has provided some
leads that need to be explored further (Gould et al., 1987).Changing Roles and FunctionsGiven the type of connectivity global telenetworks are expected to pro-vide and the information handling tools that are already beginning to ap-
pear, new methods of information distribution are likely to become increas-
ingly widely used.  These innovations will change our fundamental ideas

about information packaging and dissemination and will have implications
for the traditional roles of editors, publishers, librarians, and other informa-
tion workers.  Questions abound.  What, in the age of electronics, will

constitute a ÒdocumentÓ or its electronic analogue?  What will publication
mean?  Who will perform the functions of quality control historically per-

formed by editors and publishers?  What will be the nature of a library?

What services will it provide?It seems likely that there will be a continuing need for publishers,librarians, and other Òinformation brokersÓ in a world in which information
is increasingly gathered, stored, distributed, and used in electronic form.
The daily tasks that information-handling professionals perform will change,
however, as will the nature of the services they provide.Implications for Energy and Resource ConsumptionAs we make greater use of electronic means of distributing informationthat has traditionally been distributed by newspapers, magazines, journals,
and books, there could be a decrease in the need for and use of paper.  This

would be a desirable consequence from an environmental point of view, as
it would reduce natural resource use, energy use, and waste production
(Chapter 5).  Whether increased use of electronic publishing will in fact

decrease the demand for paper remains to be seen; to date, there is little
evidence that computer technology generally, or the application of this technology
to information distribution in particular, has done so (Herman et al., 1989;
Nickerson, 1992).It appears that people strongly prefer to read print on paper rather thanwords on an electronic visual display.  It is not clear to what extent this is

more than a matter of discomfort with change from the familiar.  Given the

potential that electronic distribution of information has for reducing our
dependence on paper and the fact that, so far, increased use of electronic
distribution has not been accompanied by a decrease in the use of paper, itEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING183seems important to attempt to understand better the causal relationshipsinvolved.  In that way, effective steps can be taken to realize the potential

for savings more fully.Participatory DemocracyBecause of the possibility of two-way communication, computer net-works could have profound effects on the ways in which decisions are made
at various levels of government and on the extent to which citizens partici-
pate directly in the making of those decisions (Lemelshtrich, 1990).  Not

only will instantaneous polls and referenda be possible, but also there will
be new types of forums for debate on issues of public interest by anyone
who wants to participate.A hint of how network technology may facilitate spontaneous politicalcommunication can be seen from an inspection of the messages that are
posted on general-interest electronic bulletin boards.  One informal analysis

of 1,000 messages posted over a five-week period on a company board
revealed that about 14 percent of them were classifiable as political com-
mentary, discussion, or debate.  Other major message types were requests

for information (ÒDoes anybody know . . . ?Ó), 21 percent; advertisements(to sell or rent), 16 percent; and unsolicited information (meeting notices,
news, service or product recommendations or warnings), 13 percent (Nickerson,
1994).HUMAN FACTORS ISSUESHuman factors considerations pertaining to communications andtelenetworking are important, in part, because eventually nearly everyone is
likely to be a user of this technology.  Many people will use it in their work,
some in relatively traditional work settings and others in radically different
contexts.  Simply by making all types of information more generally acces-

sible, computer networks greatly increase the possibility of doing ÒofficeworkÓ in places other than traditional centralized offices.  In some instances,information technology is changing the character of the work that gets done,
and it will continue to do so.  Telenetworking is itself a major industry that

offers job opportunities to many people.Not all the applications of this technology will be in the workplace.There will be many opportunities to apply it to education, to politics and
governance, and to avocational and recreational activities as well.  People

will have access to computer networks in the future, whether they actively
seek it or not, simply by virtue of the fact that televisions will be designed
to serve not only as one-way delivery systems for broadcast TV but also asEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHtwo-way terminals that can both bring information into the home and pro-vide users with the means of transmitting to a network.The opportunities for human factors research relating to this technologyare many and varied.  By way of illustrating the diverse nature of the

problems, we will focus on three general problem areas:  person-computer

interaction, person-to-person communication, and what, for want of a better
term, we will call Òvirtualization.Ó  We will mention a few research oppor-
tunities in each of these areas.  The possibilities for human factors involve-

ment in this field include these examples, but also extend way beyond them.Person-Computer InteractionPsychologists and human factors researchers have given a great deal ofattention to the topic of person-computer interaction.  Most of the research

that has been done has focused on the question of how to facilitate it,
howÑthrough improvements in the designs of interfaces and interactivetechniquesÑto make the interaction more natural and more effective.  This
problem is of undoubted importance and deserves continued attention.Terminal and Interface DesignAn obvious problem will be improving the design of terminals that givepeople access to computing resources and of the interfaces through which
people communicate with information resources.  This has been a major

focus of human factors research since computer-based systems began to be
used widely by people other than computer scientists and system developers
(Nickerson, 1986).Most terminals today depend primarily on two-dimensional visual dis-plays as output devices and on typewriter-like keyboards, typically comple-
mented with a pointing and drawing instrument, such as a mouse or trackball,
for input.  The effective exploitation of other input-output modalities and

methods will become an increasingly important challenge as the community
of users of terminals that provide access to computer networks continues to
expand and as technology widens the range of practical input-output op-
tions.  Speech will become an increasingly feasible option for both input

and output, for example (Makhoul et al., 1990; Weischedel et al., 1990).  So
will Òwalk-around,Ó three-dimensional, 
Òvirtual-realityÓ representations of
objects and environments with which users can interact (Durlach and Mavor,
1995).  How fully the technological possibilities in these and related areas

are realized will depend, to a large extent, on how effectively the numerous
human factors issues that pertain to them are addressed.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING185Information Finding and UtilizationRealization of the potential benefits that can come from the connectiv-ity to information resources provided by computer networks will require the
development of a variety of usersÕ tools.  Physical access to very large
information repositoriesÑthe electronic equivalent of major libraries, forexampleÑwill be of little value unless users have effective methods forgetting at the information they need or want without spending an undue
amount of time and effort in unproductive search.  As Bromley (1986:628)

has put it:More information than we can ever conceivably want will be available tous within seconds.  What do we do with it?  How do we condense, corre-
late, and sort it so that humans can base decisions on it?  This is one of the
major challenges facing all science, all society.There already exist many large electronic databases that serve a varietyof purposes and special interests:  electronic funds transfer, airline reserva-

tions, stock price quotations, credit card and check authorization, crime
investigation, scientific research, and numerous others.  Databases that hold

the results of DNA sequencing research or the astrophysical data collected
by space-probing satellites are growing very rapidly and are expected to
continue to do so for the foreseeable future.  Ensuring prospective users

easy access to these databases is important, and achieving this goal be-
comes increasingly difficult as the amount of data in the databases grows.There is a need for tools that will facilitate information access both inthe narrow senseÑaccess by specialists to the focused databases that servetheir special interestsÑand in the broad senseÑaccess by nonspecialists toinformation that is available to the public through news media, libraries,
and general-purpose information services to which anyone can subscribe.
There is also opportunity for innovative work on information representation
and presentationÑhypertext systems that include multimodal representa-tions provide a hint of the possibilitiesÑand on the design of navigationaids to help users move around effectively and efficiently in multidimen-
sional data-rich environments.  For more on the topic of information access

and organization, see Chapter 7.Personal Information ManagementMost people, over the course of their lives, acquire a variety of types ofinformation that they need or desire to retain for their personal use or
reference: legal documents, medical records, financial papers, recipes, books,
letters, pictures, and so on.  All of this information is, in principle, storable
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHin digital form, and in the future more and more of it will be delivered andretained electronically (or photonically).  Also, because of the existence of

computer networks and the connectivity to information sources they repre-
sent, people may acquire much more information that they wish to retain for
personal use than they do now.If people are to efficiently manage large amounts of information inpersonal electronic repositories, if they are to keep electronic files accurate,
timely, and retrievable and not find this a burdensome chore, they will need
some tools and methods designed for this purpose.  Simply replacing paper

files with electronic files does not ensure greater accessibility to informa-
tion.  Although the computer gives one the potential for handling much

larger databases much more efficiently, it does not rule out the possibility
of creating chaos.  Moreover, because of the ease with which electronically

stored information can be erased, either intentionally or inadvertently, spe-
cial precautions must be taken to protect personally valued information.The design of information systems to serve the personal needs of indi-viduals represents a challenge to both software producers and human factors
specialists.  And this will become increasingly important as more and more

people gain access to computer networks and to the ever-expanding collec-
tion of information sources to which they connect.In addition to the need for tools to facilitate the organization of elec-tronic information for retention, maintenance, and ease of access and use,
there will be a need for new methods for coping with the information over-
load that connectivity to electronic mail, electronic bulletin boards, and
other information resources can produce.  Heavy users of such resources

often develop their own techniques for keeping the amount of information
they have to attend to within acceptable bounds.  The need for approaches

that are demonstrably effective and usable by nontechnical users will grow
as the potential connectivity of the ordinary citizen to information sources
of various sorts increases.Attitudes and Beliefs About ComputersOne question that has not received the attention it deserves is, whatattitudes and beliefs do people have about the computer systems with which
they interact and how are those attitudes and beliefs are affected by their
interactions?  Weizenbaum (1976) has expressed amazement at, and consid-

erable discomfort with, the seriousness and intensity of the interactions that
many people had with his Rogerian ÒElizaÓ program.  He and others have
questioned the advisability of giving people the impression that the systems
with which they communicate are smarter than they really are.There is some evidence that people are more willing to disclose infor-mation, including information about socially frowned-upon behavior or atti-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING187tudes, on a computer-administered questionnaire than in a face-to-face in-terview (Kiesler and Sproull, 1986; Sproull and Kiesler, 1991).  There are

several possible explanations for this, but so far they must be considered
speculative.Several observers have raised the question of how the ubiquity of com-puters and computer-based systems, and their increasing ability to do things
that were once considered uniquely human, will affect the way we perceive
ourselves (Turkle, 1984; Roszak, 1986).  The more that people with little

understanding of how computers work have occasion to interact with these
systems, the more relevant and important this question becomes.  What can

be done to increase the likelihood that peopleÕs conceptualizations of whatcomputer-based systems can do and how they do it are reasonably accurate,
or at least not inaccurate in destructive ways?Person-to-Person CommunicationIn the past, human factors researchers gave more attention to person-computer communication than to computer-mediated communication between
and among people.  This is not surprising, as the facilitation of interper-

sonal communication was not seen as a primary application of computer
technology until fairly recently.  With the development and rapid growth of

computer networks, however, it has become apparent that facilitating com-
munication between and among people is one of the most powerful applica-
tions that this technology can have.  Among the obvious examples of such

applications are electronic mail, electronic bulletin boards, and computer-
based teleconferencing.Electronic MailElectronic mail (E-mail) is a new form of interpersonal communicationthat has been made possible by the existence of computer networks.  It

should be studied from a human factors point of view.  To date, E-mail

facilities have been used primarily by people who are Òcomputer literate,Óin particular those who use computers regularly either in their work or for
avocational purposes.  It seems highly likely, however, that the use of E-

mail will increase in the future and that the user community will include
many people who do not now use computers for either work or play.There are many research questions relating to E-mail and its use.  Who
uses it?  And for what purposes?  How accessible is it?  How much training

do people who do not use computers for other purposes need in order to be
able to use E-mail effectively?  How do the usability and usefulness of

specific E-mail systems depend on the details of the systemsÕ designs and
operating characteristics?  Does computer-mediated communication have
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHany unique characteristics, and if so, what are they?  To what extent does it
replace other means of communication for its users?  What effects, if any,

does E-mail have on the operation of organizations whose members use it
daily?  How does interpersonal communication through E-mail resemble or

differ from communication via other media?Clearly, electronic messages do not contain many of the nonlinguisticcues (e.g., Òbody languageÓ) that often convey nuances of feelings andattitudes of participants in face-to-face or voice interactions, and they typi-
cally lack most of the clues to sendersÕ status or position that are often
found in letterheads or signature blocks (Sproull and Kiesler, 1991).  Com-

puter-mediated communication systems also tend to be opaque to personal
characteristicsÑunattractive physical appearance, speech impediments, be-havioral anomaliesÑthat sometimes, unfortunately, inhibit effective com-munication on a person-to-person basis (Zuboff, 1988).  Similarly, they

filter out the advantages that aspects of appearanceÑphysical attractive-ness, an authoritative voice, an imposing demeanorÑcan provide.  In gen-
eral, they have been seen by many observers as user ÒequalizersÓ in the
sense that they mask many of the factors that differentiate people in face-to-
face contact (Hiltz et al., 1980; Vallee et al., 1974; Zuboff, 1988).Sproull and Kiesler point out that the weakening of social differences isnot unique to computer-mediated communication, but is seen, albeit to lesser
degrees, in other technologies (1991a:43):The telephone eliminates visual cues and therefore reduces oneÕs ability todeduce the other personÕs social position and to grasp the importance ofsocial differences in the interaction.  Over the telephone, though, one re-

trieves some social information in nonvisual form.  The secretary who
answers or places calls, variations in standard ways of greeting, and pausesand tone of voice all convey social information.Several years ago, Uhlig (1977) suggested the need for an etiquette ofcomputer-based message technology that would probably differ from the
etiquette that applies to more traditional forms of communication.  Has such
an etiquette emerged?  Is one emerging?  Is E-mail less constrained by

traditional social conventions than is face-to-face or voice communication?
Does it evoke more extreme positions and the venting of anger more openly
(Kiesler, 1984; Kiesler et al., 1984; Short et al., 1976)?Sproull and Kiesler (1991) suggest that because E-mail is relativelyimpoverished in social cues and shared experience, it lends itself to commu-
nication in which the participants produce messages that display less social
awareness than face-to-face or voice communication.  Reduced social awareness
is seen in Òmessages characterized by ignoring social boundaries, self rev-elation, and blunt remarksÓ (p. 39).  People tend to be more open and less
inhibited when using electronic mail than in face-to-face or voice communi-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING189cation, Sproull and Kiesler argue, because the possibility of a critical audi-ence is less apparent in the former case:  ÒBecause a person composing anelectronic message lacks tangible reminders of his or her audience, the
writer can easily forget the forms appropriate for communicating with that
audienceÓ (p. 49).
We know that interpersonal communicationÑface to face, by telephone,or in writingÑis by far the most common form of office activity (Bair,1987; Helander, 1985; Panko, 1982).  We know too that a large part of the

typical managerÕs job is communication, much of which occurs in meetingsand group settings (Mintzberg, 1973).  Whether or not widespread use of E-

mail will affect the amount of time devoted to communication, patterns of
communication that did not exist before will probably emerge.  One can

speculate about this, but it would be useful to have some observational
studies of the patterns of use of actual E-mail communities, of which many
already exist.  Because this form of communication is new, new observa-

tional and experimental techniques may be needed to study it.  The general

question of how computer and communication technologies will affect the
ways in which people communicate with each other is extremely important
and deserves considerable research effort (National Research Council, 1984).One question of special interest is how the use of E-mail and relatedtechnologies can be expected to affect the productivity of their users.  At

this early stage in the development and use of these facilities, it is not
possible to say anything definitive on this question.  One might guess that

use of E-mail would improve productivity, since E-mail can greatly facili-
tate communication among all the members of a functional group.  Of course,
it would be naive to assume that all the E-mail communication that is done
directly serves the goals of the organization; however, there may be indirect
benefits even from the facilitation of communication for purely personal
purposes.  Some preliminary data on the question have been reported.  Sproull
and Kiesler (1991) found a high correlation between the degree to which a
group used E-mail to coordinate its activities and the groupÕs productivity.They note that correlation does not demonstrate a cause-effect relationship,
but they appear to believe there to be one.Electronic Bulletin BoardsAn electronic bulletin board can be thought of as a special form ofelectronic mail, and much of what has been said in the preceding section
about E-mail applies to electronic bulletin boards as well.  The electronic

bulletin board is a sufficiently important innovation, however, to warrant
special mention.Like a conventional bulletin board, an electronic bulletin board is apublic medium; messages posted on it can be read by anyone who hasEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHaccess to it.  Also like conventional bulletin boards, electronic bulletin
boards serve a variety of communities of users.  The users of a conventional

bulletin board might be the occupants of a building, the patrons of a store,
the residents of a neighborhood; those of an electronic bulletin board might
be the employees of a corporation, the students and faculty of a university,
the users of a computer network service.Perhaps the most obvious advantage of electronic bulletin boards overconventional bulletin boards is that users do not have to go to a particular
place to read or post messages.  Because boards can be accessed from

essentially anywhere, the user community for a particular board can be
defined by common interests rather than by a common location.  Other

advantages include the ease with which the postings on an electronic bulle-
tin board can be scanned, excerpted, corrected, elaborated, and processed in
many other ways.Individuals can use electronic bulletin boards in a variety of ways andto varying extents.  One may read notices only, or one may post some as

well.  Some users read all the notices that are posted, checking the postings

at fairly regular intervals; others scan them only occasionally.  Replies to

ÒDoes anybody know?Ó questions are sometimes posted; often they are sent
privately to the questioners via E-mail.  Patterns of communication that

spontaneously emerge include multiperson dialogues, perhaps initiated by a
question or comment that evoked responses from several people.The existence of electronic bulletin boards could have a great effect onthe way people communicate with each other in the future.  As more and

more people acquire access to computer networks, they will also be acquir-
ing access to widely distributed communities with common interests.   What
this will mean to peopleÕs daily lives remains to be seen.  One opportunity
for human factors research is the observational study of the evolution of
this new mode of communication.  Another is developing an understanding

of this technology and of the needs and preferences of its users as a step
toward promoting design decisions that will enhance the usefulness of elec-
tronic bulletin boards to the general population.TeleconferencingThe idea of using network technology to hold conferences among Òat-tendeesÓ located in different places has been of interest since the early
1960s (Bavelas et al., 1963).  Despite this long-standing interest and despite

the implementation of several experimental systems, teleconferencing has
not yet become widely used, even when face-to-face meetings involve the
expense and inconvenience of considerable travel.  This may be due to a

combination of technical and nontechnical factors (Nickerson, 1986).Some of the technical limitations of teleconferencing systems are beingEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING191eased as networks acquire sufficient bandwidth to support the real-timetransmission of sufficiently high-fidelity video representations of partici-
pantsÕ images to create a realistic impression of an actual gathering.  Whetherthis will ensure the maturing of teleconferencing into an effective and widely
used technology remains to be seen.  It seems likely that the acceptability of
this technology will depend, to a large degree, on the kinds of usersÕ tools
that teleconferencing systems offer to facilitate group problem solving and
decision making.The dynamics of electronic ÒmeetingsÓ differ from those of face-to-face
meetings in a variety of ways.  For example, many of the factors that deter-

mine which participants play dominant roles in face-to-face meetings appear
to be less influential in electronic meetings.  These include gender (McGuire

et al., 1987) and status (Dubrovsky et al., 1991).  One might expect similar

diminution of the influence of age, race, and physical appearance.Sproull and Kiesler (1991) suggest that consensus is more difficult toachieve with electronic than with face-to-face groups.  Is this because people
are more susceptible to peer pressure in a face-to-face group than when
communicating electronically?  If so, the possibility arises that a face-to-

face meeting is more likely than an electronic one to result in what appearsto be a consensus, but in fact is not.It seems reasonable to expect that electronic meetings will differ sub-stantially from face-to-face meetings for some time to come, perhaps indefi-
nitely.  We would also expect, however, that the dynamics of electronic

meetings will change as the technology continues to be developed and en-
hanced.  Ideally, we would like the technology to develop in such a way

that electronic meetings come to have all, or most, of the advantages of
face-to-face meetings and some others that come from the availability of
facilitative tools as well.  Realization of this desire will require a better

understanding than we now have of the factors that can determine the rela-
tive effectiveness of working groups.VirtualizationAs used here, the term virtualization connotes the development of capa-
bilities that make it possible for people to function at a distance from needed
resources or to interact with simulated representations of objects and envi-
ronments much as they would with the real things.  Capabilities of these

types are basic to such ideas and phenomena as telecommuting, computer-
supported cooperative work, and virtual or artificial realities.TelecommutingWhether information technology, generally, has yet had a significantEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHimpact on productivity in the workplace is a matter of some debate (seeChapters 1 and 8).  The picture is clouded in part by (a) the difficulty of

measuring productivityÑespecially white-collar productivityÑin completelyunambiguous ways and (b) the fact that information technology, by virtue
of its pervasiveness, has many indirect effects that are hard to isolate and
track.There seems little doubt, however, that information technology, par-ticularly computer-based communication networks, has the potential to en-
hance productivity greatly.  The need to maintain large inventories of mate-

rials, parts, and finished products has a negative effect on productivity
because it represents a major component of the cost of getting products into
the hands of users.  ÒJust-in-timeÓ manufacturing reduces the need for such
inventories, but it depends on fast and effective communication techniques.
The substitution of the transmission of information for the movement of
people and material is another way in which computer networks can con-
tribute to increased productivity, because this means the delivery of the
same services at the expenditure of fewer natural or economic resources.Using computer networks to enable people to work at home or in Òvir-tual officesÓ outside traditional centralized office buildings has been of
interest for some time.  The idea of teleworking, or 
Òtelecommuting,Ó was
promoted by Nilles et al. (1976) shortly after the first oil crisis of the early
1970s, partly on the grounds that bringing jobs to people electronically,
rather than transporting people to jobs, would have the doubly beneficial
effect of conserving energy and saving transportation costs.  It would also

help the environment by reducing air pollution from vehicle emissions,
traffic congestion, and office space requirements.According to one estimate, perhaps as many as 15 or 16 million peoplein the United States could be considered teleworkers as of 1989 (Martin,
1989).  However, the percentage of the workforce, especially the white-

collar workforce, that could work from home is believed to be many times
larger than is currently doing so (Harkness, 1977; Kraut, 1987).  How fully

the potential for telework will be realized will depend, in part, on how
effectively a variety of human factors issues are addressed.  Some of these

issues have to do with the design of devices and softwareÑthe tools thatmake telework technically feasible.  Others, however, relate to less tan-

gible, but no less important, aspects of the work situation that help deter-
mine not only productivity but worker satisfaction.Telework has become a symbol of liberation to some people and ofisolation to others (Huws et al., 1990).  How it is perceived depends on the

individual workerÕs circumstances and the details of the arrangement be-tween worker and employer.  Among the issues that appear to contribute to

worker satisfaction with telework are whether the worker is considered an
independent contractor or a company employee, whether work is monitoredEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING193electronically, and how compensation is determined.  This is not to suggest
that all workers prefer the same arrangement (Chamot and Zalusky, 1985;
Gregory, 1985).  Telework situations differ from more traditional work

arrangements in many respects, some obvious, some subtle; studies are needed
to provide a better understanding of the variables that determine productiv-
ity and job quality from the workerÕs point of view.Computer-Supported Cooperative WorkWith the help of computer networks, colleagues can cooperate at adistance in ways that were impossible until fairly recently.  People in widely
separated locations can collaborate, for example, in real time on writing a
paper; all the authors can critique the same draft and have the benefit of all
the critiques as soon as they are made.  They can, in effect, share the same

Òwriting surfaceÓ despite their geographical separation.
Network technology has the potential to bring expertise to bear onproblems that are located someplace other than where the expert or experts
happen to be.  A team of experts, all located at different places, might

collaboratively address a problem requiring their expertise.  In theory, at

least, high-resolution displays, coupled with tele-operator control technol-
ogy could make it possible for a remotely located surgeon not only to give
advice to on-site personnel but even to perform operating procedures.How far such innovation can be taken remains to be seen.  There is
little doubt that the ubiquity of computer networks will make expertise, like
many other things, less constrained by space and time than it now is.  The

effectiveness with which geographically separated individuals will be able
to collaborate, via computer networks, on complex tasks that draw on their
combined skills will depend, to no small degree, on how well the many
human factors issues relating to the design of the underlying systems are
resolved.TelepresenceThe telephone created a telepresence of sorts.  When two people talk on
the phone, they are in each otherÕs presence in a real, if rudimentary, sense,even if they are located half a world away from each other.  The higher the

quality of the voice transmission and the fewer the interruptions, the greater
the sense of presence is.  Film and television can also create a sense of

presence; watching a film or televised event, one can sometimes get the
sense of Òbeing thereÓ to the extent of forgetting that what one is looking at
is a picture on a screen.One goal of virtual reality technology is to increase the sense of pres-ence considerably beyond what the current state of the art of communica-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHtion technology permits.  It would add, for example, the sense of touch and
would also give the recipient of the sensory information the ability to move
the sensing devices around in the experienced context.  By moving one
Õshead and eyes, for example, one would cause the optical sensors to move in
a corresponding way.  This would give the recipient control over where to

look, much as one would have if at the remotely located scene.As the bandwidth of computer networks continues to increase, it will bepossible to transmit an increasingly detailed and veridical representation of
a physical situation to a remotely located individual.  It seems unlikely,

however, that it will be possible, at least anytime soon, to represent most
nontrivial situations in sufficient detail that one could not tell the virtual
reality from the real thing.  Fortunately, this degree of realism is not neces-

sary for most applications, but the question of how real (in appearance) is
real enough is open and probably must be answered on a case-by-case basis.
Representations of reality that would be more than adequate for some appli-
cations might be inadequate for others.  There is a need for work on the

question of how to determine the degree of fidelity required in specific
instances.CONCLUDING COMMENTSOur main purpose in this chapter has been to point out that computernetworking and associated developments have profound implications for
human communication and represent some significant challenges and op-
portunities for human factors research.  We have considered only a few of

the research questions that arise and these only in a cursory way.  The need

to focus more attention on computer-based networking will increase as the
technology for it continues to develop and its applications continue to ex-
pand.In keeping with the overall theme of this book, we have focused prima-rily on the future of networking and the prospects of extensive connectivity
of people to information resources of many types and of people to people
independently of geographical location.  It should also be noted, however,

that there are many opportunities for human factors work on the networking
systems that currently exist.  The evidence suggests that the currently oper-

ating electronic information resources are not utilized as effectively as they
could be even by people who have easy access to them and could presum-
ably benefit from making greater use of them (General Accounting Office,
1989).  In this regard, see also Chapters 4 and 7.
There can be little doubt that the increasingly widespread use of com-munications technology in the workplace is changing the nature of many
jobs and the knowledge and skill requirements for performing them.  This
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING195technology is affecting jobs throughout industry and at all levels of respon-sibilityÑfrom clerical workers who have to master a variety of computer-based document preparation and information management tools to high-
level managers who have to learn to deal with new patterns of intra- and
intercompany communication, more fluid organizational structures, and challenges
stemming from the innovative exploitation of communication technology by
competitors.  Studies are needed both to help us understand the changes that

are taking place and to anticipate the likely job-skill requirements of the
future.But the effects of computer networking will be felt far beyond theworkplace.  We need to better understand its implications for education; for

civic, political, and personal decision making; for leisure and daily life
outside the workplace.  What might it mean for people who are confined to

their homes, to hospitals, to nursing homes, to prisons?  How can it be

exploited to give shut-ins greater access to other people, to information
resources, and to the world in general?What must be done to ensure the usefulness and usability of this tech-nology?  Special and general-purpose databanks will be increasingly acces-

sible through computer networks; information services will proliferate, as
will network-accessible expert systems, electronic consultants, and elec-
tronic advice givers.  How can such resources be made approachable for

people who are intimidated by computer technology, for people who cannot
type, for people who are disadvantaged in one way or another?  How can

we minimize the chances that these resources will widen the gap between
haves and have nots?  Between better-educated and less well-educated people?
Between people who are well connected to computer resources and people
who are not?What are some of the major risks inherent in this technology?  What arethe computer network analogues to nuisance telephone calls?  To mail and

telemarketing fraud?  What safeguards can be built against them?  How

should people be encouraged to think about networks, data structures, and
information spaces?  What sorts of metaphors or mental models will be

useful and not misleading and detrimental?Communication is a fundamental human activity.  Technology has af-
fected it in numerous ways in the past.  The proliferation of computer

networks has the potential to affect it greatly in the future.  Already it is

possible to identify many human factors questions that are raised by telenetworking
and associated developments; many more are likely to arise as the impact of
the continuing development of these technologies on our daily lives be-
comes increasingly evident.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHREFERENCESBair, J.H.1987User needs for office systems solutions.  Pp. 177-194 in R.E. Kraut, ed., 
Technol-ogy and the Transformation of White Collar Work.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Bavelas, A., T. Belden, E. Glenn, J. Orlansky, J. Schwartz, and H.W. Sinaiko1963Teleconferencing:  Summary of a Preliminary Research Project
.  Study S-138.
Arlington, Va.:  Institute for Defense Analysis.
Bell, T.E.1989Telecommunications.  
IEEE Spectrum 26(1):41-43.
Bromley, B.A.1986Physics:  natural philosophy and invention.  
American Scientist 74:622-639.
Bush, V.1945As we may think.  
The Atlantic Monthly.  176(July):101-108.
Chamot, D., and J.L. Zalusky1985Use and misuse of workstations in the home.  Pp. 76-84 in M.H. Olson, ed., 
OfficeWorkstations in the Home.  Board on Telecommunications and Computer Applica-
tions, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Davies, D.W., and D.L.A. Barber1973Communications Network for Computers.  New York:  Wiley.
Denning, P.J.1989aThe science of computing:  the ARPANET after 20 years.  
American Scientist77:530-534.1989bThe science of computing:  Worldnet.  
American Scientist 77:432-434.
Desurvire, E.1992Lightwave communications:  the fifth generation.  
Scientific American 266(1):114-121.Dubrovsky, V., S. Kiesler, and B. Sethna1991The equalization phenomenon:  status effects in computer-mediated and face-to-
face decision making groups.  Human Computer Interaction 6:119-146.
Durlach, N.I., and A.S. Mavor, eds.1995Virtual Reality:  Scientific and Technological Challenges
.Committee on Virtual
Reality Research and Development, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:National Academy Press.Forester, T.1987High-Tech Society:  The Story of the Information Technology Revolution
.  Cam-
bridge, Mass.:  MIT Press.
General Accounting Office1989Cancer Treatment:  National Cancer InstituteÕs Role in Encouraging the Use of
Breakthroughs.  Washington, D.C.:  General Accounting Office.
Gore, A.1991Infrastructure for the global village.  
Scientific American 265(3):150-153.
Gould, J.D., L. Alfaro, R. Finn, B. Haupt, and A. Minuto1987Reading from CRT displays can be as fast as reading from paper. 
Human Factors29:497-507.Gregory, J.1985Clerical workers and new office technologies.  Pp. 112-124 in M.H. Olson ed.,
Office Workstations in the Home.  Board on Telecommunications and Computer
Applications, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy

Press.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING197Harkness, R.C.1977Technology Assessment of Telecommunications-Transportation Interactions.  MenloPark, Calif.:  Stanford Research Institute.
Heart, F.1975The ARPANET network.  In R.L. Grimsdale and F.F. Kuo, eds., 
Computer Com-munication Networks:  1973 Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study Institute
.Leyden, Netherlands:  Noordhoff International Publishing.
Heart, F., A. McKenzie, J. McQuillan, and D. Walden1978ARPANET Completion Report.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Bolt Beranek and Newman.
Helander, M.G.1985Emerging office automation systems.  
Human Factors 27(1):3-20.
Herman, R., S.A. Ardekani, and J.H. Ausubel1989Dematerialization.  Pp. 50-69 in J.H. Ausubel and H.E. Sladovich, eds., 
Technol-ogy and Environment.  National Academy of Engineering. Washington, D.C.:  Na-
tional Academy Press.Hiltz, S.R., K. Johnson, C. Aronovitsh, and M. Turoff1980Face-to-Face Versus Computerized Conferences:  A Controlled Experiment
.  Re-
port 12.  Newark:  New Jersey Institute of Technology.
Huws, U., W.B. Korte, and S. Robinson1990Telework:  Towards the Elusive Office
.  New York:  Wiley.
Kahn, R.E.1987Networks for advanced computing.  
Scientific American 257(4):136-143.
Kiesler, S.1984Computer mediation of communication.  
American Psychologist 39:1123-1134.
Kiesler, S., and L.S. Sproull1986Response effects in the electronic survey.   
Public Opinion Quarterly 50:402-413.
Kiesler, S., J. Siegel, and T.W. McGuire1984Social psychological aspects of computer-mediated communication.  
American Psy-chologist 39:1123-1134.
Kraut, R.E.1987Social issues and white-collar technology:  an overview.  Pp. 1-21 in R.E. Kraut,
ed., Technology and the Transformation of White-Collar Work.  Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum.Lemelshtrich, N.1990The expression of opinions through the new electronic mass media:  an experimen-
tal and cybernetic view.  In N. Moray, W.R. Ferrell, and W.B. Rouse, eds., 
Robot-ics, Control and Society.  New York:  Taylor and Francis.
Licklider, J.C.R.1965Libraries of the Future.  Cambridge, Mass.:  MIT Press.
Makhoul, J., F. Jelinek, L. Rabiner, C. Weinstein, and V. Zue1990Spoken language systems.  
Annual Review of Computer Science 4:481-501.
Marrill, T., and L.A. Roberts1966Cooperative network of timesharing computers.  Pp. 425-431 in 
Proceedings ofthe AFIPS 1966 Sprint Joint Computer Conference.  Arlington, Va.:  American
Federation of Information Processing Societies Press.Martin, A.1989There
Õs no place like home . . . to work.  Human Resource Executive July:50-51.
McGuire, T., S. Kiesler, and J. Siegel1987Group and computer-mediated discussion effects in risk decision making.  
Journalof Personality and Social Psychology 52:917-930.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHMintzberg, H.1973The Nature of Managerial Work.  New York:  Harper and Row.
National Research Council1984Research Needs on the Interaction Between Information Systems and Their Users:Report of a Workshop.  Committee on Human Factors.  Washington, D.C.:  Na-
tional Academy Press.1988Toward a National Research Network.  National Research Network Review Com-
mittee, Computer Science and Technology Board. Washington, D.C.:  National
Academy Press.Nickerson, R.S.1986Using Computers:  Human Factors in Information Technology.  Cambridge, Mass.:MIT Press.1992Looking Ahead:  Human Factor Challenges in a Changing World
.  Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum.1994Electronic bulletin boards:  a case study in computer-mediated communication.
Interacting With Computers 6:117-134.
Nilles, J.M., F.R. Carlson, P. Gray, and G. Hanneman1976Telecommuting
Ñan alternative to urban transportation congestion.  IEEE Trans-actions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 6:77-84.
Panko, R.1982Serving managers and professionals.  Pp. 97-103 in 
AFIPS Office AutomationConference Proceedings.  Arlington, Va.:  American Federation of Information
Processing Societies Press.Parker, E.1973Technological change and the mass media.  Pp. 619-645 in I. Pool, W. Schramm,
F. Frey, N. Maccoby, and E. Parker, eds., Handbook of Communication.  Chicago,
Ill.:  Rand McNally.
Partridge, C.1990A faster data delivery.  
Unix Review 8(3):43-48.
Pool, R.1993Beyond databases and e-mail.  
Science 261(August):841-843.
Roszak, T.1986The Cult of Information:  The Folklore of Computers and the True Art of Thinking.New York:  Pantheon Books.
Short, J., E. Williams, and B. Christie1976A Social Psychology of Telecommunications.  New York:  Wiley.
Shumate, P.W., Jr.1989Optical fibers reach into homes.  
IEEE Spectrum 26(2):43-47.
Sproull, L., and S. Kiesler1991Connections:  New Ways of Working in the Networked Organization
.   Cambridge,
Mass.:  MIT Press.
Turkle, S.1984The Second Self:  Computers and the Human Spirit
.  New York:  Simon and
Schuster.Uhlig, R.P.1977Human factors in computer message systems.  
Datamation 23(4):120-126.
Vallee, J., R. Johansen, R.H. Randolph, and A.C. Hastings1974Group Communication Through Computers.  Vol. 2:  
A Study of Social Effects.Report R-33.  Menlo Park, Calif.:  Institute for the Future.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND TELENETWORKING199Waldrop, M.M.1988A landmark in speech recognition.  
Science 240:1615.
Weischedel, R., J. Carbonell, B. Grosz, W. Lehnert, M. Marcus, R. Perrault, and R. Wilensky1990Natural language processing.  
Annual Review of Computer Science 4:435-452.
Weizenbaum, J.1976Computer Power and Human Reason:  From Judgment to Calculation
.  San Fran-
cisco:  Freeman.
Zuboff, S.1988In the Age of the Smart Machine:  The Future of Work and Power
. New York:Basic Books.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCH2007Information Access and Usability
Christopher D. Wickens and Karen S. SeidlerINTRODUCTIONWe are a society increasingly driven by information.  Accurate, up-to-
date information underlies the effective and progressive functioning of gov-
ernmental, economic, and social institutions, impacting everything from the
focus and quality of public policy decisions to the competitiveness of indus-
trial research and development.  In this modern realityÑsometimes labeled

the information society (e.g., Salvaggio, 1989) or the postindustrial society
(Bell, 1973)Ñknowledge and information become the primary resources,
displacing manufactured goods and agricultural products as key commodi-
ties (Stonier, 1983).A number of trends associated with the evolution of an informationsociety beg attention from the human factors community.  One trend is the

greatly expanded quantity of information available to people in all profes-
sions.  For the scholar, this translates into a 3 percent growth per year in the

United States alone in the number of journals, professional conferences, and
proceedings (King et al., 1981).  Worldwide, the growth is even more rapid.

This makes keeping abreast of current research on even a restricted topic
daunting, and scholars are increasingly unsure of the extent to which they
have located relevant literature, let alone digested it.  Lawyers have wit-

nessed a comparable overwhelming growth in the records they can consult
for legal precedents.  In the medical profession, the limited ability of physi-

cians and other health professionals to extract from the literature relevantEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITY201information on patient care, teaching, and research has engendered so muchconcern (e.g., Huth, 1989) that a new subfieldÑmedical informaticsÑhasbeen created to address issues related to the development and operation of
medical information systems (Hewins, 1990).  Somewhat ironically, this sub-

discipline is generating its own growing body of literature (see Chapter 4).In industry, the exponential increases in system complexity have alsoresulted in voluminous documentation and procedures to support system
operations and maintenance.  The documentation required by the F-18 air-

craft alone contains 300,000 pages.  In nuclear facilities, it is not unheard of
for manuals of procedures for dealing with accidents to exceed hundreds of
pages.  For the consumer, a growing wealth of information on products and

costs is at least potentially available.  In the face of this data-rich environ-

ment, users are experiencing frustration in locating, accessing, tracking, and
interpreting the information that is germane to their concerns.New information technologies, though, offer viable and powerful waysto manage information collections.  Among these innovations are:  (1) greatly
enhanced storage and access capabilities (e.g., CD-ROM), (2) expanded
communication systems that allow faster and greater connectivity, (3) hypermedia
developments that allow greater flexibility in information representation
and database ÒnavigationÓ (Gluschko, 1990), (4) the advanced graphics ca-
pabilities that make direct manipulation interfaces and data visualization
possible (Newby, 1992), and (5) developments in artificial intelligence to
support ÒintelligentÓ systems and interfaces that can, for example, infer userinformation needs and support dialogue in more natural language (Allen,
1991).Yet advances in collection, storage, and dissemination technology donot ensure successful use of electronic information repositories.  Muckler

(1987) has documented the low Òhit rateÓ obtained in typical library data-
base searches, in terms of both the relevant documents that fail to be lo-
cated (misses) and the unnecessary retrieval of many documents of limited
usefulness or relevance (false alarms).  In one case a computer search through
10 databases retrieved 16,816 abstracts that were identified as relevant for a
particular topic.  Only 166 were.  More disturbing was the fact that in an

independent, nonelectronic search through the literature, a user located 177
useful references that had not been found by any of the database searches.
In a study of user success with a legal database, Blair and Maron (1985)
found a similar pattern of results, with only a 20 percent recall of relevant
documents.  Even more alarming, though, was the finding that searchers

believed they were recovering 75 to 80 percent of relevant documents.  This

finding is consistent with a general conclusion reached by MacGregor et al.
(1987) that users overstated the success of their information retrieval from
electronic databases.Of course, there have been positive interactions as well.  Wilson et al.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCH(1989) report a dramatic example:  in eight incidents the lives of patients
were saved because a search of the MEDLINE database uncovered informa-
tion that led the physicians to change the course and direction of their
treatment procedures.  As we increasingly attend to the difficulties users

have with information technologies, such a positive synergy between user
and machine will become more common.Yet this attention will need to extend beyond the technically sophisti-cated user.  A growing proportion of the labor force will perform informa-

tion-handling activities (i.e., production, maintenance, and interpretation) in
the future.  We have already seen a substantial growth in the number of

white-collar workers (information handlers), from less than 18 percent of
the workforce in 1900 to over half today (Koenig, 1990).  And since com-

munication and computing technologies have allowed data to be made di-
rectly available in the office, workers are increasingly being asked to con-
front the information stores without the aid of expert human search intermediaries
(e.g., librarians) familiar with the database systems.  Further, the growth in

numbers of end users is not limited to the workplace.  Electronic informa-

tion databases are becoming more common in everyday private life.  With

the purchase of a modem and an on-line service, the average person can use
a personal computer to tap into large databases at home and carry on many
personal activities directly (e.g., make airline reservations, shop at home,
conduct bibliographic searches).  This means that a wide range of skills and

tasks are being brought to the computer interface.  These more casual or

infrequent users are less likely to possess the intellectual resources or moti-
vation to invest in a time-consuming learning process.  The implications are

that information system designers cannot rely on user perseverance or high
technical skills to overcome poor interface design.  Instead, user friendli-

ness will become critical in attracting and keeping end users.In summary, the issues may be represented by three major concerns.First, users must often confront enormous quantities of information in order
to identify and utilize the small portion that is ultimately relevant and meaningful
to them.  Second, the interface and the database representation designed to

manage the vast information collections may often not be compatible with
the userÕs mental model of how the system should work, leading to userfrustration and abandonment of the system.  Third, even if a user is satisfied

with the on-line operation of a system, he or she may be less satisfied with
its output if many unwanted items are retrieved (i.e., high recall but low
precision).  Alternatively, although the user may be satisfied with the infor-

mation retrieved, that satisfaction could be unwarranted because of an un-
suspected high miss rate.From a human factors perspective, we may think about the problems ofinformation access and retrieval outlined above as resulting from the userÕsrequirement to map an information need (sometimes ill defined) onto a veryEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITY203large database whose contents and structure may or may not be immediatelyapparent.  That is, information is somewhat ÒhiddenÓ in the database.  Lucky(1989) describes this as a problem of acquiring meta-information (informa-
tion about information).  That is, users must determine whether desired

information is contained within the database, how it is represented, where it
is located, and how to access it.  Exploiting the new information technolo-

gies to address these problems defines a host of important human factors
research issues for the next decade, such as the following:  What is the

optimum display interface through which the user can understand what in-
formation is available?  What is the appropriate control/display interface

through which the user can explore the information base?  How strongly

and how well can intelligent systems draw correct inferences about human
needs and wishes and how well can those systems help the user formulate
and refine those wishes?  How can one adequately assess performance with

information systems, since user satisfaction may not correlate with recall
and precision indices?In the following pages, we discuss these issues as they pertain to threeselected classes of databases:  (1) the restricted database, the well-struc-

tured database for a particular system in a restricted domain; (2) the fluid
database, the less-structured database of scientific, academic, or general
knowledge; and (3) the base constituted by scientific data.  We recognize

that the three classes are not discrete; that is, they share many overlapping
features relating to information accessibility and interpretability.  In fact,

we view the restricted and fluid databases along a continuum that reflects
the degree to which the database organization can be determined by a user
prior to actual use.  For convenience and parsimony of expression, we also

take the liberty of using the term electronic database in its broadest sense,
that is, to represent any type of electronic information repository (e.g., an
on-line bibliographic system, a videotext system, a computerized mainte-
nance manual).  We conclude this chapter by focusing in detail on the set of

human factors research issues that are common to all of these areas.DATABASE REPRESENTATION ISSUESRestricted DomainsThe most structured information-representation domain, and the onemost readily studied from a human factors viewpoint, is one in which the
knowledge pertains to the functioning of a single, well-structured systemÑa restricted domain.  Examples include the on-line help system for a word-

processing system, the airline flight reservation systems (Boehm-Davis et
al., 1992), the onboard in-flight library of information about an aircraft and
its surrounding airspace conditions (Curran, 1991), all of the entries in aEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHmaintenance document for a complex piece of equipment, and the contentsof an industrial inventory.  These systems represent the electronic counter-

parts to such conventional paper-based items as manuals, descriptions of
procedures, schedules, encyclopedias, and handbooks.In the restricted domain, the contents of the database often are less of amystery to the user than is the location of an information item within the
system and the means of accessing it.  In the hard-copy counterparts, users

may consult a table of contents or an index to locate information; if the
document is alphabetically arranged (e.g., a dictionary), its structure is im-
mediately apparent and users can infer the location of information.  Alterna-
tively, users might choose to thumb through the document or browse to find
information of interest.  To keep track of their place when cross-referenc-

ing, they might bend down corners of pages or use highlighters or book-
marks.  Advanced electronic systems sometimes have analogous capabilties.In the electronic version of an information system, the issue is how todesign the interface so that the user can (a) readily locate needed items of
information and (b) access the items efficiently (this might include needing
to shift rapidly between sets of ÒrelatedÓ items of information).  The first
need has to do with the organizational structure of the database (e.g., hier-
archical, matrix, network; see Durding et al., 1977), and the second, with
the navigational tools for moving from entry to entry (Seidler and Wickens,
1992).  The organizational structure may or may not be independent of the

navigational tools.  For example, a database may be organized in a strict

hierarchical fashion, but navigational tools may allow the user to directly
access any node in the database from any other node with a single com-
mand, thus bypassing the hierarchical relationships.  This contrast is closely

related to that between menu-driven search and key word search.Much of the empirical investigation relevant to these areas has focusedon such issues as menu organization and key word systems (Norman, 1991;
Shneiderman, 1987).  For instance, the issue of the trade-off between menu

depth (the number of levels in the hierarchy) and breadth (the number of
items per level) has been a popular research topic (e.g., Kiger, 1984; Miller,
1981; Snowberry et al., 1983).  The general consensus of these studies has

been that search time lessens and accuracy improves as breadth is increased
and depth decreased.  Increasing depth seems to increase the likelihood of

becoming ÒlostÓ in the information space.  Other menu studies (e.g., Card,
1982; Giroux and Belleau, 1986) have looked at the ordering and organiza-
tion of menu items within a page (e.g., alphabetical, semantic, or random)
and have found systematic arrangements better than random ordering of
items.  There have also been studies looking at the advantages of adding

menu descriptors (e.g., Latremouille and Lee, 1981; Snowberry et al., 1985);
these have been found to improve performance when applied to upper levels
of the menu hierarchy only.  Most of these studies of menu organization,
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITY205though, have used relatively small, homogeneous, and often abstract data-bases (Fisher et al., 1990) unlike those typically found in operational set-
tings.  Also, search questions were generally goal-directed, which means

that results may be inappropriate for understanding browsing behavior.Research is still needed on how to organize both the structure and thenavigational tools in a way that is compatible with both the usersÕ mental
model of the database and the task-defined needs to access the information
in a particular sequence.  A classic study by Roske-Hofstrand and Paap

(1986) revealed that F-16 pilots used an in-flight information menu more
readily when its organizational structure corresponded to their mental model
of which systems were related to each other; the pilots were less likely to
use the menu when the menu designersÕ own plan guided the structure.
Prior to obtaining user input on the question of structure, the designer should
be able to define the set of options.  This can be difficult because there are

so many different ways in which groups of Òinformation nodesÓ could be
organized.  For an aircraft, they might be related in terms of system compo-

nents:  thus, all entries pertaining to a common system (e.g., fuel-use instru-

ments) would be close together or commonly grouped.  Alternatively, they

might be grouped according to phase of flight, so all instruments that are
frequently consulted in the same flight phase (and hence frequently used in
sequence) would be located together, even if they relate to entirely different
systems.  There is little or no guidance as to whether one organizational

structure is preferable, how either might relate to the usersÕ mental model,
how homogeneous these mental models may be across different users, or
whether the organizational structure for one task (e.g., normal operation)
might differ substantially from the structure needed for a different task
(e.g., fault diagnosis and trouble-shooting).  It is possible that these differ-

ent structures can exist in parallel through implementation of networks or
redundant nodes.Allowing the user to tailor or structure the organization adaptively ashe or she sees fit is an attractive approach.  Yet this solution has three

potential dangers not always considered when making design recommenda-
tions:¥The user might not know the ideal organization because all pos-sible scenarios in which information is needed cannot be anticipated a priori.¥There may be undesirable set-up costs in establishing configurabledisplays.¥Individual structuring will lead to a lack of consistency across dif-ferent databases.This last concern is crucial, as has been understood by those considering thelack of consistency across such systems as word-processing applications,Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHkeyboards, and aircraft (Andre and Wickens, 1992; Wiener, 1989).  What
should be the trade-off, then, between flexibility and adaptability on the one
hand, and consistency on the other?  It may be that having too much free-

dom to structure information differently in a system is as bad as having too
little.  Human cognition is somewhat adaptable, and it may well be that the

user can adapt to a non-ideal but fixed information structure more rapidly
and effectively than the user can mold or adapt the structure to his or her
ideal.Identifying the elements that foster this adaptation is the challenge.  It
requires making the organizational structure and navigational procedures
readily apparent to the user, so that users always know where they are in the
database relative to where they want to be.  This issue of visibility of

database structure to the user is addressed by the implementation of elec-
tronic database Òmaps,Ó whose utility has been well validated (e.g., Vincenteand Williges, 1988).  Major design challenges still confront the human

factors community in addressing how such maps can spatially represent the
vast number of nodes and entries in large databases in a way that allows the
user to visualize the full structure readily (Mackinlay et al., 1991; Shneiderman,
1987).Fluid DomainsWhen dealing with information in a restricted domain, the user gener-ally must access or ÒunpackÓ specific pieces of information that exist at
nodes of the database and whose identity is known before the search begins.
For example, a technician might need to look up a particular maintenance
procedure.  The contents of the restricted-domain databases are fairly well

defined in advance by the system designer.  In contrast, many domains have

boundaries that are far less concretely defined, and the organizational struc-
ture within these domains is much less well described by either a systems
hierarchy or a simple n-dimensional matrix.  Instead, the relationships be-
tween information sources in the fluid database, such as a libraryÕs hold-ings, derive meaning from the information needs and use context.  The task

in using such databases may extend beyond ÒunpackingÓ information within
a node to understanding the relationships between items in the database.  As

examples, we may consider the on-line bibliographic retrieval of articles
about a particular topic (Newby, 1992); books of a userÕs preference (Pejtersen,1989); the set of legal decisions, statutes, and regulations bearing on a
particular type of case; the set of aircraft incident reports with common
features listed in the Aviation Safety Reporting System (Williams et al.,
1992); and a set of medical cases with similar typologies (Hubbard et al.,
1987; see also Chapter 4).A database of this sort is characterized by the fact that a single organi-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITY207zational framework is not typically imposed at the outset of data generation,
or, if one is, then it must evolve to accommodate the unpredictable growth
of information.  This contrasts with the computer help system or the mainte-
nance information system mentioned in the previous section; there the com-
ponents and functions are specified in advance by design and, therefore,
possess a fairly concise hierarchical or network structure.  Instead, the fluid

databases are contributed to by various people (or events) over time, have
no tightly constrained structure or boundary, and are employed by users
who may have a very divergent set of task needs.  Any efforts by one

individual to impose a particular parsimonious taxonomy will probably de-
feat other users with different needs and information uses.Consider, for example, a database of human factors research.  Different
people will have very different criteria regarding the boundaries of such a
database.  Should it include the social psychology of multiperson interac-

tion?  Personality types as they affect this interaction?  Physiology?  Man-

agement and organizational practices?  Correspondingly, how should the

information sources in the data be organized?  Their multidimensionality

defies classification into a simple hierarchical framework.  Four logical

dimensions of organization of the human factors data immediately come to
mind.  That is, such data can be organized according to:
¥the domain of applicability (e.g., computer, transportation, consumerproduct),¥the functions addressed (e.g., control, communications, monitoring),¥the relevant psychological components (e.g., perception, memory,attention), and¥the chronological order of the study.Other dimensions are also possible.The difficulty in organizing and condensing the entire contents of thefluid database makes a menu structure generally unwieldy as a search mechansim
(although menus have sometimes been employed in front-end database aids
and some very specialized domain databases, such as CANSEARCH, an
expert system to search cancer therapy literature, described by Pollitt, 1987).
Furthermore, menus do not offer search power for complex queries.  In-

stead, the command mode, usually via key word entry, places the user in an
active search role (Shneiderman, 1987) and is commonly used to enact the
search request.  In order to generate sets and subsets of information items, a

user constructs a query statement that is then compared against a document
representation via some information retrieval technique (Belkin and Croft,
1987).  The information system may employ any one of a number of infor-

mation retrieval techniques.  The most common method used today in large

operational systems is the exact match, whereby the usersÕ query statement
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHmust exactly match the document representation, often described by keywords, in order for a document to be recovered.  This method may involve

Boolean, string, or full-text search.  Exact match techniques generally result

in high-precision retrieval but low recall.  Other retrieval methods
Ñpartialmatch techniquesÑcompare the query with a document or group of docu-ments represented as sets of features or index terms.  These terms are

assigned a priori by either human indexers or machine-automated processes.
Documents are then ranked or recovered based upon some measure of the
similarity (e.g., probabilistic, vector-space, cluster, fuzzy set, spreading ac-
tivation) between the query and document representation.Some key word searches are performed relatively easily.  These gener-
ally encompass what has been termed known-item (Blair, 1984) or data
retrieval (Vigil, 1985) searches, such as when a user seeks a specific known
title, author, date, or ISBN number of a record.  Other types of searches

(topical or subject searches), requiring more complex strategies and prob-
lem-solving behaviors, are generally less effective (Muckler, 1987).  This is

largely because users have trouble translating concepts into the formal logic
of the computer.  In indexed databases, the key words may not correspond

to the userÕs representation of the terms.  In full-text databases, there may
be problems with synonymy and imprecise language.  In both, key word

systems users often experience difficulty in constructing and manipulating
Boolean statements.To assist users in their search tasks, artificial intelligence techniquesare increasingly being applied to information system design.  Successful

prototype systems to date have already automated many of the mechanical
aspects of the search process that were problematic for users. Examples
include guidance in connecting to an on-line service or database, download-
ing results, and translating the user query into a Boolean statement (Hawkins,
1988).  The more intellectual components of the search process, such as the

formulation of the search query and selection of a search strategy, however,
are much less well understood, although they have received attention.  For

these latter research attempts, a major focus has been describing the knowl-
edge people use when searching for information, with the goal of incorpo-
rating this knowledge into the expert system (e.g., Croft and Thompson,
1987).Other research has examined various aspects of the cognitive processesinvolved in information search, including learning (e.g., Polson and Friedman,
1988), problem solving (e.g., Chen and Dhar, 1991), memory (e.g., Prasse
et al., 1988), and comprehension, again with the aim of supporting informa-
tion systems design.  For instance, in their research on problem-solving

behavior in information search, Chen and Dhar (1991) identified five strate-
gies used during on-line catalog search and reported improved performance
with a system redesigned to respond to these strategies.  Other problem-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITY209solving research has included identification of search tactics (Bates, 1986),development and selection of search strategy (Brooks et al., 1986), identifi-
cation of heuristics used in search formulation (Harter and Peters, 1985),
and identification of query formulation subtasks (Harter, 1986).  Some re-

search has also focused on developing user models that can be incorporated
into an intelligent system to enhance its capability to respond to the varied
needs and the inherent flexibility of individual users (e.g., Brooks et al.,
1986).  Modeling knowledge acquisition has also been of interest as a way

to facilitate machine learning that will allow intelligent systems to build
their own capabilities over time.Drenth et al. (1991) noted, however, that these models have rarely fo-cused on anything beyond task identification and documentation of proce-
dures.  Our understanding of these cognitive processes remains limited.  We

have no comprehensive picture of the knowledge and expertise underlying
the intellectual component of the search process, in part because of the
failure to attend to methodological issues.  Much of the behavior involved

in human-computer interaction is covert.  If we are to explore information

retrieval behavior within a research paradigm reflecting realistic operational
settings and constraints, we must identify and use nontraditional techniques
(e.g., verbal protocol analysis, critical incident technique; Flanagan, 1954).
Little attention to date has been devoted to exploring these alternative ap-
proaches or to developing innovative techniques to elicit and analyze data.Other considerations must also be addressed before flexible, powerful,and intelligent intermediaries can truly be implemented and made available
for use by the general population.  A critical but rarely addressed issue

concerns the value of information.  What attributes define the subjective

value or usefulness of information to the user (Morehead and Rouse, 1985)?
How much responsibility should the computer be given for deciding (and,
therefore, providing) what is of value, and what is not?  How much infor-

mation (title? abstract?) should be provided to users to help define the
relevant set?  Can the user specify the necessary attributes of value in

advance of a search in such a way that an expert system could meaningfully
use these to guide the search and retrieval process?A somewhat related issue concerns the evaluation of retrieval systemperformance.  We have noted hints and some documentation of the less than

adequate performance of many database searches (Mann, 1987) but no for-
mal procedure for evaluating their performance level is available.  Even a

simple signal detection theory analysis of hits and misses begs the question
of what is considered signal and what is noise (Granda and Halstead-Nussloch,
1988; Morehead and Rouse, 1985).  It may be that the evaluation of re-

trieval performance needs to encompass the use of the information, that is,
how the information accessed affects task decisions (see Hewins, 1990).Evaluating retrieval performance becomes particularly complex whenEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHthe usersÕ goals are not restricted to locating a number of cases with certain
attributes and examining each in detail but include understanding more glo-
bal aspects of the database, such as the correlations or constraints within the
databaseÑfor example, whether human factors studies involving group pro-cesses are related primarily to training or to performance.  This kind of

understanding is often achieved through browsing, and good performance
metrics have not been established for browsing.Our discussion of fluid domains has focused on the information searchprocess.  As in restricted domains, it is reasonable to suppose that search

performance will be supported if effective graphic displays to support visu-
alization of the database are available.  However, three features of fluid

databases present challenges for the design of such displays.  First, the size

of fluid databases may be overwhelming, so that very little of the relevant
database can be viewed at any one time, and still less of it can be reviewed
in any detail (e.g., the text that might describe a particular case).  Consider,

for example, how extensive is the human factors database of all articles
published in the Human Factors Journal, Human Factors Proceedings, Er-gonomics, and Applied Ergonomics.  Second, database browsing is best
done flexibly, in real time, so that sometimes a user can ÒunpackÓ and
examine a particular item or set of items while at other times he or she
might merely want to note the location of the items in relationship to other
items (i.e., the user should be able to Òzoom inÓ and 
Òzoom outÓ to various
levels of detail).  This capability might, for example, help define 
ÒclustersÓor Òuse groups,Ó or it might allow the user to determine the correspondence
(or lack of correspondence) between the independent data sets of the same
underlying space.  For example, the density of researchers actively working

in certain areas within a particular field could be overlaid on a representa-
tion of the frequency of problems calling for research in that field, in order
to determine if there is a mismatch and how that mismatch might best be
addressed.  Third, the structure of such data may both be ill defined (i.e.,

different from user to user) and have a complex relational structure that
does not easily lend itself to a two-dimensional visual rendering.  For ex-

ample, it is clear that many of the terms relating items within a database
have ÒanalogÓ characteristics so that the spatial proximity between items is
a meaningful semantic concept.  The degree of similarity between the do-

main represented by two cases (e.g., studies or incidents) is one example.
Two legal cases may deal with identical circumstances or with circum-
stances that have varying levels of similarity.  Analog relations might also

be defined in terms of the date of court proceedings, the level of the court,
and so on.  These analog characteristics make 
ÒdistanceÓ a relevant concept
for the database study.  But how distance in a multidimensional space is

best displayed in a way that is meaningful to and interpretable by the user isEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITY211not well understood.  A three-dimensional structure calls into play issues of
three-dimensional graphics (to be discussed below), while spatial dimen-
sionality greater than three will not easily be envisioned.  Recent advances

in computer graphics displays, such as the Information Visualizer System,
the Òdata wall,Ó and the 
Òcam tree,Ó give innovative solutions to these prob-
lems (Card et al., 1990; Clarkson, 1991).  The data wall, for example, is a

three-dimensional rendering of a wall (actually a perspective building) upon
whose surfaces reside visible information nodes.  These can be organized

according to any two-dimensional structure and examined at any level of
distance (or detail) by zooming in and out.  The cam tree allows visual

representation and examination of a three-dimensional hierarchical data-
base.  Newby (1992) has explored issues in navigating through the three-

dimensional spatial representation of bibliographical databases.The issue of the visual representation of large-scale databases brings usto the third form of database:  one in which the data are those revealed by

scientific inquiry (e.g., scientific experiments, meta-analysis of experimen-
tal results, survey data); this defines a set of research issues related to
scientific visualization.Scientific VisualizationThe availability of massive amounts of scientific data in domains suchas meteorology, geology, demographics, and microbiology, coupled with
the power of computer graphics, has enabled the scientist to visualize data
in a variety of sophisticated forms (Zorpette, 1989).  Scientific visualization

both allows and exploits such capabilities as flexibility of representation
(e.g., two-dimensional vs. rotating three-dimensional views, various color-
coding options), high-dimensionality renderings, dynamic updating, and multi-
format representation such as windowing text, graphics, and sound.  How-

ever, the rapid proliferation of such graphics capabilities has somewhat
outstripped the development and application of human factors principles for
their appropriate employment.In fact, a review of the literature reveals very few empirical studies thathave evaluated the effectiveness of different forms of data representation
for the understanding of complex data sets (Jensen and Anderson, 1987; Liu
and Wickens, 1992; Merwin and Wickens, 1991).  This paucity of data is, in
part, understandable.  The advanced display technology is often complex,

expensive, and hard to tailor in a way that is consistent with experimental
protocol.  Furthermore, it is extremely challenging to develop experimental

questions that would correspond to the kinds of loosely structured, often
exploratory questions that scientists typically ask of their data.  The 
ÒtaskanalysisÓ of scientific inquiry is not well understood.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHHUMAN FACTORS ISSUESIn the previous section, we described three general domains of informa-tion representation, each of which can potentially be served by advanced
interactive display technology.  We now directly consider the human factors
and human performance research issues associated with this technology.Cognitive Task AnalysisSome research effort must be devoted to carrying out comprehensivetask analyses of users interacting with complex databases.  This includes

users of complex, ill-structured information databases performing tasks of a
browsing nature as well as scientists attempting to gain insight from com-
plex data (Langley et al., 1987).  The need for cognitive task analysis has

direct relevance for the research issues on mental models, automation, and
expert systems that are suggested below.Mental ModelsInquiry must continue on the mental models that users have of bothrestricted and fluid databases (Carroll and Olson, 1987).  This remains a

key issue because of our current awareness that the effectiveness of data-
base retrieval depends on how congruent the organization of the database
and the navigational mechanism for traversing it are to the userÕs mentalmodels (Allen, 1991; Seidler and Wickens, 1992).  Yet how these models

should be assessed, how flexible they are within and between users, and
how different mental models should be ÒaveragedÓ across users all remain
issues of considerable uncertainty.User Models, Automation, and Expert SystemsDistinct from the userÕs model of the system is the systemÕs model ofthe user.  This knowledge is essential for the effective development and

implementation of automation and expert systems that will support informa-
tion accessibility.  The issue cuts across all three domains discussed above.

From a computerÕs point of view, the issue is:  ÒWhat is the user trying toachieve at this moment and how can I best satisfy those needs?Ó  It is clear
that such answers must be based on insight gained from research in the two
previous areas.Flexibility Versus ConsistencyAutomated systems, as we described above, will attempt to adapt them-selves flexibly to suit the momentary needs of the human user.  Yet too
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITY213much adaptability may well be counterproductive.  If a well-intentioned,
adaptive change in carrying out a command occurs when the user does not
expect (or need) it, considerable harm could result.  Yet the research com-

munity to date has provided little guidance on the level of sophistication at
which intelligent adaptability may stop being beneficial and may actually
be harmful.  When, in short, is consistency better than flexibility?
MethodologyIn order to grasp the intricacies underlying information retrieval in allthree domains, we must continue to develop and assess ways to explore user
behavior in contexts reflecting realistic operational constraints.  Also acutely
needed are meaningful, practical metrics that can be used to consistently
evaluate performance within and across systems.  These metrics will have

to be sensitive to system usability (see Shneiderman, 1987), quality of in-
formation, problem context, and resolution.Greater attention to these methodological issues will allow studies tocomplement one another, leading, over time, to the development of compre-
hensive theories of human-computer interaction that can be used to guide
effective system design.The Spatial MetaphorIn each domain, we have argued that there are analog dimensions ofrelatedness, similarity, and ordering that may often be best served within a
spatial framework.  This, of course, is definitely true with many aspects of

scientific visualization, such as the geosciences, in which Euclidian space is
an underlying dimension of the data.Given also that humans have extensive familiarity navigating and ma-nipulating in space, a strong argument can be made for exploiting the spa-
tial designs of databases and information networks.  Yet these design deci-

sions bring with them a number of unresolved issues relating to navigation
and lostness (Billingsley, 1982; Gluschko, 1990; Mackinlay et al., 1991).
Some examples of research issues are the following:¥How should information for very large databases be portrayed, whenusers may need the flexibility to zoom in to higher levels of detail?  What

levels of detail and/or abstraction are necessary?¥What sort of options should a user have to navigate through aninformation base?  Should these be defined by spatial coordinates, nodes, or

key words?  Should there be constraints on motion (e.g., only along x, y,

and z coordinate axes)?   How many user options for navigation should be
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHavailable?  What are the best control devices for an operator to navigate
through this Òvirtual information spaceÓ (Card et al., 1990)?
¥What are the best ways of conveying information in a dimensional-ity greater than two?  If some representation of three-dimensional space is

used, what depth cues are necessary to provide a salient sense of depth for
different kinds of databases (Wickens et al., 1989)?  Should depth be abso-

lute or ordinal?  When should perspective be used to convey information

regarding a third dimension and when should color or intensity be employed
instead?  When should the user be presented with two two-dimensional

plans or views?  When the dimensionality expands beyond three, the dis-

play-formatting issues grow exponentially.  Other important research issues

relate to the assignment of display dimensions to their referents (i.e., se-
mantic dimensions).  Are some assignments better than others?  Are some

display dimensions best for representing categorical, rather than continuous,
semantic dimensions?¥The issue of spatial representation is closely tied to the relatedconcept of virtual reality (Eglowstein, 1990; Pausch, 1991), the attempt to
render all aspects of database interaction, not just the visual display charac-
teristics, in a three-dimensional spatial mode.  These use such features as

direct hand position sensing with simulated tactile feedback, spatially local-
ized sound sources, and an Òinside-outÓ perspective.  Scores of potential
applications have been proposed and, in some instances, demonstrated:  from
exploratory surgery to architectural design to scientific inquiry to educa-
tion.  Certainly human factors concerns relate to the 
Òlevel of realityÓ that
best supports performance.  It is, for example, well recognized in both the

training and the system design community that there are times when more
reality does not support better performance; at those times performance is
better supported by more abstract displays or discrete controls (Hutchins et
al., 1985; Jones et al., 1985; Wickens, 1992).  Other human factors issues

pertain to fidelity trade-offs that may be imposed by hardware limitations.
Can some image resolution be sacrificed to obtain faster speed?  Or should

the opposite trade-off be preferred (Pausch, 1991)?  There is also an intrigu-
ing possible trade-off between performance and learning.  To what extent

do the features of virtual reality that support better performance within a
virtual world actually inhibit the learning and long-term retention about the
more abstract properties of that world (Wickens, 1992)?Training IssuesThe issue of training overlaps with issues of information access andutilization in at least three respects.  First, it is apparent that adequate use of
information technology will often depend upon users being trained early in
their careers about the value and importance of computer-based informationEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITY215systems.  This lesson has been well learned in the medical profession, in
which large numbers of health care professionals, untrained in medical in-
formation services, now fail to make use of the advantages those services
provide (see Chapter 4).The second issue relates back to user models.  Different levels of user
experience may dictate very different structuring needs of information sys-
tems (Allen, 1991).  Hence, intelligent interfaces should be quite attentive

both to the userÕs level of knowledge about the domain represented in thedatabase and to the userÕs knowledge of the interface itself.  Finally, there
is the issue of the use of the interface tool itself to train or educate learner-
users about the information it contains.  As we have reported elsewhere

(Wickens, 1992), there really is very little hard evidence that the extensive
automated flexibility of an information database improves usersÕ ability to
master the information in it.REFERENCESAllen, B.L.1991Cognitive research in information science:  implications for design.  
Annual Re-view of Information Science and Technology 26:3-37.
Andre, A.D., and C.D. Wickens1992Compatibility and consistency in display-control systems:  implications for air-
craft decision aid design.  Human Factors 34(6): 639-653.
Bates, M.J.1986Subject access in online catalogs:  a design model.  
Journal of the AmericanSociety for Information Science 37:357-376.
Belkin, N.J., and W.B. Croft1987Retrieval techniques.  Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 22:109-145.Bell, D.1973The Coming of the Post-Industrial Society.  New York:  Basic Books.
Billingsley, P.A.1982Navigation through hierarchical menu structures:  does it help to have a map?  Pp.
103-107 in Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting of the Human Factors Society.Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
Blair, D.C.1984The management of information:  basic distinctions.  
Sloan Management Review26(1):13-23.Blair, D.C., and M.E. Maron1985An evaluation of retrieval effectiveness for a full-text document retrieval system.
Communications of the ACM 28(3):289-299.
Boehm-Davis, D.A., R.W. Holt, and A.C. Schultz1992The role of program structure in software maintenance.  
International Journal ofMan-Machine Studies 36:21-63.
Brooks, H.M., P.J. Daniels, and N.J. Belkin1986Research on information interaction and intelligent information provision mecha-
nisms.  Journal of Information Science:  Principles and Practice
 12(1):37-44.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHCard, S.K.1982User perceptual mechanisms in search of computer command menus.  Pp. 190-196
in CHI Õ82 Conference on Human Factors in Computer Science.  New York:
Association for Computing Machinery.Card, S.K., J.D. Mackinlay, and G.G. Robertson1990The design space of input devices.  Pp. 117-124 in 
CHI Proceedings.  New York:
Association for Computing Machinery.Carroll, J.M., and J.R. Olson, eds.1987Mental Models in Human-Computer Interaction.  Committee on Human Factors,
National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Chen, H., and V. Dhar1991Cognitive process as a basic for intelligent retrieval systems design.  
InformationProcessing and Management 27(5):405-432.
Clarkson, M.A.1991An easier interface.  
BYTE February:277-282.
Croft, W.B., and R.H. Thompson1987I
3R:  a new approach to the design of document retrieval systems.  
Journal of theAmerican Society for Information Science 36(6):389-404.
Curran, J.1991Multidimensional ELS User Interface.  SAE Technical Paper Series 912108.  Pre-
sented at the Aerospace Technology Conference and Exposition, September 23-26,
Long Beach, Calif.Drenth, H., A. Morris, and G. Tseng1991Expert systems as information intermediaries.  
Annual Review of Information Sci-ence and Technology 26:113-153.
Durding, B.M., C.A. Becker, and J.D. Gould1977Data organization.  
Human Factors 19:1-14.
Eglowstein, H.1990Reach out and touch your data.  
BYTE July:283-290.
Fisher, D.L., E.J. Yungkurth, and S.M. Moss1990Optimal menu hierarchy design:  syntax and semantics.  
Human Factors 32:665-
683.Flanagan, J.C.1954The critical incident technique.  
Psychological Bulletin 51(4):327-358.
Giroux, L., and R. Belleau1986What
Õs on the menu?  The influence of menu content on the selection process.
Behavior and Information Technology 5:169-172.
Gluschko, R.J.1990Hypertext:  Prospects and Problems for Crew System Design
.  CSERIAC SOAR-
90-22.  Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio:  CSERIAC.
Granda, R.E., and R. Halstead-Nussloch1988The Perceived Usefulness of Computer Information Sources:  A Field Study
.  IBM
Technical Report TR00.3495.  Poughkeepsie, N.Y.:  IBM.
Harter, S.P.1986Online Information Retrieval:  Concepts, Principles, and Techniques
.  Orlando,
Fla.:  Academic Press.
Harter, S.P., and A.R. Peters1985Heuristics for online information retrieval:  a typology and preliminary listing.
Online Review 9(5):407-424.
Hawkins, F.1988Human Factors in Flight.  Brookfield, Vt.:  Gower.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITY217Hewins, E.T.1990Information need and use studies.  
Annual Review of Information Science andTechnology 25:145-172.
Hubbard, S., J.E. Henney, and V.T. DeVita, Jr.1987A computer data base for information on cancer treatment.  
New England Journalof Medicine 316:315-318.
Hutchins, E.L., J.D. Hollan, and D.A. Norman1985Direct manipulation interfaces.  
Human-Computer Interaction 1(4):311-338.
Huth, E.J.1989The underused medical literature.  
Annals of Internal Medicine 110(2):99-100.
Jensen, C.R., and L.A. Anderson1987Comparing three dimensional representation of data to scatterplots.  Pp. 1174-
1178 in Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Human Factors Society.Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
Jones, E.R., R.T. Hennessy, and S. Deutch, eds.1985Human Factors Aspects of Simulation.  Committee on Human Factors, National
Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Kiger, J.L.1984The depth/breadth trade-off in the design of menu-driven user interfaces.  
Interna-tional Journal of Man-Machine Studies 20:201-213.
King, D.W., D.D. McDonald, and N.K. Roderer1981Scientific Journals in the United States:  Their Production, Use and Economics
.Stroudsburg, Pa.:  Hutchinson Ross.
Koenig, M.E.D.1990Information services and downstream productivity.  
Annual Review of InformationScience and Technology 25:55-86.
Langley, P., H.A. Simon, G.L. Bradshaw, and J.M. Zytkow1987Scientific Discovery:  Computational Explorations of the Creative Processes.  Cambridge,Mass.:  MIT Press.
Latremouille, S., and E.S. Lee1981The design of videotex tree indexes:  the use of descriptors and the enhancement
of single index pages.  Pp. 65-112 in D. Phillips, ed., 
Telidon Behavioral ResearchII:  The Design of Videotex Tree Indexes
.  Ottawa, Canada:  Department of Com-
munications.Liu, Y., and C.D. Wickens1992Visual scanning with or without spatial uncertainty and divided and selective at-
tention.  Acta Psychologica 79:131-153.
Lucky, R.W.1989Silicon Dreams:  Information, Man and Machine
.  New York:  St. Martin
Õs Press.MacGregor, D., B. Fischhoff, and L. Blackshaw1987Search success and expectations with a computer interface.  
Information Process-ing and Management 23(5):419-432.
Mackinlay, J.D., G.G. Robertson, and S.K. Card1991The perspective wall:  detail and context smoothly integrated.  Pp. 173-179 in S.P.
Robertson, G.M. Olson, and J.S. Olson, eds., Human Factors in Computing Sys-tems.  Reaching Through Technology.  CHI 
Ô91.  New York:  Association for
Computing Machinery.Mann, T.1987Computer searches.  Pp. 80-102 (Chapter 9) in 
A Guide to Library ResearchMethods.  New York:  Oxford University Press.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHMerwin, D.H., and C.D. Wickens1991Comparison of 2D planar and 3D perspective display formats in multidimensional
data visualization.  In 
Proceedings of the International Society for Optical Engi-neering.  Bellingham, Wash.:  SPIE.
Miller, D.P.1981The depth/breadth tradeoff in hierarchical computer menus.  Pp. 296-300 in 
Pro-ceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Human Factors Society.  Santa Monica,Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
Morehead, D.R., and W.B. Rouse1985Computer-aided searching of bibliographic databases:  on line estimation of the
value of information.  Information Processing and Management 21:387-399.
Muckler, F.A.1987The human-computer interface:  the past 35 years and the next 35 years.  In G.
Salvendy, ed., Cognitive Engineering in the Design of Human-Computer Interac-tion and Expert Systems. Proceedings of the Second International Conference onHuman-Computer Interaction, Honolulu, Hawaii.  Amsterdam, Netherlands:  Elsevier.Newby, G.B.1992An Investigation of the Role of Navigation for Information Retrieval.  ASIS Meet-
ing.Norman, K.1991The Psychology of Menu Selection.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Pausch, R.1991Virtual reality on five dollars a day.  Pp. 265-269 in 
Proceedings CHI Ô91.  New
York:  Association for Computing Machinery.
Pejtersen, A.M.1989The Book House:  Modeling Users
Õ Needs and Search Strategies as a Basis for
System Design. RISO-M-2794. Roskilde, Denmark:  Riso National Library, De-
partment of Information Technology.Pollitt, A.S.1987CANSEARCH:  an expert systems approach to document retrieval.  
InformationProcessing and Management 23(2):119-138.
Polson, M.C., and A. Friedman1988Task-sharing within and between hemispheres:  a multiple-resources approach.
Human Factors 30(5):633-643.
Prasse, M.J., M. Dilon, M.J. Gordon, B. Mortland, and A. Repka1988F-TAS:  a full-text access system.  Pp. 327-332 in M.E. Williams and T.H. Hogan,
comps., Proceedings of the 9th National Online Meeting.Roske-Hofstrand, R.J., and K.R. Paap1986Cognitive networks as a guide to menu organization:  an application in the auto-
mated cockpit.  Ergonomics 29(11):1301-1311.
Salvaggio, J.L.1989The Information Society:  Economic, Social, and Structural Issues
.  Hillsdale,
N.J.:  Lawrence Erlbaum.
Seidler, K.S., and C.D. Wickens1992Distance and organization in multifunction displays.  
Human Factors 34:555-569.
Shneiderman, B.1987Designing the User Interface:  Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interac-
tion.  Reading, Mass.:  Addison-Wesley.
Snowberry, K., S.R. Parkinson, and N. Sisson1983Computer display menus.  
Ergonomics 26(7):699-712.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMATION ACCESS AND USABILITY2191985Effects of help fields on navigating through hierarchical menu structures.  
Interna-tional Journal of Man-Machine Studies 22:479-491.
Stonier, T.1983The Wealth of Information:  A Profile of the Post-Industrial Economy
.  London,
England:  Methuen London in association with Thames Television International.
Vigil, P.1985Computer literacy and the two cultures revisited.  Pp. 240-242 in C.A. Parkhurst,
ed., Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science (ASIS) 48thAnnual Meeting.  White Plains, N.Y.:  Knowledge Industry Publications, Inc.
Vincente, K.J., and R.C. Williges1988Accommodating individual differences in searching a hierarchical file system.  
In-ternational Journal of Man-Machine Studies 29:647-668.
Wickens, C.D.1992Engineering Psychology and Human Performance, 2nd ed.  New York:  Harper
Collins.Wickens, C.D., S. Todd, and K. Seidler1989Three-Dimensional Displays:  Perception, Implementation, and Applications.  Universityof Illinois Institute of Aviation Technical Report ARL-89-11/CSERIAC-89-1.  Also
CSERIAC SOAR 89-001, AAMRL, December.  Wright-Patterson Air Force Base,
Ohio.  Savoy, Ill.:  Aviation Research Laboratory.
Wiener, E.1989Errors and error management in high technology aircraft.  In 
Proceedings of the7th Meeting on Aeronautic and Space Medicine, June, Paris.Williams, H.P., M.P. Tham, and C.D. Wickens1992Resource Management and Geographic Disorientation in Aviation Incidents:  A
Review of the ASRS Database.  Technical Report ARL-92-3/NASA-92-2.  Savoy:
University of Illinois, Aviation Research Laboratory.Wilson, S.R., N. Starr-Schneidkraut, and M.D. Cooper1989Use of the Critical Incident Technique to Evaluate the Impact of MEDLINE.  Final
Report AIR-64600-9/89-FR; NLM/OPE-90/01.   Palo Alto, Calif.:  American In-
stitutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences.Zorpette, G.1989The main event.  
IEEE Spectrum 26(1):28.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCH2208Emerging Technologies in Work Design
Paul A. Attewell, Beverly M. Huey, Neville P. Moray,and Penelope M. SandersonINTRODUCTIONThe last 15 years have seen dramatic changes in the competitive situa-tion of many sectors of the U.S. economy and also in the levels of invest-
ment in and deployment of new technologies.  These developments present

new challenges for human factors specialists.  They raise issues about how

to design jobs to make sure that the latest technologies fulfill their promise
of raising industrial productivity and competitiveness.  In addition, they

stimulate conceptual questioning about the proper relationship of humans,
machines, and systems.  Experiences, both good and bad, with emerging

technologies have stimulated new philosophies of design, have highlighted
gaps in our research knowledge, and have suggested new avenues for hu-
man factors research.  In this chapter we examine the implications of recent

technological and economic changes for job design and for research in the
human factors community.THE ECONOMIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL CONTEXTOver the last two decades, the world economy has been rapidly shiftingfrom a structure in which a few geographic centers dominated world trade
to a more complex, multicentered structure.  The rapid expansion of world

trade has been accompanied by the emergence of new industrial powers and
the erosion of dominance of older centers (National Research Council, 1990).Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGN221In the United States, this was experienced, during the 1980s, as a crisis ofcompetitiveness (PresidentÕs Commission on Industrial Competitiveness, 1985).
In many industries, U.S. firms lost substantial domestic market shares to
foreign imports, and a similar loss occurred in export markets.Industrial technology is viewed by many as critical for success in thisenvironment of intensified competition, and a backwardness in utilizing
advanced technologies in manufacturing has been identified as one cause of
the earlier U.S. decline (Jaikumar, 1986; National Academy of Engineering,
1988; Adler, 1991). Out of these concerns came several policy recommen-
dations for U.S. firms:  among these were that U.S. firms make changes in

traditional product development processes, accelerate the implementation of
new technologies, adopt strategies of continuous improvement, and embrace
practices that encourage employee involvement.  More recently, the federal

government has embraced total quality management (TQM), not only as a
strategy for itself but also as a requirement for its industrial suppliers.The recommendations and diagnoses of several commissions emergedjust as many U.S. firms were implementing a host of interlinked organiza-
tional changesÑfrom outsourcing to de-layering to using high-performance
work teamsÑwhile making substantial technological investment, most no-
tably in computers, communications, and robotic technologies.  The imple-

mentation of this mix of technological and organizational change was far
from smooth.  Although there are examples of increased productivity, there

are also troubling indications that some technology investments have failed
to boost productivity to the extent expected (Adler, 1991; Attewell, 1994;
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, 1994).The problems of design, implementation, and operation of new tech-nologies have therefore moved to center stage.  Human factors specialists

are faced with technologies that are complex in purely engineering terms
but whose effectiveness also appears to depend on teamwork and a host of
other organizational innovations (National Research Council, 1986; Adler,
1991; National Academy of Engineering/National Research Council, 1991).
Job designers therefore face a dual task: to design jobs to take advantage of
new technologies while fitting these jobs into new organizational structures
and strategies.THE CHANGING GOALS OF JOB DESIGNEarly in this century Frederick Taylor (1911) and the Gilbreths ([1917]1973) were the first to argue that job design should be undertaken in a
systematic manner, drawing upon scientific knowledge of human motor and
cognitive capacities, of fatigue, and of attention span.  Later, the socio-

technical systems perspective added the idea that effective work designEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHmust take into account the interactions among individuals in the workplaceas well as the interplay of human and machine.Drawing upon these insights, various methodologies have developedfor analyzing jobs to discover their constituent tasks, and rules of best
practice have emerged about how to combine tasks most effectively, where
to draw boundaries between jobs, and how to join jobs together.However, the principles and practices of job design have not remainedconstant over the last half century, in part because the goals of design have
shifted.  Different design philosophies or theories focus on optimizing dif-ferent aspects of work.  Over time, design philosophies have shifted as

different goals or dimensions of work rise and fall in importance.  This
point can best be illustrated by a brief historical review of the major ap-
proaches to job design and a consideration of some new goals of work
design that have emerged or have at least become more salient in recent
years.Taylorism or scientific management dominated job design prior to WorldWar II.  As a theory of design, it was centrally concerned with the optimiza-
tion of physical effort in order to increase speed of production.  Its various

offshoots, such as time and motion study, sought to eliminate superfluous
movement through design of both the job and its attendant machinery (jigs,
machine tools, feeding mechanisms, etc.).  But Taylorist attempts to opti-

mize on physical effort and speed had important consequences for other
aspects of the job:¥There was a separation of Òindirect laborÓ (planning, preparation,
maintenance, quality control) from direct labor.¥Jobs were subdivided as far as possible, so that each job encom-passed a narrow range of repetitve tasks.  This was intended to enhance

work speed and reduce the time needed to learn the job.¥Worker discretion was as far as possible eliminated in favor ofÒone best wayÓ (the designer
Õs way) to accomplish the tasks (Knights et al.,1985).The introduction of the assembly line, intended to optimize the effi-ciency and flow of production, led to further changes in job design.  Jobs

were designed around the need for continuous (uninterrupted) production.
Machine tools became highly specialized, and feed and conveying opera-
tions were automated whenever possible.  Assembly line jobs encompassed

only a few repetitive tasks requiring minimal discretion or knowledge.  The

emphasis was on speed, simplicity, and stamina.  The resulting work design

philosophy, an extension of Taylorism, is often called ÒFordism.ÓTaylorism and Fordism were fairly successful as theories of work de-sign, in terms of their professed goals.  But they eventually came under
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGN223great criticism because they unintentionally degraded important aspects ofwork and, therefore, undermined other goals of production.  From the 1950s

onward, sociologists demonstrated that Taylorized assembly line jobs were
boring yet physically demanding, leading to stress, low worker motivation,
frequent absenteeism, and labor conflict (Walker and Guest, 1952; Kornhauser,
1965).  Ultimately, this led to the emergence of a new work design move-

ment, the human relations approach (McGregor, 1960), which stressed a
very different goal for job designÑimproving job satisfaction or psycho-logical fulfillment as a means of increasing workersÕ motivation.
This goal implied very different design principles:¥To encourage meaningful work and a sense of achievement, mul-tiple tasks should be grouped into a single job in such a way that an indi-
vidual could gain a sense of completion.¥Task variety and job rotation are desirable.¥Some choice over the sequencing of work, methods, and speedshould be left to the employee.The human relations approach to work design expanded from the 1950son and became linked to a movement within job design known as the Òqual-ity of work lifeÓ movement.  The approach remains especially salient where
high levels of worker motivation (high initiative, good judgment, and care-
fulness) are important requirements of production processes.QualityThe very success of Fordism in maintaining the high speed of the as-sembly line led, in many cases, to chronic problems with the quality of
products.  Alienated automobile assembly line workers who were required

to work at a fast pace had a tendency to allow poorly constructed cars to go
forward even when there were obvious flaws.  Workers would take short-

cuts that enabled them to keep a fast pace but that could undermine the
quality of the product.With intensified international competition from better-quality importedgoods in the 1980s, the inferior quality of some U.S.-made goods became a
major worry.  Attaining and maintaining high standards of quality conse-

quently became a central preoccupation in many U.S. manufacturing firms
(Deming, 1986).  This in turn has influenced job design.  Quality testing has
been reintegrated into many machine operatorsÕ and assembly line workers
Õjobs: instead of a separate quality-testing staff at the end of the production
process, assembly line and other workers have been encouraged to Òbuildquality inÓ and prevent bad work from going forward.  There has been a
renewed emphasis on job rotation (even during a single day) and on payingEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHworkers for developing maintenance and repair skills.  Some production
jobs have been broadened to include cleaning oneÕs machine and surround-ing areas, under the logic that this increases a sense of ownership and pride
in oneÕs work.A commitment to high-quality products places new or increased perfor-mance demands on production employees.  There is a greater need for

relatively intangible skills such as taking responsibility and showing good
judgment: for example, many of todayÕs assembly line employees are em-powered to pull the Òandon cordÓ that brings the assembly line to a halt if
they see a quality problem.  This was not the case in Taylorist or Fordist job
designs.  Other new skills are intellectual, such as the substantial statistical

and conceptual skills expected of workers who participate in quality circles.
Cole (1979) delineates the mathematical knowledge required for statistical
control procedures, including familiarity with elementary probability theory,
statistical variance, and quasi-experimental approaches to diagnosing sources
of error.The growth of the total quality management movement has resulted inan increased respect for the intellectual contributions of shop-floor and
office workers.  In many workplaces they are encouraged to join quality

circles to look for ways to improve production processes and to save re-
sources.  They may also be trained in group problem-solving techniques and
in teamwork more generally.In addition to changing the work lives of many employees, TQMÕsemphasis on quality has highlighted certain gaps in the human factorsÕscientific knowledge base.  One important kind of quality flaw stems from

operator error.  Yet we know surprisingly little about the causes and sources
of human error and even less about designing jobs and processes to reduce
the frequency and seriousness of errors.  Research is also needed to inte-

grate the knowledge base on human error into design principles for machin-
ery, displays, work procedures, and communications processes.  This is one

of several challenges that emerging technologies and the current economic
climate pose for human factors research.Workplace Health and SafetyAnother equally important goal of work design, made more prominentby recent technological developments, is the maintenance and improvement
of workplace health and safety.  Recent concerns over workplace safety and

occupational health reflect Occupational Safety and Health Administration
legislation in the United States and, in Scandinavia and elsewhere in Eu-
rope, the influence of trade unions, which have targeted workplace health as
a major issue (Butera and Thurman, 1990).  Employees are demanding safer

workplaces; legislation has declared that to be their right and has placed anEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGN225obligation upon employers to provide safe jobs.  In the United States, bur-
geoning health insurance and disability costs related to workplace illnesses
provide an additional powerful impetus for employers to attend to these
problems; this will ultimately result in demands for safer, healthier work-
places via better-engineered and designed work (see Chapter 4).Designing jobs and work processes with health and safety in mind buildson traditional ergonomic concerns.  Machine guards, good lighting and air

quality, and concerns about protection from noise, lifting and stretching,
fatigue and attention span, and legibility of signs and displays are all long-
standing human factors issues.  They will remain basic to design for tomorrowÕsworkplaces.  But the range of factors to be considered in work design will

probably need to be broadened to include other, more social and psycho-
logical stressors in the workplace.Consider, for example, the recent upswing in musculoskeletal disordersfound among employees who work at computer terminals.  In certain U.S.

industries, such as telephone companies and newspaper offices, epidemiolo-
gists have documented recent mini-epidemics of both wrist pain and neck
and upper-back problems, so-called Òrepetitive strain disorders.Ó  Such complaintsmay affect from 20 to 40 percent of workers in certain workplaces.  The

problems span a spectrum from severe conditionsÑsuch as carpal tunnelsyndrome, which can be so painful that sufferers are unable to work and
therefore often resort to surgeryÑto less dramatic, but still consequential,intermittent pain, which can affect workplace productivity and employee
morale.The traditional ergonomic response to such repetitive strain disorders isto study and reengineer workplace machinery, utilizing our knowledge about
vision, posture, hand motion, and other areas.  Thus, we have seen the

design of better chairs, video display terminals, lighting, and keyboards,
drawing upon the human factors knowledge base.However, while giving traditional ergonomic factors their due, the epi-demiological research suggests that additional sociopsychological factors
may be at work to create job stress that is in turn related to the physical
symptoms of repetitive strain disorders.  These disorders can be found even

in offices that have invested in ergonomically sound equipment.  Epidemi-

ologists at the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health and
elsewhere have documented that a variety of job stressorsÑfrom fear of jobloss to the variability of work, from the existence of deadlines to the nature
of supervision and surveillanceÑare related to these disorders in certainworkplaces.  It will take considerable design ingenuity to minimize such

stressors.Current design responses to repetitive strain disorders include enhanc-ing work-group dynamics and scheduling rest breaks and job rotation, as
well as designing better keyboards, monitors, and other equipment.  Unfor-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHtunately, there is little research that examines whether these responses areeffective in countering the spread of repetitive strain disorders.  Beyond

studying the efficacy of these particular interventions, there is a need for
human factors specialists to orient research toward the intersection of ergo-
nomic knowledge, sociotechnical factors, and epidemiology with the goal of
understanding the links between sociotechnical design, workplace stress,
and worker health.Intellectual Work and TeamworkIntellectual WorkFor several decades the proportion of the labor force in white-collarjobs has been growing, with managerial, professional, and technical occupa-
tions leading the way.  As 
Òknowledge workÓ has come to dominate the
information economy, job design has had to embrace new concepts and
approaches especially suited to intellectual and informational jobs.  Because
knowledge workers work at machines, most notably computers, traditional
ergonomic concerns with seating, keyboards, and displays remain impor-
tant.  Much attention has also been focused on such human-computer inter-

faces as displays of information and cognitive maps.  But beyond this,

computing technologies have changedÑand continue to changeÑthe divi-sion of labor and the content of jobs, often in dramatic ways.Before computerization, most information jobs in large firms were sub-ject to Taylorist design.  In insurance offices, for example, paper flowed

from department to department in a sequence: first to the claims examina-
tion department, then to the accounts payable department, then to the check-
writing department, then to bookkeeping.  Within each department, tasks

were narrowly subdivided, routinized, and linked in a chain.  Each depart-

ment typically kept its own databases and paper files.  Thus, a single busi-

ness process, for example accounts payable or assessing an insurance claim,
involved sending the originating paper through a long multistep multi-
department chain, each link of which consisted of a specialized clerical
worker perfoming a narrow repetitive task.  There tended to be backlogs of

work in each department, and each department expected a substantial period
of time (e.g., one week) to clear a claim through its part of the process.Taylorist design could efficiently process very high volumes of busi-ness items, but was slow because of the many handoffs from person to
person.  A given claim or payment often took weeks to process from start to

finish, and there was no easy way to locate a particular piece once it had
entered the stream.Interactive or real-time computing was widely adopted from the early1970s on, and it made this fine division of labor obsolete.  Real-time com-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGN227puting allowed previously distinct databases to be linked.  As soon as a
piece of information was entered, all the relevant databases were instantly
updated to reflect the new datum.  A further consequence was that previ-

ously separate clerical or informational tasks could now be integrated.  So,

when an order arrived, a clerk could call up on the computer a database that
would first determine the customerÕs credit, that is, whether any bills wereoutstanding.  If the buyer was found creditworthy, the software would present
inventory data to see whether the requested item was in stock.  If sufficient

stock was available the clerk could have a Òpick slipÓ printed at the ware-
house giving the order to ship the goods.  At the same time the accounts

receivable database would note that the customer should be charged, and an
invoice would be prepared.  And the company
Õs books would be updated tonote the additional amount receivable.  If the items were not in stock, the

clerk could initiate an order for the shop floor to produce the items and
could even (via materials requirements planning, MRP software) set in mo-
tion orders for more raw material needed before production could com-
mence.In sum, the interlinked databases allowed for a reintegration of previ-ously fragmented tasks, each of which was previously a separate job in a
long clerical sequence.  Instead of simplifying steps, the new design logic

was to give each order-taking clerk access to all of the steps and activities
needed to complete an order, to make a job coincide with the complete
range of informational tasks associated with an order.  New complementarities
also arose between data retrieval, customer service, and data entry.  Be-

cause databases were now easily accessible, it made sense to give computer
clerks the role of intermediary between the information system and the
customer.  So a customer could phone and ask the clerk whether certain

goods were available for shipment, and if not, when they could be produced
and delivered.  At the same time, the clerk could enter data on the specfics

of a new order, payment method, and shipping details.  Thus, one-time

highly specialized and routinized clerks became more multifaceted Òcus-tomer service representativesÓ (Attewell, 1992:71-74).
At first, job designs like these evolved spontaneously.  But experiences
with interactive computer systems have become codified and today inform a
new practice of job design known as Òbusiness process reengineeringÓ or
(more grandly) Òreengineering the corporationÓ (Hammer and Champy, 1993).This approach looks for previously fragmented tasks to integrate; it ÒdelinearizesÓand resequences tasks, creates new, broader jobs, and also restructures (typically
reduces) managerial controls to fit the new, broader division of labor.  Pro-

ponents of the approach claim that it increases productivity, improves ser-
vice, and enhances job satisfaction.While new information technologies have created many of these multi-faceted clerical positions at the lower end of information work, they haveEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHalso stimulated change in higher-paid information work.  Today
Õs managersuse management information systemsÑstreams of production and financialdataÑto survey and understand their areas of jurisdiction.  This in turn can
lead to rather different styles of managerial control and decison making
than those found a generation ago (Attewell, 1992), styles that are heavily
dependent on quantitative data and computerized decision tools.  This can

have both positive and negative consequences.  Studies of the use of deci-

sion tools such as spreadsheet models (e.g., Kotteman and Remus 1987;
Kotteman et al., in press) indicate that managers can become dependent on
the use of these techniques even when they fail to produce better (or even
adequate) decisions.  In particular, the researchers cited above have found

that managers systematically overestimate the effectiveness of these meth-
ods.  They have coined the phrases 
cognitive conceit and 
the illusion ofcontrol to describe these effects.
Such studies indicate an emerging trend in human factors research toexamine trust in machines (and in computers and data) as well as the emo-
tional and cognitive consequences of dependence on cognitive tools such as
computers.  (This is clearly related to the issue of human error discussed

earlier.) We shall return below to ways these concerns have become re-
flected in job design and philosophies of appropriate levels of automation.TeamworkA rather different aspect of the impact of computer technologies onjobs involves the rising importance of teamwork in modern workplaces.
Teamwork among small groups of skilled individuals predates the diffusion
of information technology: one thinks of physican-nurse teams in a hospital
operating room, the flight team in an aircraft cockpit, and the team of
sailors taking bearings and steering a ship into port.  However, several

commentators have argued that small-group teamwork of this kind has be-
come increasingly widespread in the modern workplace, going beyond the
traditional professions and into new work domains.  Frequently, the tasks

involved in knowledge work in modern workplaces are highly complex and
therefore benefit from coordinated teams of highly skilled individuals, often
with different specialties, working together (Peters and Waterman, 1983;
Savage, 1990; Drucker 1993:83-89; Mills, 1991; see also Hill, 1992).This increasing emphasis on teamwork presents a challenge to humanfactors researchers and the behavioral science community generally.  First,

there are lacunae in our basic knowledge of small-group dynamics.  As a

recent review (Simpson and Wood, 1993) put it: ÒDespite the widely recog-nized importance of groups, basic social processes underlying group dy-
namics have received scant and intermittent attention.  This has been par-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGN229ticularly true within social psychology.Ó (However, see McGrath, 1984, and
Hackman, 1987, for a more optimistic view.)Second, the research literature on work groups in situÑin real worksettings as distinct from laboratory experiments or simulated workgroupsÑis sparse.  There are, however, notable exceptions, for example, R. HelmreichÕsresearch on flight cockpit crew dynamics and on operating room surgical
teams.The potential importance (and practical difficulties) of applying humanfactors approaches to the job design of group work or teamwork can be
illustrated by the example of software development, a steadily growing area
of employment in our postindustrial economy.  Most software development

projects are carried out by small teams of systems analysts, programmers,
and coders.  The work is creative, and for that reason uncertain: up to 25

percent of projects fail, and cost overruns and missing deadlines are en-
demic (DeMarco and Lister, 1987; see also Computer Science and Telecom-
munications Board, 1990).Given the high cost of software development projects, great effortshave been made to increase the productivity of programming efforts.  Metrics
of productivity and output have been developed (Boehm, 1987).  New pro-

gramming languages and software tools abound; it is claimed that many of
these increase productivity.  Unfortunately, differences in programming technology
do not explain observed differences in software engineering productivity
(DeMarco and Lister, 1987), and the introduction of new programming tools
has not solved problems with software productivity: several studies have
found that the most modern of Computer Aided Software Engineering (CASE)
tools are associated with lower productivity (Banker et al., 1991; Orlikowsky,1988.)  Thus, the attention of researchers and job designers has been drawn

to sociotechnical factors, most notably the processes of coordination and
division of tasks among team members.Perhaps because of the incompleteness of scientific research, one findsdramatically different approaches to job design in these settings.  Some

authorities, viewing coordination as the AchillesÕ heel of software teams,
pursue design strategies aimed at removing ambiguity and complexity from
teamwork.  Tasks are decomposed, simplified whenever possible, and orga-

nized as modules to reduce the necessity of coordination or interaction
among team members.  Lines of authority are made as specific as possible,

and standard operating procedures are spelled out.  Meetings are formalized

and scheduled regularly (Boehm, 1987; Brooks, 1987), and standardized
methods of documentation and testing are prescribed.  This approach has

come to be known as Òstructured developmentÓ or simply as 
Òprogrammingmethodologies.ÓOne difficulty with this approach is that by creating formal structures toEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHminimize the burden of coordination and communication among team mem-bers, designers may reduce necessary or fruitful commmunication, resulting
in inferior performance.  Kiesler et al. (1994:226) argue that the most pro-

ductive combination is moderate levels of formalization and structure com-
bined with moderate levels of team communications. At either extremeÑhigh structure or high communicationÑteam productivity suffers.In contrast, those who take an ethnographically informed approach tojob design for software teams are quite hostile to using formalized method-
ologies to structure team dynamics and programming.  DeMarco and Lister

(1987:114) give the following critique:A Methodology is a general systems theory of how a whole class of thought-intensive work ought to be conducted.  It comes in the form of a fat book

that specifies exactly what steps to take at any time, regardless of who isdoing the work, regardless of where or when. . . . Methodology is anattempt to centralize thinking.  All meaningful decisions are made by the

Methodology builders, not by the staff assigned to do the work. . . . Theydo this by trying to force the work into a fixed mold that guarantees:¥a morass of paperwork,¥a paucity of methods,¥an absence of responsibility, and¥a general loss of motivation.DeMarco and Lister (1987) turn elsewhere for factors that influenceeffective teamwork.  They argue that software productivity requires deep

thinking as well as communication.  They find that modern workplaces

rarely provide good environments for thinking, especially for Òflow,Ó a kind
of thinking requiring extended periods of concentration and focus.  In many

workplaces there are frequent interruptions from phone calls and colleagues,
and noise levels are highÑphenomena inimical to flow.  DeMarco and
Lister find, for example, that being able to silence oneÕs phone makes asubstantial difference in productivity.  Teams do better if they have recep-

tionists who shield them from interruption.  DeMarco and Lister make a

series of suggestions regarding the design of work spaces, noise reduction,
recruitment of team members, and style of leadership, which include tradi-
tional human factors concerns as well as sociotechnical factors.Software development is but one of the numerous contexts in whichteamwork is the preferred strategy for organizing work.  But the contrasting

prescriptions and beliefs about how to best design teamwork prove that the
knowledge base and science behind job design of teamwork are at very
rudimentary stages.  This is an area of great promise and great practical

importance, but one in which relatively little has yet been accomplished.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGN231ADVANCED AUTOMATIONAs information technologies become increasingly capable of perform-ing a wide range of functions in both manufacturing and white-collar work,
attention has turned to the proper role of humans in the system.  There are

two extreme design philosophies (Kantowitz and Sorkin, 1987):  (1) the

human should be eliminated entirely from systems, or if that is not possible,
the human role should be minimized (i.e., automate as much as is possible)
and (2) the human operator should be involved as much as possible in the
system, even if artificial tasks must be created to accomplish this.  The first

philosophy, which is technology-driven, is defined by decisions about when
and how to automate (Air Force Studies Board, 1982), which, in turn, de-
fine the role of the operator in the system.Researchers have reported that system designers often believe that thegreater the degree of automation the better (Bainbridge, 1982; Boehm-Davis
et al., 1983; Wiener, 1985; Wiener and Curry, 1980).  However, this moves

the human further from direct contact with the system; this has been found
to sometimes result in negative consequences when the operator is required
to intervene (Air Force Studies Board, 1982).  New types of errors or acci-

dents have often been created because automation has changed the nature of
the human-machine relationship in unforeseen ways (e.g., Hirschhorn, 1984;
Moray and Huey, 1988; Nobel, 1984).  A workshop on automation (Boehm-

Davis et al., 1983) identified five problems associated with highly auto-
mated systems:  (1) newly automated systems do not usually provide all the

anticipated benefits; (2) when automated equipment fails, the system loses
credibility; (3) automation usually increases training requirements; (4) de-
signers often fail to anticipate new problems that will be created by the
automated systems; and (5) automation changes the role of the human from
active controller to system monitor.  Numerous other researchers have also

identified both pros and cons of automation (Bainbridge, 1982; Wiener,
1985; Wiener and Curry, 1980; Parsons, 1985).Thus, many researchers have come to the view that in order to achievehigh levels of productivity, quality, safety, and worker satisfaction and mo-
tivation, human and machine skills and intelligence must be integrated.
There is a need to complement, not replace, human skills and abilities (Havn,
1990.) New technologies should be skill-enhancing rather than skill-replac-
ing (Kidd, 1990).Although there has been great investment in advanced automation androbotics in U.S. industry, it has not resulted in a dramatic U.S. lead in
manufacturing technology.  One reason seems to be that in the United States
automation has largely been seen as a chance to reduce the labor force;
another reason is the belief that automated equipment is sufficiently intelli-
gent in itself to be run by relatively unqualified, and hence cheap, labor.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHBy contrast, in both Europe and Japan, there has been a tendency to inte-grate highly qualified labor (e.g., even graduate engineers) into the control
of automated manufacturing equipment.Recently, both industrialists and academics (Brodner, 1986; Kellso, 1989;Kuo and Hsu, 1990; De Greene, 1991) have claimed that the attempt to
substitute machine for human intelligence in industry has failed, and they
have called for a better understanding and implementation of a human-
machine symbiosis in manufacturing.  In a classical paper, Bainbridge (1983)
pointed out the Òironies of automationÓ:  only those processes that are well
understood can be automated; those processes that are poorly understood
are then left to humans, so that progressively the humans face more and
more difficult tasks when systems falter or fail.It is now being realized that advanced automation places great demandson the human workforce and that automation should not amount to Òdesign-ing the human out of the systemÓ (Shaiken, 1984).  The question is, rather,
how the special characteristics of humans can be integrated into technologi-
cal systems so that productivity is optimized from the point of view of
production level, quality, and safety (Wall et al., 1987).Sanderson (1989) pointed out a number of aspects of discrete manufac-turing in which humans play a central role that is only imperfectly under-
stood, even at the level of the individual operator.  To support the integra-

tion of humans into manufacturing systems requires that designers, trainers,
procedure writers, and all levels of management understand the nature of
the skills of the human operator at many levels.  This means understanding

traditional problems of interface design at the lowest level, through com-
plex activities such as planning, scheduling, expediting, and maintenance,
up to the most global level of policy setting by management.  Indeed, the

concept of macro-ergonomics has recently been introduced.  This refers to

the extremely important role played by managerial and organizational fac-
tors in the efficiency of automated and hybrid systems, and to the dynamics
of groups, teams, and crews.  It provides a top-down ergonomics to comple-

ment the traditional bottom-up ergonomics of design.The European Economic Community (EEC) has undertaken a massiveinvestment in the application of human factors to industrial and manufactur-
ing systems of the future.  This can be expected to give the Europeans a

large lead in integrating human intelligence into manufacturing production,
something that will have a great impact on their global competitiveness.  In

the United States there are few signs of a change in thinking; many still see
automation as nothing more than a way to employ inexpensive and rela-
tively unskilled labor to run sophisticated machines.  But all the indicators

are that this will lead to a disastrous failure in competitive manufacturing.There are two main themes that arise from the considerations discussedabove.  The first is a drive for research that will improve productivity and
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGN233efficiency in industry.  The second is a need for research toward a work
climate, culture, and environment that will be humane and fulfilling to the
workforce.  Thus, all levels of ergonomics will have to be studied.  These

include the interface design for flexible manufacturing systems and com-
puter-integrated manufacturing, as well as the role of humans in planning
and scheduling, in design, in maintenance, and in supervisory control as
applied to discrete manufacturing systems.  In addition, we need models of

humans in discrete manufacturing situations, and a consideration of macro-
ergonomic factors, both theoretical and applied, to support design and sys-
tems development.Skill Requirements in Advanced ManufacturingAs automation advances, the workforce required to operate and main-tain it splits into two job classes.  One class requires a few highly skilled

workers.  Tasks for these workers are often intellectually challenging.  These
workers perform the high-technology jobs called for in, for example, ad-
vanced flexible manufacturing technology.  The other job class requires

more workers but places few demands on them for specialized training and
education.  Their jobs are generally unrewarding, either intellectually or

financially.  Such jobs may remain in the overall job inventory even in the

wake of complete automation.In the present state of the art, one problem is that, when systems falteror malfunction, humans are called on to perform tasks that may be beyond
their capabilities.  In such cases, a boring job may suddenly become ex-

tremely demanding.  It is not clear what level or type of education will best

serve manufacturing industry so as to match the task to the human.  If the

sophistication of advanced machinery calls for highly qualified operators,
how are the jobs to be designed so that such people will not be bored and
dissatisfied during normal operation? What steps are needed to enable people
with a suitable level of education to be satisfied in operating a highly auto-
mated plant?Although relatively few manufacturing jobs can give rise to severe haz-ards (in contrast to chemical industries, the nuclear industry, etc.), there are
certainly problems of both safety and economics when systems fail.  It has

been said that plants may be designed on the assumption that they will be
down for maintenance and reprogramming for as much as 30 percent of
their operating time, a situation that is clearly undesirable.  We need to

know how to maintain operator skills so that time lost due to accidents and
system faults is minimized.  Supervisory control can cause skills to be lost

and leave operators unable to cope with abnormal conditions.  Our under-

standing of what makes operators intervene to take charge of a faltering
automated system is rudimentary (Lee and Moray, 1992), and the dynamicsEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHof trust between humans and their machines is far from adequate to defineallocation of function or to design systems that optimize their interaction
(Zuboff, 1988).Hirschhorn (1984), Adler (1986), and others have argued that even low-level jobs involving computers require greater responsibility on the part of

employees.  Errors ramify rapidly through interconnected databases and

information systems, and such errors are often hard to reverse.  Conse-

quently, care and high-quality work, with attention to detail, are especially
important in these jobs.  This again raises the issue of sources of error and

error prevention in computer-related jobs.  We need more empirical studies

of performance errors in a range of computer-based jobs in order to design
job procedures and whole job systems that prevent or minimize error.In transaction processing, continuous-flow manufacturing, and severalother jobs using information technologies, computers are programmed to
take care of routine cases, leaving human operators with a greater mix of
trouble-shooting and handling exceptionsÑemployees become monitors,maintenance people, and troubleshooters, rather than Òdoers.Ó  This kind of
monitoring work can require different skills:  more recognition of patterns,

more logical or abstract decision making, more learning from rare events
rather than via frequent repetition (Clark et al., 1988:Chapter 4).Thus, in addition to ergonomic concerns, human factors specialists whoseek to understand the demands of these jobs as an input into work design
must find new methods of measuring the cognitive workload and cognitive
skills of the jobs.  Some aspects of cognitive workload and skills are rela-

tively well researched:  information overload and competencies in absorb-

ing numerical data and graphical representations.  Others are less well un-

derstood.  For example, many people working with information systems

need to visualize the logical structure of the system in order to understand
the implications of their own actions, their effects on others, and how to
diagnose and correct mistakes.  Researchers are at an early stage in under-

standing system visualization as a skill and as an aspect of cognitive workload
(see Carroll and Olson, 1987).As blue-collar work has become automated, fewer jobs are Òhands onÓ;more and more involve the employee in monitoring production via dials,
gauges, and so forth.  As Zuboff (1988) has explained, this often leads to a

loss of data received directly through the physical senses, resulting in shifts
in skills and additional cognitive workload.  Machinists, for example, used

to depend heavily on tactile skills and sense of vibration when feeding and
cutting on traditional machine tools.  They cannot use the same senses now

that programmable machine tools (Òmachining stationsÓ) are automated andare surrounded by heavy metal hoods.  However, some machinists have

developed hearing skills to sense when a cutting or milling procedure is
going wrong.  Even though their machines are muffled by hoods, they seem

able to identify slight changes in tone in what seems to outsiders to be aEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGN235very noisy machine-shop environment.  These clues enable them to stop
jobs that are about to go wrong (Attewell, 1992; Zicklin, 1987).This example demonstrates that skill changes resulting from new tech-nologies can be quite subtle.  A simple task analysis would undoubtedly

note that the automated machinist needs new programming skills, but might
well miss the tactile-to-aural shift.  Researchers have hardly begun to de-

scribe and make an inventory of these higher-level cognitive skills, let alone
begun to design job systems with them in mind.SummaryThe widespread introduction of information technologies and automa-tion introduces a number of significant problems that affect employment,
the nature of work, the configuration of the workplace, the performance of
workers, and the well-being of the workforce.Although it was once believed that automation would increase unem-ployment in the United States, this has generally not been the case.  Some

traditional jobsÑparticularly those with low skill and knowledge demandsÑhave declined as functions have been automated; however, new jobs have
been created.  This has raised a number of areas that human factors re-

searchers have the knowledge to contribute to.  Examples include:
¥making technology more human-centered;¥designing systems to make proper use of unique human capabilitiesand designing aids to support task performance;¥making work meaningful (e.g., acceptable workload levels; reduc-ing boredom, fatigue, and job stress; giving a sense of control over
the work process); and¥attempting to satisfy the need for autonomy, education, and training.Research is needed to address such questions as the following:  How
can we monitor and enhance worker trust in automation?  How can opera-

tors be kept in the loop so that they can respond when their skills are
needed?  How can we monitor and measure human performance to detect

symptoms of stress and performance impairment?  How do we avoid opera-

tor skill obsolescence from the use of rapidly advancing technologies?  What
are the effects of individual differences in cognitive style on worker perfor-
mance with automated systems?CONCLUSIONWe have argued that computer technologies and the shift to an informa-tion economy present a considerable challenge for those involved in work
design and for those researchers in human factors and related disciplinesEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHwho try to provide a scientific basis for work design.  Although a number oftopics and areas of research have been raised in this chapter, four central
themes stand out:First, more systematic and detailed descriptive research about the skillsÑespecially the higher-level cognitive skillsÑthat are used by todayÕs high-technology workers is an indispensable base for future design of jobs and
technologies.  The kinds of task and skill inventories used in the past have

not adequately captured these kinds of cognitive and organizational skillsÑleaving designers to Òfly blind.ÓSecond, further research is needed on performance and error character-istics of emerging technology jobs.  We must find out what causal mecha-

nisms or features underlie observed differences in performance, especially
in errors and error rates, so that work systems can be designed to avoid

error where possible and so that errors that cannot be avoided can at least
be more easily identified and remedied.Third, research must investigate informal learning processes and skillacquisition among those working with new technology; this is a relatively
neglected but important research topic.  Insights gathered from such re-

search should be used both to plan formal training procedures and to im-
prove ease of on-the-job learning.Finally, additional research is required to identify the full range ofstressors within emerging-technology workplaces and their consequences
for employee performance, morale, and health.  Some of these stressors will

be ones that ergonomics is well equipped to study.  Others will necessitate

adding sociopsychological studies to traditional human factors methodolo-
gies.In the long run one might think that the increase in highly intelligentcomputers, robotics, and microelectronics will continue to displace human
operators.  Yet in Europe and Japan this does not seem to be the case.  In

recent years, factories built in the United States by foreign companies have
reached high levels of productivity with surprisingly little automation and
robotics.  And one manufacturer who opened a state-of-the-art car assembly

plant stated that only about 30 percent of operations are worth automating.
Beyond that, automation is relatively cost-ineffective, and it is better to use
human skills appropriately.  If that is the case, human factors and manage-

ment psychology may be as important as automation engineering in ensur-
ing high productivity.  But there is little understanding of these factors, and

what understanding there is comes largely from foreign experience, which
for cultural reasons may not be transplantable to the United States.The challenge of automation to the human factors community in futureyears is to learn how to adapt automation to people in ways that are both
human-centered and productive.  Human-centered technology is being ac-

tively pursued in Japan and Europe.  Until about five years ago, little of this
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGN237approach was practiced in the United States, but a still timely researchquestion is how to produce human-centered designs in the context of American
culture.REFERENCESAdler, P.1986New technology, new skills.  
California Management Review 29(Fall):9-28.
1991Capitalizing on new manufacturing technologies:  current problems and emergent
trends in U.S. industry.  Pp. 59-88 in National Academy of Engineering/National
Research Council, People and Technology in the Workplace. Washington, D.C.:National Academy Press.Air Force Studies Board1982The Effectiveness of the Air Force Nondestructive Inspection Management.  Panel
on Nondestructive Inspection, Committee on Mechanical Reliability, Assembly of
Engineering, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy
Press.Attewell, P.A.1992Skill and occupational change in U.S. manufacturing.  Chapter 3 in P. Adler, ed.,
Technology and the Future of Work.  New York:  Oxford University Press.
1994Information technology and the productivity paradox.  Pp. 13-53 in D.H. Harris,
ed., Organizational Linkages:  Understanding the Productivity Paradox
.  Panel on
Organizational Linkages, Committee on Human Factors, National Research Coun-cil.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Bainbridge, L.1982Displays as a source of task load.  
Ergonomics 25(4):335.
1983Ironies of automation.  Pp. 129-135 in G. Johannsen and J.E. Rijnsdorp, eds.,
Analysis, Design and Evaluation of Man-Machine Systems:  Proceedings of the
IFAC/IFIP/IFORS/IEA Conference, Baden-Baden, Federal Republic of Germany,27-29 September 1982.  New York:  Pergamon.
Banker, R.D., S.M. Datar, and C.F. Kemmerer1991A model to evaluate variables impacting the productivity of software maintenance
projects.  Management Science 17:1-18.
Boehm, B.W.1987Improving software productivity.  
IEEE Software Society 20:43-57.
Boehm-Davis, D.A., R.E. Curry, E.L. Wiener, and R.L. Harrison1983Human factors of flight-deck automation
ÑNASA/industry workshop.  Ergonom-ics 26:953-961.
Brodner, P., ed.1986Proceedings of the IFAC Workshop on Skill-Based Automated Manufactoring.  Karlsruhe,West Germany:  IFAC.
Brodner, P.1986Skill-based manufacturing vs 
ÒUnmanned FactoryÓ:  which is superior?  
Interna-tional Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 1:145-153.
Brooks, F.P.1987No silver bullet:  essence and accidents of software engineering.  
IEEE ComputerSociety 20:10-18.
Butera, F., and J. Thurman1990Automation and Work Design.  A study prepared for the International Labour
Office.  New York:  North-Holland.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHCarroll, J.M., and J.R. Olson, eds.1987Mental Models in Human-Computer Interaction.  Committee on Human Factors,
National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Clark, J., I. McLoughlin, H. Rose, and R. King1988The Process of Technological Change.  New York:  Cambridge University Press.
Cole, R.E.1979Work, Mobility, and Participation:  A Comparative Study of American and Japa-
nese Industry.  Berkeley:  University of California Press
Computer Science and Technology Board1990Scaling up:  a research agenda for software engineering.   National Science Foun-
dation.  Communications of the ACM 33:281-293.
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board1994Information Technology in the Service Society.  National Research Council.  Washington,D.C.:  National Academy Press.
De Greene, K.B.1991Emergent complexity and person-machine systems.  
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies 35(2):219-234.
DeMarco, T., and T. Lister1987Peopleware:  Productive Projects and Teams
.  New York:  Dorset House.
Deming, W.E.1986Out of the Crisis.  Cambridge, Mass.:  MIT Press.
Drucker, P.1993Post-Capitalist Society.  New York:  Harper.
Gilbreth, F.B., and L.M. Gilbreth
[1917] 1973 Applied Motion Study.  Easton, Pa.:  Hive Publishing.
Hackman, J.R.1987The design of work teams.  Pp. 315-342 in J.W. Lorsch, ed., 
Handbook of Organi-zational Behavior.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Hammer, M., and J. Champy1993Reengineering the Corporation:  A Manifesto for Business
 Revolution.  New York:
Harper and Row.Havn, E.1990Designing for cooperative work.  Pp. 35-42 in W. Karwowski and M. Rahimi,
eds., Ergonomics of Hybrid Automated Systems II.  New York:  Elsevier.
Hill, G.W.1992Group versus individual performance:  are N + 1 heads better than one?  
Psycho-logical Bulletin 91:517-539.
Hirschhorn, L.1984Beyond Mechanization.  Cambridge, Mass.:  MIT Press.
Jaikumar, R.1986Post-industrial manufacturing.  
Harvard Business Review 63(November/Decem-
ber):69-76.Kantowitz, S.H., and R.D. Sorkin1987Allocation of functions.  Pp. 355-369 in G. Salvendy, ed., 
Handbook of HumanFactors.  New York:  John Wiley and Sons.
Kellso, J.R.1989CIM in action:  microelectronics, manufacturer charts course towards true systems
integration.  Industrial Engineering 21:18-22.
Kidd, P.T.1990Information technology:  design for human involvement or human intervention?
Pp. 417-424 in W. Karwowski and M. Rahimi, eds., Ergonomics of Hybrid Auto-mated Systems II.  New York:  Elsevier.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES IN WORK DESIGN239Kiesler, S., D. Wholey, and K.M. Carley1994Coordination as linkage:  the case of software development teams.    Pp. 214-239
in D. Harris, ed., Organizational Linkages:  Understanding the Productivity Para-
dox.  Panel on Organizational Linkages, Committee on Human Factors, National
Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Knights, D., H. Wilmott, and D. Collinson1985Job Redesign:  Critical Perspectives on the Labor Process.  Brookfield, Vt.:  GowerPublishers.Kornhauser, A.1965The Mental Health of the Industrial Worker.  New York:  Wiley.
Kotteman, J., and W. Remus1987Evidence and principles of functional and dysfunctional decision-support systems.
International Journal of Management Science 15(2):135-144.
Kotteman, J., F.D. Davis, and W. RemusIn PressComputer-assisted decison-making:  performance, beliefs and illlusion of control.
In Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes.  New York:  Aca-
demic Press.Kuo W., and J.P. Hsu1990Update:  simultaneous engineering design in Japan.  
Industrial Engineering 22:23-
28.Lee, J.D., and N. Moray1992Operators
Õ monitoring patterns and fault recovery in the supervisory control of a
semi-automatic process.  Pp. 1143-1147 in 
Proceedings of the Human FactorsSociety 36th Annual Meeting.  Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
McGrath, J.E.1984Groups:  Interaction and Performance
.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:  Prentice-Hall.
McGregor, D.1960The Human Side of the Enterprise.  New York:  McGraw Hill.
Mills, D.Q.1991Rebirth of the Corporation.  New York:  John Wiley.
Moray, N.P., and B.M. Huey, eds.1988Human Factors Research and Nuclear Safety.  Panel on Human Factors Research
Needs in Nuclear Regulatory Research, Committee on Human Factors, NationalResearch Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
National Academy of Engineering1988The Technological Dimensions of International Competitiveness.  Committee on
Technology Issues That Impact International Competitiveness.  Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.National Academy of Engineering/National Research Council1991People and Technology in the Workplace.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy
Press.National Research Council1986Human Resources Practices for Implementing Advanced Manufacturing Technol-ogy.  Manufacturing Studies Board.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
1990The Internationalization of U.S. Manufacturing:  Causes and Consequences.  Manu-facturing Studies Board.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Nobel, D.F.1984Forces of Production:  A Social History of Industrial Automation
.  New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.Orlikowsky, W.J.1988Information Technology in Post-Industrial Organizations.  Unpublished PhD dis-
sertation.  Stern School of Management, New York University.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHParsons, H.M.1985Automation and the individual:  comprehensive and comparative views.  
HumanFactors 27(February):99-111.
Peters, T., and R. Waterman1983In Search of Excellence.  New York:  Warner Books.
PresidentÕs Commission on Industrial Competitiveness1985Global Competition:  The New Reality
.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S. Government
Printing Office.Sanderson, P.M.1989The human planning and scheduling role in advanced manufacturing systems:  an
emerging human factors domain.  Human Factors 31(6):635-666.
Savage, C.1990Fifth Generation Management. Burlington, Mass.: Digital Press.Shaiken, H.1984Work Transformed:  Automation and Labor in the Computer Age
.  New York:
Holt Reinhart Winston.Simpson, J., and W. Wood1993Where is the group in social psychology?  An historical overview.  In S. Worchell,
W. Wood, and J. Simpson, eds., Group Process and Productivity.  Newbury Park,
Calif.:  Sage Press.
Taylor, F.1911The Principles of Scientific Management.  New York:  Harper and Row.
Walker, C., and R. Guest1952Man on the Assembly Line.  Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard University Press.
Wall, T.T., C.W. Clegg, and N.J. Kemp1987The Human Side of Advanced Manufacturing.  New York:  Wiley.
Wiener, E.L.1985Beyond the sterile cockpit.  
Human Factors 27:75-89.
Wiener, E., and R.E. Curry1980Automation in the cockpit:  some generalizations.  In 
Proceedings of the AnnualMeeting of the Human Factors Society, October. Santa Monica, Calif.:  Human
Factors Society.Zicklin, G.1987Numerical control machining and the issue of deskilling:  an empirical view.
Work and Occupations 14:452-466.
Zuboff, S.1988In the Age of the Smart Machine:  The Future of Work and Power
.  New York:
Basic Books.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2419Transportation
Herschel W. Leibowitz, D. Alfred Owens, and Robert L. HelmreichINTRODUCTIONThe transportation field comprises vehicles ranging from submarines tospacecraft and technologies that span the iron age and the computer age.
Human factors issues are important because individuals must interact with
the large, complex systems of modern forms of transportation.  Safety is

critical, as most citizens utilize several modes of transportation, and trans-
portation disasters are highly publicized.  Investigations of transportation

mishaps typically invoke contributory human factors issues, thus enhancing
research opportunities.The range of areas within transportation illustrates the expanded defini-tion and role of human factors research.  Traditional ergonomic issues clearly
inform the design of vehicles and transportation systems. Operationally rel-
evant human factors research encompasses cognitive, perceptual, and engi-
neering psychology, as well as organizational, social, personality, educa-
tional, and cross-cultural disciplines.  Levels of analysis range from the

individual to the group to the organization to the culture; many research
questions cut across disciplinary boundaries and demand a  multidisciplinary
approach.Rather than document the full array of transportation research ques-tions, we will focus on opportunities for behavioral research in two areas
representative of the broad scope of human factors:  vehicular traffic safety

and aviation safety.  In the first area, we discuss traditional concerns with
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHthe individual and the machine, while in the second we describe the role ofteam performance and training in a high-technology environment.  The hu-

man factors research relevant to aviation includes organizational, social and
personality, educational, and cross-cultural psychologyÑas well as the more
traditional cognitive, experimental, and engineering concerns.  Many of the

research issues raised here are not limited to vehicular and air domains, but
apply in whole or part to other domains of transportation, including mari-
time and rail operations and space flight.VEHICULAR TRAFFIC SAFETYIn dealing with traffic safety, the human factors community has theopportunity to contribute to the solution of a major public health problem.
In the United States, motor vehicle accidents are the leading cause of death
for people between the ages of 1 and 38 and are responsible for more deaths
than all other causes combined between the ages of 15 and 24 (National
Safety Council, 1993).  Currently 1.7 million disabling injuries and 43,000

fatalities occur annually.  Because traffic accidents take a disproportionate

toll on the younger population, the average number of years of life lost per
death is 2 and 3 times higher than for cancer and heart disease, respectively,
and the mortality cost per death is 3.7 and 6.2 times higher.On the basis of mortality costs, Sivak (1993) has estimated that theUnited States invests 15 times more heavily in research on cardiovascular
disease and nearly 24 times more for cancer.  Perhaps this discrepancy in

expenditures occurs because traditionally traffic safety has been viewedÑ
along with other issues of transportationÑas a matter of commerce and
technology.  Certainly, our modern transportation systems exemplify the

great benefits of technology for commerce.  However, they also have major

consequences for public health and welfare; these consequences arise not
from the machinery per se but from the interaction of human users and
technological systems.  It is at this interface that human factors research

comes into play.A central requirement for progress in this area is the development of acoherent theoretical framework for addressing the task of driving.  We must

develop a theory of driving behavior that is both empirically grounded and
ecologically valid.  Present theoretical frameworks often consist of commonsense
judgments (e.g., Òspeed killsÓ) or abstract flow charts that have only limited
empirical support.  One approach to traffic safety that is rapidly gaining

attention is the attempt to use computational technology.  This is based on

the assumption that because computers are faster and more reliable than
humans, they can eliminate or reduce costly human errors.  Designing sys-

tems to assist or automate driving is a fascinating challenge and may ulti-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION243mately justify the investment of massive resources (Green and Brand, 1992).However, the successful development of such systems requires a fuller un-
derstanding of the fundamental characteristics of driving (Owens et al.,
1993).Researchers seeking a useful understanding of proficient driving andtraffic safety skills should pursue multiple levels of conceptualization.  They
must address the regulatory difficulties that have persisted in licensing,
training, and evaluating drivers as well as the problems associated with new
technological systems.  Many of these issues are widely recognized and

repeatedly investigated, but systematic analyses are lacking.  It is doubtful

that useful general theories will follow from a focus on specific regulatory
questions or from basic research on isolated or narrowly defined aspects of
human performance.  Rather, progress in understanding driving behavior

will require coordination and integration of work at multiple levels of analysis,
ranging from assessment of individual performance through specification of
broad behavioral and informational requirements of the driving task to so-
cial aspects of communication among motorists in a changing traffic envi-
ronment.The theoretical requirements are challenging, and they offer excitingopportunities for gaining basic insights into human behavior in complex
systems.  The resulting agenda, however, should not be purely theoretical.

Indeed, theory can receive an invaluable impetus from systematic attention
to immediate practical problems.  If investigators of current problems aim

from the start to integrate their findings into a larger account of proficient
driving performance in a complex traffic environment, their research will be
doubly fruitful.Screening and LicensingLicensing examinations are universally administered.  In the United
States, they are typically based on an in-vehicle road test, a visual examina-
tion, and a series of questions testing the applicantÕs knowledge of drivingregulations.  The central problem with driver licensing is the poor predic-

tive power of current test procedures.  This issue is gaining in importance

as a consequence of the 1990 Americans With Disabilities Act, which re-
quires that exclusionary regulations be justifiable.  We need to base licens-

ing decisions on valid predictors of safe driving.  Several states have al-

ready begun to relax visual acuity requirements as part of graduated licensing
programs.  Human factors research will be critically important in paving the

way to valid and fair licensing procedures.  At the same time, development

of more reliable and efficient test procedures can contribute to the develop-
ment of a comprehensive theory of driving.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.244EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHIn-Vehicle Testing and the Possible Benefits of SimulationThe current driving test typically evaluates the ability to negotiate avehicle at low speeds on a specially constructed test track involving numer-
ous turns and traffic signals.  Such tests rarely, if ever, involve conditions

under which accidents are most likely to occur, for example, under long-
term demands, high speeds, competition for attention, emergencies, night-
time, or adverse weather driving conditions.  If candidates for a driving

license are to be tested under more realistic conditions, the method of choice
is a driving simulator (McKnight and Stewart, 1990).  Simulators are still

expensive so they will probably be used only in selected cases.  This situa-

tion appears to be changing, however, as increasingly sophisticated video
and computing systems emerge at dramatically reduced costs.  Such simula-

tors may offer the most practical method to evaluate drivers under condi-
tions that correspond more closely to those encountered in the driving envi-
ronment.  Although driving simulators have been available for many years,

few are interactive, that is, with the visual environment changing to con-
form with vehicle movements.  Interactive displays are the rule in aviation

simulators, but making them available for driving simulation will require
the development of less expensive display equipment.A major problem in all simulators is the coordination of visual andvestibular simulation.  A moving vehicle stimulates the vestibular system.

In a fixed-base simulator, however, only the visual component of motion is
available; the resulting mismatch between the visual and vestibular (and to
a lesser extent proprioceptive) systems can induce nausea.  This phenom-

enon, simulator sickness, has been of interest in aviation, but primarily for
simulations of high-performance aircraft.  Simulator sickness sometimes

causes complex symptoms similar to motion sickness and has been reported
to produce disorientation inside and outside the simulator.  It is not yet

clear how great a problem this will be for driving simulators; this must be
evaluated as test simulators are developed.  One possible solution is to

impart motion to the operator (moving base simulator), but this would entail
considerable additional expense.Current computational technology is proceeding at a dazzling pace andit is not unreasonable to entertain the possibility of having driving simula-
tors with realistic interactive displays and at a reasonable cost in the not-
distant future.Vision TestingIt is often said that the driving task is 90 percent visual.  While the
original source of this proposition is obscure, most would agree that good
vision is necessary.  The problem is that we do not yet know what good
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION245vision means in the context of driving.  The conventional standard, which
calls for a corrected visual acuity of 20/40, is not empirically justified and
may be virtually irrelevant.  The ineffectiveness of present visual testing

procedures was dramatically demonstrated by Burg (1967, 1968, 1971),
who correlated the results of both standard and nonstandard visual tests
with the frequency of accidents for 17,000 drivers.  Of all the tests em-

ployed, only dynamic visual acuity, a test not included (to our knowledge)
in any licensing procedure currently in use in the United States, correlated
with accidents, and even there the correlation was weak.The basis for this low predictive power is probably related to the dis-crepancy between visual demands encountered during testing and those en-
countered while driving.  Visual acuity tests evaluate only the threshold of

resolution for high-contrast optotypes, that is, the ability to read fine print
in bright illumination.  Such tests have proven to be valuable for prescrib-

ing reading glasses.  However, driving usually depends on large fields of

relatively coarse visual structure, and it frequently requires recognizing low-
contrast objects under low (mesopic) illumination.  Therefore, it should not

be surprising that research shows little or no correlation between standard
acuity tests and accidents.There is, however, a growing body of literature, both empirical andtheoretical, suggesting that tests of peripheral vision, contrast sensitivity,
and motion perception may be more useful.  Johnson and Keltner (1983)

obtained visual fields on 10,000 eyes and determined that individuals with
binocular scotomas were more likely to be involved in accidents.  Testing

of visual fields on a large scale will require the development of automated
perimetric devices.  This area is being actively investigated, not because

visual fields are critical for driving but because visual field examinations
can detect early visual pathology.Another promising approach is to assess vision for moving targets.  Burg(1971) found that dynamic acuity, which requires the observer to resolve a
moving optotype, was the only subtest related to accidents.  Because motion
is pervasive outside the laboratory, both the driver and the stimuli of inter-
est are moving.  The introduction of a gaze stability requirement for licensure
is a logical step toward greater ecological validity.One should also note that most critical visual stimuli encountered dur-ing driving have low luminance contrast.  During the past several decades,

the vision community has accumulated impressive evidence that contrast
sensitivity is more informative than visual acuity for high-contrast optotypes,
especially in predicting performance for visual tasks other than reading.
For example, an observer with incipient cataracts can demonstrate normal
acuity even though his or her ability to recognize low-contrast objects has
been severely impaired.  Several inexpensive contrast-sensitivity tests are

now available.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.246EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHIn view of the poor predictive ability of the static optotypes now beingused in visual testing, and the empirical and theoretical evidence for the
importance of both a contrast-sensitivity criterion and motion, the develop-
ment of a contrast-sensitive test of dynamic spatial vision is both wanted
and wanting.Perhaps the most significant concomitant of normal aging is the loss ofability to receive light.  With age the pupil of the eye becomes progres-

sively smaller.  Typically, the maximum pupil diameter changes from 8 mm

in youth to 4 mm in old age, a fourfold reduction in pupil area and, there-
fore, in light transmission.  In addition, with increasing age, the optical

media gradually become less transparent.  On the average, the effective

light transmitted to the retina is reduced by a factor of 2 every 15 years.
Since the accident rate per mile driven is approximately 3.5 times higher at
night than during the day, some test of nighttime vision is clearly to be
recommended.Despite these facts, and despite the extensive literature and instrumen-tation on night vision (developed primarily during World War II), to our
knowledge no tests of night vision are currently in use, and, except for
student drivers, there is no proscription for driving at night.  What is needed
is a test of nighttime vision that can be shown to be related to driving
performance under low illumination levels.  Whether this should evaluate

recognition vision, visual guidance, or both is an empirical question.  On

the basis of information currently available, it would appear reasonable to
restrict night driving for some individuals.  Such graduated licensing regu-

lations will require that reliable and valid testing procedures be developed.The possibility of innovative tests of driving proficiency should also beconsidered.  Based on the pioneering work of Gibson (1950, 1966, 1968), it

has recently been suggested that the ability to guide a vehicle based on
optical flow is critical in driving (e.g., Warren et al., 1991; Royden et al.,
1992; Crowell and Banks, 1993).  With the low-cost computers and displays
available, such tests, if they demonstrate predictive power, are now fea-
sible.  Other visual abilities that might be considered include distance per-

ception, ability to judge closing rates, glare sensitivity, velocity perception,
and the ability to handle divided attention.  The low predictive power of

present procedures is a cogent argument for utilizing the wealth of informa-
tion already available about vision and vision tests to develop new and
better procedures.AlcoholAlcohol is universally recognized as a major contributor to traffic acci-dents (Shinar, 1978).  It has been estimated that approximately 50 percent

of automobile accidents involve alcohol (Evans, 1991).  Depending on state

driving laws, the critical level of blood alcohol, above which the driver isEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION247assumed to be legally intoxicated, is on the order of 0.08 or 0.10 mg per100 mg.  However, the behavioral data do not support a fixed blood-alcohol

criterion as a threshold of impairment.  There is extensive evidence that

many individuals are impaired at blood-alcohol levels that are half the val-
ues being used (Moskowitz, 1985).  In addition, the limited performance

data available demonstrate strikingly high intersubject variability (Wilson
and Plomin, 1985).  Some people with blood-alcohol levels below the cur-

rent legal limits frequently perform less well on dynamic contrast sensitiv-
ity tests than others whose levels would classify them as legally intoxicated
(Andre et al., 1992).  Data are urgently needed to resolve this dilemma.  If

there is a blood-alcohol level that does not impair performance, it must be
supported by performance data.  Alternatively, the combination of drinking

and driving should be prohibited and the legal limit set at the measurement
error of the evaluation procedure.Attention and AutomaticityA major problem in human performance is vigilance, that is, the need toremain alert during a repetitive task that induces drowsiness and lack of
attention.  The deficit may be general or may involve a narrowing of the

effective field of attention.  There are marked individual differences in the

Òuseful field of viewÓ (UFOV); these are correlated with accident records
and, therefore, have significant implications for driving proficiency (Ball
and Owsley, 1992).  Recent studies indicate that restriction of the field of

attention or UFOV poses a serious problem for older drivers.  This impor-

tant finding raises several research questions about how drivers allocate
attention.  What are the effects of fatigue, expectation, traffic demands,

experience, and age?  To what extent or in what mode is the UFOV test

related to specific components of the driving task (Ball et al., 1993)?  The

relationship of the UFOV test to driving performance provides yet another
example of the need for theoretical development.  Much needs to be learned

about the relevant attentional and automatic processes in driving.Lack of alertness seems to be an obvious factor in transportation safety.Depending upon the state of the driver, reaction times can vary from less
than 1 second to 2.5 seconds or more (e.g., Summala, 1981; Triggs and
Harris, 1982).  Unfortunately, it is difficult for drivers to monitor their own

state of alertness, particularly during prolonged driving.  A system that

would inform drivers of waning alertness would be extremely valuable.Training New DriversUnderstanding the skills involved in driving will provide insights abouthow these skills are acquired.  The effectiveness of current driver training isEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.248EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHproblematic, and it is important to learn better ways of teaching the skillsinvolved in driving.We suspect that the basic problem stems from the hierarchical nature ofthe driving task.  The operational component
Ñstarting, steering, and stop-ping a vehicleÑis relatively easy to learn and, once it has been learned,gives the novice driver the feeling of being in control.  New drivers can also
learn much of the ÒknowledgeÓ (i.e., rules of the road) in a short time.
Indeed, such rule-based knowledge is strongly emphasized in most driver
tests.  However, the driving task involves much more than vehicle control

and familiarity with rules:  for example, perceiving and anticipating the

actions of other motorists and the potential of other roadway hazards.  The

identification and teaching of such abilities should be the focus of research.Misestimated RiskWe suggested above that the fundamental skills involved in driving areeasy to acquire and that accidents may arise from failure to perceive and
compensate for risk.  In effect, the driver is aware of the danger and has the

ability to take the necessary precautions but does not always anticipate or
recognize the relevant hazards (Leibowitz and Owens, 1986).  The higher

accident rate among young drivers and the effects of alcohol, which typi-
cally increase risk-taking behavior, are consistent with this observation.
Wilde (1988) has proposed that drivers adjust their risk level so as to com-
pensate for engineering innovations in driver safety such as seat belts (risk
homeostasis).  In recent years, there has been an increase in the research

literature devoted to risk-taking behavior, and its application to driving is
clearly indicated (Wagenaar, 1992).DisplaysIn contrast to the extensive research in aviation, relatively little atten-tion has been given to displays for vehicles.  It has been suggested that

displays that convey information to the driverÑsuch as stopping distance,momentum, and distance to road obstructionsÑwould be useful.  It has also
been proposed that display information be optically superimposed on the
road ahead so as to reduce the need for scanning the instrument panel
(Weihrauch et al., 1989; Okabayashi et al., 1989).  (ÒHeads-upÓ displays arenow common in military aircraft.)  Such proposals should be empirically

tested.  An adequate theory of driving will help specify the types of infor-

mation that are most useful for safe driving.  It will also help determine

when the information is useful and what format of presentation (display
design) is most effective (Weintraub and Ensing, 1992).Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION249AgingA common thread relevant to all of these problems is the effect of ageon driving skills (Barr and Eberhard, 1991; Eberhard and Barr, 1992).  It is

well known that some major abilities relevant to drivingÑsuch as nightvision, smooth pursuit eye movements, and reaction timeÑall decline sys-tematically with age and that the elderly frequently experience difficulty
with cluttered environments.  It is also well established that individual dif-

ferences in aging are pronounced and that age per se is not an unequivocal
predictor of performance.  Furthermore, to a great extent, the aging driver

probably compensates behaviorally for perceptual and cognitive deficien-
cies, thus minimizing or delaying costs to safety.Given the increasing longevity of our population and the central role ofmobility as a factor in the quality of life, research in this area is particularly
critical (Waller, 1991).  Again, we see the need for a comprehensive theory

of driving behavior that will enable clearer delineation of the specific skills
and situations in which older drivers are most likely to face difficulties.  As

we noted earlier, we already have valuable information about some age-
related changes (e.g., night vision and the UFOV), but we do not clearly
understand the impact of such changes on safe driving (e.g., to what extent
the older driver can or does compensate).  In order to evaluate the capabili-

ties of elderly drivers and provide appropriate advice and restrictions, we
need a scientific foundation for graduated licensing criteria.  In effect, for

all of the categories mentioned above, special attention should be given to
the role of aging.Intelligent Vehicle HighwayEfforts are currently being directed toward the application of sophisti-cated control systems that would take over some of the driverÕs responsi-bilities.  For example, the difficulty of estimating distance and velocity is

assumed to account for the frequency of accidents involving a vehicle turn-
ing left in the face of oncoming traffic.  To prevent such errors, it has been

proposed that each vehicle be equipped with a system that senses how far
the vehicle is from other vehicles and that informs the driver when it is
unsafe to attempt a left turn.  Assuming such systems are technically fea-

sible, the critical question is whether drivers accustomed to observation
outside the vehicle would divert their eyes from the road in order to obtain
information from a display.  The application of sophisticated information

systems assumes that the driver will be willing to trust and act on such
information.  Solving these problems will require extensive human engi-

neering testing to determine the optimum method of presenting the informa-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.250EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHtion, for example, heads-up displays and auditory warnings.  The human
factors community has had extensive experience with similar problems in
aviation, but they are by no means resolved.  For example, ground proxim-

ity warning systems provide urgent auditory warning of impending flight
into terrain, but in many instances, crews have disregarded the warning and
have flown into the ground.  It is critical that human factors analysis be

incorporated in these programs (Weintraub and Ensing, 1992; Ervin, 1993;
Owens et al., 1993).Legal ApplicationsA potentially fruitful area for research is the interaction between thelaw and transportation.  Specifically, many laws require operators of ve-

hicles to accomplish tasks that are not within their capabilities.  This leads

to unnecessary litigation and appellate reviews and creates a disrespect for
laws.  If statutes such as the Assured Clear Distance Ahead rule and regula-

tions governing the use of alcohol were examined in relation to the behav-
ioral sciences literature on human capabilities and limitations while operat-
ing a vehicle, the findings could lead to more rational laws and codes
(Leibowitz et al., submitted for publication).  Efforts directed at this prob-

lem represent a potentially valuable contribution.General CommentsThe automobile plays a critical role in the quality of life in the UnitedStates as well as in other technologically advanced countries.  Without the

mobility it provides, the lives of many millions would be severely degraded.
For this reason, legislatures have been reluctant to impose restrictions on
driving licenses.  From the data presently available, it is not readily appar-

ent whether the unprecedented costs in human suffering and economic loss
that our society tolerates as the price of mobility are justifiable.  However,

there is no doubt that measures to reduce this burdenÑwhether they involvetraining, engineering innovations, alternative sources of transportation, or
licensing restrictionsÑmust be based on behavioral data.TEAM PERFORMANCE AND AVIATION SAFETYIn stark contrast with automobile travel, commercial aviation is thesafest form of mass transportation.  Traditional ergonomics has played a

substantial role in the development of all modern transport aircraft and
remains an integral part of the design process (Wiener and Nagel, 1988).
Commercial aviation remains one of the few vocations in which retirement
at a fixed age is still required.  Thus, age-related accidents are not a current
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION251problem, and, similarly, little evidence has been found to suggest that alco-hol and drugs pose major safety problems. (These problems do exist, how-
ever, in general aviation.)Despite the focus on human factors in aviation, more than two-thirds ofthose accidents and incidents that do occur in the system include human
error/human factors as causal elements (Lautman and Gallimore, 1987; Cooper
et al., 1980).  Although the total number of casualties is small relative to

those produced by the automobile, aviation accidents are highly visible and
elicit strong demands for action.  The aviation community has responded to

these data with both research and training addressing the human factors
identified in accidents and incidents.  These activities reflect a broader

conception of human factors as it intersects social, personality, and organi-
zational psychology.  The results of these interventions, occurring world-

wide and known generically as cockpit or crew resource management (CRM)
training, represent one of the success stories of applied psychology and
human factors.  The programs have been shown to produce significant changes
in the behavior and attitudes of flight crews and have been identified as
preventing or mitigating serious accidents in both civil and military aviation
(Diehl, 1991; Helmreich and Foushee, 1993; Helmreich and Wilhelm, 1991;
Wiener et al., 1993).  Despite the progress that has been made in CRM, a

number of major research questions remain.  In the following sections, we

describe the CRM approach to aviation human factors and the open issues
requiring research and committed action.Human Factors Training ApproachesFlight crews operate within a system in which the individual functionsas part of a team that functions within an organization that, in turn, is
embedded in a regulatory and ambient environment.  All components of the

system influence group dynamics and the outcomes of a particular flight.
As with many aspects of driver training, it is not clear that all relevant and
needed training is provided or that the most appropriate aspects of perfor-
mance are being evaluated.  The Federal Aviation Administration defines

pilot training specifications in the United States; these include extensive
training in emergency procedures and technical maneuvers, many of which
are seldom encountered in operational flight.  Historically a single-pilot

mentality has prevailed in regulation, which has ignored the need to per-
form effectively the team tasks that are required to pilot a modern transport
in complex air space.  For example, to maintain licensure, air transport

pilots must currently undergo a proficiency check that focuses on individual
technical expertise as demonstrated by execution of fixed maneuvers.CRM training has evolved into a systematic approach to group commu-nications, team coordination, leadership, decision making, and conflict resolution.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.252EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHEffective training is based on diagnosis of organizational norms and prob-lems, organizational restructuring (where needed), and experiential training
that focuses on the development of specific behavioral skills (Federal Avia-
tion Administration, 1993; Byrnes and Black, 1993; Taggart, 1994).  Also

integral to this approach is continuing (recurrent) training and reinforce-
ment of effective behaviors, usually through the use of structured simula-
tion (Butler, 1993).  The critical difference between CRM training in avia-

tion is the focus on the group rather than the individual as the unit of
behavior and evaluation.Research Needs in Aviation and Team PerformanceIntegrating Technical and Psychological TrainingAlthough CRM training for flight crews has shown demonstrable, posi-tive effects, it has not been successfully integrated with traditional technical
instruction.  The value of integrated instruction for complex technical op-

erationsÑso that, for example, training in maintaining control after losingan engine on takeoff is integrated with training in the coordination, commu-
nication, and decision making required to deal with such a contingencyÑiswidely recognized, and recently implemented Federal Aviation regulations
will require such integration (Federal Aviation Administration, 1990; Helmreich
and Foushee, 1993).  The accomplishment of this goal, however, will pro-

vide a continuing challenge for human factors specialists.A larger challenge will be found in the integration of human factorsconcepts with initial pilot training.  To date, the emphasis has been on

adding human relations skills to the repertoires of already qualified pilots, a
process that often requires unlearning old behaviors and changing tradi-
tional practices.  While the International Civil Aviation Organization, the

component of the United Nations that regulates worldwide civil aviation,
has introduced a requirement for human factors training as a condition of
licensure, this does not equate to demonstrating and evaluating the human
factors aspects of primary flight activities.  A fully integrated curriculum

that stresses interpersonal, as well as individual, skills from the outset should
result in better-prepared pilots.Understanding the Impact of Culture on Team PerformanceOne finding that emerged from research into the effectiveness of CRMtraining was the existence of differential reactions to training in different
organizational and national settings (Helmreich and Foushee, 1993; Helmreich
and Wilhelm, 1991).  Many of the differences could be traced to the par-

ticular views that organizational cultures and subcultures held regardingEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION253appropriate roles and behaviors.  In addition, comparative data on the im-
pact of CRM training from various national cultures are in accord with
HofstedeÕs (1980, 1991) conceptualization of the dimensions of nationalculture, particularly differences in individualism/collectivism and in atti-
tudes toward authority defined as power distance (Merritt and Helmreich, in
press).  For example, a training emphasis on the importance of the 
groupand its maintenance is highly congruent with values in collectivist cultures,
such as many South American and Asian nations, but less readily accept-
able in more individualistic societies, such as the United States and Ireland.
Similarly, an approach that stresses reducing status differentials between
leaders and team members and the need for juniors to question the actions
and decisions of leaders when they threaten safety is compatible with U.S.
and Australian notions of egalitarianism, but mystifying to those from cul-
tures, such as China and Malaysia, that rank high on HofstedeÕs powerdistance dimension in the reluctance of subordinates to question the actions
of leaders.  CRM training has not been successfully exported from one

culture to another without consideration of differing values; this shows the
importance of cultural issues even for supposedly standardized tasks, such
as managing the flight of a transport aircraft.  One challenge for human

factors is to understand how cultures, both national and organizational, in-
fluence attitudes and behaviors related to safety and efficiency and to adapt
training to reflect cultural issues.  It should be of great concern to the

manufacturers of aircraft that are marketed throughout the world.Optimizing Curricula and Instructional MethodsRelated to the influence of culture on attitudes and receptivity to in-struction is a need to more precisely define which issues need to be stressed
in human factors training and how best to deliver instruction. In general,
human factors specialists have concluded from experience that curricula
need to have high levels of specificity, to avoid overreliance on psychologi-
cal concepts and jargon, and to be experiential rather than didactic.  Even in

this area, however, cultural values may influence responsiveness.  Cultures

that place a high value on instruction by authority figures may be less
receptive to group discussion and more favorably influenced by more au-
thoritative presentations.  Overall, the goal for human factors is to define

curricula that are relevant, are understandable, and can be presented in a
way that can be understood in the context of individual values.Improving the Evaluation of Group and System PerformanceIt is axiomatic that behavior cannot be successfully taught unless in-stances of the desired behavior are reinforced and that reinforcement cannotEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.254EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHoccur unless the behavior can be precisely evaluated.  Although the evalua-
tion of individual technical performance in aviation has a long and success-
ful history, this focus has stifled concern with developing more sophisti-
cated approaches to the evaluation of group behavior and performance.  Early
attempts to improve group-level evaluation in aviation illustrated the diffi-
culties of such assessments and the reluctance of operational personnel to
expand the scope of evaluation (Gregorich and Wilhelm, 1993; Butler, 1993;
Taggart, 1994).  A more reliable and valid methodology for assessment of

group-level phenomena should be widely beneficial, not only in aviation
but also in other endeavors involving group-level tasks.Also needed are improved methodologies for analyzing and understand-ing human error at the group and system levels.  The study of complex

determinants of error in technological environments has advanced signifi-
cantly in recent years (Perrow, 1984; Rasmussen, 1993; Reason, 1990).
Detailed analyses of aircraft accidents, in which pilot error is clearly the
proximal cause, typically uncover an array of contributing factors that influ-
enced the decision making and group dynamics on the flight deck.  For

example, the crash of a Canadian airliner on takeoff during a snowstorm
resulted from the crewÕs flawed decision to take off with ice contaminatingthe wings.  However, the findings of a commission of inquiry that investi-

gated all aspects of the aviation system isolated a number of contributing
factors at the regulatory, organizational, and group levels that created an
environment with inadequate safeguards against a fatal decision (Helmreich,
1992; Moshansky, 1992).  A taxonomy of human factors problems that can

be applied to the analysis of accidents and incidents would be invaluable for
researchers and for those charged with safety (Jones, 1993).Automation and the ÒElectronicÓ Crew MemberAs increasingly sophisticated computer systems characterize the flightdecks of modern aircraft, crews face the new dilemma of how to integrate
an ÒelectronicÓ crew member into team operations.  When many activities
are shifted from human to computer control, issues of maintaining compe-
tencies, vigilance, and awareness arise, and shifts may occur in the dynam-
ics of crew interaction.  Defining a coherent, research-based philosophy of

automation is a critical task that involves human factors experts participat-
ing in the design and manufacture of aircraft as well as in the organizations
that operate them (Billings, 1989; Wiener, 1993).  The philosophy of auto-

mation needs to address what should be automated as well as how automa-
tion should be accomplished.  The principle that what can be automated

should be automated has not demonstrated marked success in reducing hu-
man error or workload, but has resulted in enormous capital expenditures.
An excellent discussion of issues of automation design is found in the re-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION255port of an extensive investigation of the fatal flight into terrain of a highlyautomated aircraft in 1992 (Minist‘re de LÕ…quipement, des Transportes, etdu Tourisme, 1993).  A philosophy of automation also needs to address the

use of automated systems: when they should be used and when control
should revert to the human operator.  At the user level, this needs to be

incorporated into training and organizational norms.Recent research suggests that there are large cultural differences inattitudes regarding the acceptance and use of automated systems, including,
for example, willingness to disengage automated systems and revert to hu-
man control when conditions change (e.g., Sherman and Law, 1994).  Hu-

man factors specialists and airframe manufacturers must recognize that hu-
man-computer interfaces are highly varied and culturally determined; they
can then undertake research to define these differences and training strate-
gies to deal with them.Advanced technology aircraft are now operated with a crew of twopilots.  However, crews are augmented with relief pilots for extremely long

intercontinental flights.  Extended routine cruising raises questions of main-

taining proficiency, combatting fatigue and complacency, and transferring
control among extended crews.  Many of these issues have not been system-

atically addressed in research.Dealing with Training FailuresThe success of human factors training in aviation is diminished to someextent by the fact that the concepts and behaviors taught are not universally
accepted, even within a particular organization or culture.  In all programs

evaluated, a small subset of individuals fails to respond positively to train-
ing efforts, and some may even become less accepting of and more resistant
to team coordination (Chidester et al., 1990a, 1990b; Helmreich and Wilhelm,
1989, 1991).  These failures in training are necessarily of concern because

those who actively reject strategies to enhance performance are likely to
pose the greatest threat to safety.  One source of resistance may lie in

personality characteristics of those who react negatively.  For example,

Chidester et al. (1990a, 1990b) found that those lacking in attributes associ-
ated with effective interpersonal behavior were more prone to reject train-
ing that stressed the importance of interpersonal communication.  Given the

unlikelihood of effecting basic changes in personality except by extended
psychotherapy, improved selection in terms of performance-related person-
ality traits may be the last line of defense against ineffective crew coordina-
tion and teamwork.  However, the human factors community should exhaust
all avenues of research to determine if there are means of remediation for
those deficient in interpersonal communication skills.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.256EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHExtending the Concepts Beyond the Cockpit DoorHuman factors research in aviation has grown from its original focus onenhancing communication and coordination among the basic flight team
into an awareness that many of the problems in the system reside in inter-
faces between teams and other components of the aviation system, includ-
ing, for example, air traffic control and ground operations (Taggart, 1993,
1994).  New strategies and associated research will be required to develop

and validate training methodologies that effectively address intergroup as
well as intragroup coordination and cooperation.EXTENDING HUMAN FACTORS TRAINING INTOOTHER DOMAINSIt is becoming clear that the human factors approaches encompassed byCRM in aviation apply more generally to endeavors in which teams func-
tion with technology under demanding conditions (Helmreich et al., 1993).
For some years, the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) has been
advocating the extension of CRM from the cockpit to the bridge of mari-
time vessels (e.g., National Transportation Safety Board, 1993).  More re-

cently, the medical profession has noted similarities in human factors prob-
lems in the operating room and in the cockpit and has begun to adapt
training and evaluation strategies from aviation (Ewell and Adams, 1993;
Howard et al., 1992; Helmreich and Schaefer, 1994).  Similar issues should

exist in control rooms of nuclear power plants, petrochemical operations,
and other manufacturing enterprises (Helmreich et al., 1993).  It is essential

that the human factors community avoid trying to export training from one
domain to another in a simplistic manner; the pitfalls of such an approach
were discovered in attempts to move training across national boundaries.
The characteristics and cultures of each domain must be investigated and
understood before common concepts can be applied effectively.Maritime OperationsA few examples may illustrate extensions of human factors concernsfrom aviation to seafaring.  Although events play out at a much slower pace

than in an automobile or aircraft, ships are operated by teams interacting
with technology in a regulated environment.  In the majority of marine

disasters, as in aviation, human error is also implicated.  Automation is also

becoming a common shipboard characteristic, associated with large decreases
in personnel and again raising issues of vigilance and reliance on computer
solutions.  Issues of national culture are also of great importance in mari-

time operations, and many ships are operated by multinational crews forEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION257economic reasons.  The traditional culture of the sea, in which the captain is
the unchallenged (and frequently autocratic) master, can inhibit the effec-
tive communication and utilization of available resources, especially human
ones.  Team interface issues have also been implicated in a number of

marine accidents, specifically flawed communications between pilots and
masters while operating in restricted waters (e.g., National Transportation
Safety Board, 1993).As noted, the NTSB has concluded that many of these problems couldbe alleviated through effective human factors interventions and the adoption
of approaches successfully employed in aviation.  This will, however, re-

quire a substantial research endeavor to define common and divergent fac-
tors and to design human factors programs that will be accepted within the
general maritime and specific organizational cultures involved.CONCLUSIONSThe field of transportation provides rich opportunities to expand thescope of human factors in areas for which outcomes have major conse-
quences.  Optimizing the interface between individuals and groups with

complex technology and systems requires a multidisciplinary approach that
embraces the full range of concerns of human factors specialists.  Concern

with a particular problem, whether vehicular or aviation safety, should not
blind researchers to concepts that transcend problem areas and that reflect
more broadly on human capabilities and limitations.  At the same time,

research and solutions must be sensitive to the characteristics of the particu-
lar endeavor.REFERENCESAndre, J.T., R.A. Tyrrell, M.E. Nicholson, M. Wang, and H.W. Leibowitz1992Measuring and predicting the effects of alcohol on contrast sensitivity for static
and dynamic gratings.  Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science (ARVO
Abstract) 33(4):1416.Ball, K., and C. Owsley1992The useful field of view:  a new technique for evaluating age-related declines in
visual function.  Journal of the American Optometric Association 63:71-79.
Ball, K., C. Owsley, M. Sloan, D.L. Roenker, and J.R. Bruni1993Visual attention problems as a predictor of vehicle crashes among older drivers.
Investigative Ophthalmology and Visual Science 34(11):3110-3123.
Barr, R.A., and J.W. Eberhard1991Safety and mobility of elderly drivers, Part I.  Special Issue.  
Human Factors33(5):497-603.Billings, C.E.1989Toward a human centered aircraft automation philosophy.  Pp. 1-8 in 
Proceedingsof the Fifth International Symposium on Aviation Psychology.  Columbus:  Ohio
State University.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.258EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHBurg, A.1967The Relationship Between Vision Test Scores and Driving Record:  General Find-
ings.  Department of Engineering Report No. 67-24.  Los Angeles, Calif.:  Univer-
sity of California.1968The Relationship Between Vision Test Scores and Driving Record:  Additional
Findings.  Department of Engineering Report No. 68-27.  Los Angeles, Calif.:
University of California.1971Vision and driving:  a report on research.  
Human Factors 13(1):79-87.
Butler, R.E.1993LOFT:  full-mission simulation as crew resource management training.  Pp. 231-
259 in E. Wiener, B. Kanki, and R. Helmreich, eds., Crew Resource Management.San Diego, Calif.:  Academic Press.
Byrnes, R.E., and R. Black1993Developing and implementing CRM programs:  the delta experience.  Pp. 421-443
in E. Wiener, B. Kanki, and R. Helmreich, eds., Crew Resource Management.  San
Diego, Calif.:  Academic Press.
Chidester, T.R., R.L. Helmreich, S.E. Gregorich, and C.E. Geis1990aPilot personality and crew coordination:  implications for training and selection.
International Journal of Aviation Psychology 1:23-42.
Chidester, T.R., B.G. Kanki, H.C. Foushee, C.L. Dickinson, and S.V. Bowles1990bPersonality Factors in Flight Operations, Vol. 1. Leader Characteristics and CrewPerformance in Full-Mission Air Transport Simulation.  NASA Technical Memo-
randum No. 102259.  Moffett-Field, Calif.:  NASA-Ames Research Center.
Cooper, G.E., M.D. White, and J.K. Lauber, eds.1980Resource Management on the Flightdeck:  Proceedings of a NASA/Industry Work-
shop.  NASA CP-2120.  Moffett Field, Calif.:  NASA-Ames Research Center.
Crowell, J.A., and M.S. Banks1993Perceived heading with different retinal regions and types of optic flow.  
Percep-tion and Psychophysics 53(3):325-337.
Diehl, A.E.1991The effectiveness of training programs for preventing aircrew 
Òerror.Ó  In 
Pro-ceedings of the Sixth International Symposium of Aviation Psychology.  Columbus:Ohio State University.Eberhard, J.W., and R.A. Barr, eds.1992Safety and mobility of elderly drivers, Part II.  Special Issue. 
Human Factors34(1):1-65.Ervin, R.1993Bringing Human Factors Expertise to the Conceptualization of Active-Safety Technology.
Paper presented at the UMTRI Human Factors Festival.  Ann Arbor:  University ofMichigan Transportation Research Institute.Evans, L.1991Traffic Safety and the Drive.  New York:  Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Ewell, M.G., and R. Adams1993Aviation psychology, group dynamics and human performance issues in anesthesi-
ology.  Pp. 499-504 in 
Proceedings of the Seventh International Symposium onAviation Psychology.  Columbus:  Ohio State University.
Federal Aviation Administration1990Advanced Qualification Program.  Washington, D.C.:  Federal Aviation Adminis-
tration.1993Crew Resource Management Training.  Advisory Circular AC 120-51A.   Wash-
ington, D.C.:  Federal Aviation Administration.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION259Gibson, J.J.1950The Perception of the Visual World.  Boston, Mass.:  Houghton Mifflin.
1966The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems.  Prospect Heights, Ill.:  Waveland
Press.1968What gives rise to the perception of motion?  
Psychological Review 75:335-346.
Green, P., and J. Brand1992Future In-Car Information Systems:  Input from Focus Groups
.  SAE Technical
Paper No. 920614.  Warrendale, Penn.:  Society of Automotive Engineers.
Gregorich, S.E., and J.A. Wilhelm1993Crew resource management training assessment.  Pp. 173-198 in E. Wiener, B.
Kanki, and R. Helmreich, eds., Crew Resource Management.  San Diego, Calif.:
Academic Press.Helmreich, R.L.1992Human factors aspects of the Air Ontario crash at Dryden, Ontario.  In V.P.
Moshansky, ed., Commission of Inquiry Into the Air Ontario Accident at Dryden,Ontario:  Final Report.  Ottawa, Ontario:  Minister of Supply and Services, Canada.Helmreich, R.L., and H.C. Foushee1993Why crew resource management?  Empirical and theoretical bases of human fac-
tors training in aviation.  In E.L. Wiener, B.G. Kanki, and R.L. Helmreich, eds.,
Cockpit Resource Management.  San Diego, Calif.:  Academic Press.
Helmreich, R.L., and H.-G. Schaefer1994Team performance in the operating room.  Pp. 225-254 in M.S. Bogner, ed.,
Human Error in Medicine.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Helmreich, R.L., and J.A. Wilhelm1989When training boomerangs:  negative outcomes associated with cockpit resource
management programs.  In R.S. Jensen, ed., 
Proceedings of the Fifth InternationalSymposium on Aviation Psychology.  Columbus:  Ohio State University.
1991Outcomes of crew resource management training.  
International Journal of Avia-tion Psychology 1(4):287-300.
Helmreich, R.L., E. Wiener, and B.G. Kanki1993The future of crew resource management in the cockpit and elsewhere.  Pp. 479-
501 in E. Wiener, B. Kanki, and R. Helmreich, eds., Crew Resource Management.San Diego, Calif.:  Academic Press.
Hofstede, G.1980CultureÕs Consequences:  International Differences in Work-Related Values.  BeverlyHills, Calif.:  Sage.
1991Cultures and Organizations:  Software of the Mind.  Maidenhead, England:  McGraw-Hill.Howard, S.K., D.M. Gaba, K.J. Fish, G. Yang, and F.H. Sarnquist1992Anesthesia crisis resource management:  teaching anesthesiologists to handle criti-
cal incidents.  Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine 63:763-770.
Johnson, C.A., and J.L. Keltner1983Incidence of visual field loss and its relation to driving performance.  
Archives ofOphthalmology 101:371-375.
Jones, S.G.1993Human factors in incident reporting.  Pp. 567-572 in 
Proceedings of the SeventhInternational Symposium on Aviation Psychology.  Columbus:  Ohio State Univer-
sity.Lautman, L.G., and P.L. Gallimore1987Control of the crew-caused accident.  
Airliner Magazine, April-June:1-7.  Seattle,
Wash.:  Boeing Commercial Airplane.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.260EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHLeibowitz, H.W., and D.A. Owens1986We drive by night.  
Psychology Today 54-58.
Leibowitz, H.W., D.A. Owens, and R.A. TyrrellThe Assured Clear Distance Ahead Rule:  Implications for Traffic Safety and the
Law. (Submitted for Pulication)McKnight, A.J., and M.A. Stewart1990Development of a Competency Based Driver License Testing System.  Final Report
for the California Department of Transportation.  Landover, Md.:  National Public
Services Research Institute.Merritt, A.C., and R.L. HelmreichIn PressHuman factors on the flightdeck:  the influence of national culture.  
Journal ofCross-Cultural Psychology.Minist‘re de LÕ…quipement, des Transportes, et du Tourisme1993Rapport de la Commission d
ÕEnqu’te sur lÕAccident Survenu le 20 Janvier 1992Pr‘s du Mont Sainte Odile (Bas Rhin) a lÕAirbus A.320 Immatricule F-GGEDExploit” par la Compagnie Air Inter.  Paris, France:  Minist
‘re de LÕ…quipement,des Transportes, et du Tourisme.Moshansky, V.P.1992Commission of Inquiry Into the Air Ontario Accident at Dryden, Ontario:  Final
Report, Vols. 1-4.  Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Minister of Supply and Services.
Moskowitz, H., M.M. Burns, and A.F. Williams1985Skills performance at low blood alcohol levels.  
Journal of Studies on Alcohol46(6):482-485.National Safety Council1993Accident Facts, 1993 edition.  Itasca, Ill.:  National Safety Council.
National Transportation Safety Board1993Grounding of the UK passenger vessel 
RMS Queen Elizabeth 2 near Cuttyhunk
Island, Vineyard Sound, Massachussetts.  NTSB/MAR-93/01.  Washington, D.C.:
National Transportation Safety Board.Okabayashi, S., M. Sakata, J. Fukano, S. Daidoji, C. Hashimoto, and T. Ishikawa1989Development of Practical Heads-Up Display for Production Vehicle Application.SAE Technical Paper Series No. 890559.  Warrendale, Penn.:  Society of Automo-

tive Engineers.Owens, D.A., G. Helmers, and M. Sivak1993Intelligent vehicle highway systems:  a call for user-centered design.  
Ergonomics36(4):363-369.Perrow, C.1984Normal Accidents:  Living With High Risk Technologies.  New York:  Basic Books.Rasmussen, J.1993Deciding and doing:  decision making in natural context.  In G. Klein, J. Orasanu,
R. Calderwood, and C. Zsambok, eds., Decision Making in Action:  Models and
Methods.  Norwood, N.J.:  Ablex.
Reason, J.1990Human Error.  Cambridge, England:  Cambridge University Press.
Royden, C.S., M.S. Banks, and J.A. Crowell1992The perception of heading during eye movement.  
Nature 360:583-585.
Sherman, P.J., and J.R. Law1994Are there differences for standard vs. automated aircraft?  Within-airline compari-
sons of aircraft types.  Pp. 110-115 in 
Proceedings of the 14th Biennial Meeting ofApplied Behavioral Sciences Symposium.  Colorado Springs, Colo.:  United States
Air Force Academy.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TRANSPORTATION261Shinar, D.1978Psychology on the Road.  New York:  Wiley.
Sivak, M.1993Some Speculations About How to Determine Traffic-Safety Priorities.  Unpub-
lished presentation at the UMTRI Human Factors Festival, Ann Arbor, Michigan.University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute, March.Summala, H.1981Driver/vehicle steering response latencies.  
Human Factors 23:683-692.
Taggart, W.R.1993How to kill off a good CRM program.  
The CRM Advocate 93(1):11-12.
1994Crew resource management:  achieving enhanced flight operations.  In N. Johnston,
N. McDonald, and R. Fuller, eds., Aviation Psychology in Practice.  Brookfield,
Vt.:  Ashgate.
Triggs, T.J., and W.G. Harris1982Reaction time of drivers to road stimuli.  Report No. 0-86746-1470 for Common-
wealth Department of Transportation, Australian Office of Road Safety.Wagenaar, A.C.1992Risk taking and accident causation.  Pp. 257-281 in J.F. Yates, ed., 
Risk-TakingBehavior.  New York:  John Wiley & Sons.
Waller, P.F.1991The older driver.  
Human Factors 33(5):499-505.
Warren, W.H., Jr., D.R. Mestre, A.W. Blackwell, and M.W. Morris1991Perception of circular heading from optical flow.  
Journal of Experimental Psy-chology:  Human Perception and Performance
 17(1):28-43.
Weihrauch, M., T.C. Goesch, and G.G. Meloeny1989The First Head Up Display Introduced by General Motors.  SAE Technical Paper
No. 890288.  Warrendale, Penn.:  Society of Automotive Engineers.
Weintraub, D.J., and M. Ensing1992Human Factors Issues in Head-Up Displays:  The Book of HUD.  Wright-PattersonAir Force Base, Ohio:  Crew Systems Ergonomics Information Center.
Wiener, E.1993Crew coordination and training in the advanced-technology cockpit. Pp. 199-230
in E. Wiener, B. Kanki, and R. Helmreich, eds., Crew Resource Management.  San
Diego, Calif.:  Academic Press.
Wiener, E., B. Kanki, and R. Helmreich, eds.1993Crew Resource Management.  San Diego, Calif.:  Academic Press.
Wiener, E.L., and D.C. Nagel1988Human Factors in Aviation.  San Diego, Calif.:  Academic Press.
Wilde, G.J.S.1988Risk homeostasis theory and traffic accidents:  propositions, deductions and dis-
cussion of dissension in recent reactions.  Ergonomics 31(4):441-468.
Wilson, J.R., and R. Plomin1985Individual differences in sensitivity and tolerance to alcohol.  
Social Biology 32(3-
4):162-184.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.262EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCH26210Cognitive Performance Under StressJ. Frank Yates, Roberta L. Klatzky, and Carolynn A. YoungThe media have given considerable attention to the stress in contempo-rary society.  For instance, the topic was the cover theme of a 
Time maga-
zine issue in 1983 (June 6).  Within the past few years, there have been

numerous highly publicized incidents in which U.S. Postal Service employ-
ees have attacked and killed their supervisors and coworkers.  The Òhead-

lineÓ segment on a recent ABC News 20/20 program was devoted to these
events.  The program speculated that job stress, including the stress associ-

ated with the Postal ServiceÕs efforts to improve its highly automated sort-
ing systems, was a significant contributor to the violence.The current focus on stress extends beyond the popular press.  Schol-
arly analyses of several prominent tragedies have cited stress as a factor:¥Wickens (1992) conjectures that stress may have impaired the per-
formance of a control room operator on duty during the nuclear reactor
accident at Three Mile Island, making the situation worse than it might have
been otherwise.  Wickens suggests that stress may have played a similar

role in the downing of an Iranian airliner by the crew of the U.S. missile
frigate Vincennes, who thought they were under attack by a military air-craft.¥In March 1989, Air Ontario Flight 363 crashed and burned on take-
off from Dryden, Ontario.  The pilot, copilot, a flight attendant, and 21

passengers were killed.  The immediate cause of the accident was snow and
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS263ice on the wings.  Helmreich (1990) performed a human factors study of the
incident.  He concluded that time pressure and other stressors quite likely

induced the pilots to make faultyÑand ultimately fatalÑdecisions aboutdeicing and departure.¥In every armed conflict, military personnel sometimes mistakenlyfire on their own confederates.  There were numerous instances of such

Òfriendly fireÓ among American troops in the Persian Gulf War of 1991.
Military analysts acknowledge a host of causes of these incidents, including
cognitive ones like poor situational awareness (U.S. Army, 1992a, 1992b);
these causes are also thought to include factors commonly acknowledged as
forms or concomitants of stress, such as anxiety.The stress literature is not restricted to high-profile occurrences likethose just described.  There is considerable published work on the stresses

of everyday life, includingÑor perhaps especiallyÑin the ordinary work-place (Manuso, 1983).  In 1988, the National Research Council published a

highly influential report by its Committee on Techniques for the Enhance-
ment of Human Performance (Druckman and Swets, 1988).  The committee

did a critical review of research on a host of performance-related topics,
ranging from motor skills to paranormal phenomena.  Subsequent work by

the committee (Druckman and Bjork, 1991) extended the range of topics
even further.  The 1988 report (p. 115) acknowledged that 
Ònone of thetopics . . . has received more attention than the management of stress.ÓThis impression seems accurate; the scholarly literature on stress is enor-
mous.  The American Psychological Association
Õs PsycINFO database listsover 35,000 entries under the keyword stress.  Using the joint keyword
query stress and performance, a recent search directed toward topics moreclosely associated with human factors yielded 2,565 entries.Everyone seems to acknowledge that stress is a serious problem, andthe research community has appeared to respond by devoting a great deal of
energy to solving that problem.  Why, then, is the topic being proposed as

an area of additional emphasis in human factors research?  There are sev-

eral responses to this question, which we will develop more fully below.
Briefly, however, the thrust of our argument is not that we need to increase
the sheer volume of stress research (although that may well be true), but
that future research should direct more attention to particular cognitive as-
pects of stress-performance interactions, aspects that have managed to es-
cape close scrutiny.  (By convention, the term 
cognition refers to acts of
perception and knowing.)   A hint of this oversight is suggested by a search

of the PsycINFO database using the query stress and cognition.  This searchproduced only 223 items, a yield of fewer than 9 items per year over the
1967-94 coverage of the database.  In their comprehensive survey, Mross
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.264EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHand Hammond (1989) have also noted the sparseness of the stress-cognitionliterature.A good case also can be made that stress and the significance of itsconsequences will increase over the coming years:¥Global economic competition has increased dramatically over thepast couple of decades, and it shows little sign of slackening in the near
future.  Thus, both public organizations, such as the U.S. Postal Service,

and private organizations will undoubtedly find themselves severely chal-
lenged simply to survive.  These challenges are virtually guaranteed to

cause every person in those organizations to experience greater stress.  For

instance, polls suggest that there is an emerging sense among the public that
job security is rarer now than in the past and that this condition will last a
long time (Church, 1993).¥Economic and technological developments have led to greater in-terdependence among individuals and organizations, often accompanied by
centralization.  This implies that an action by any element in the contempo-

rary workplace has widerÑand hence more seriousÑconsequences than inthe past (see also Driskell and Salas, 1991b).  Take the case of financial

markets.  On a dollar volume basis, the bulk of the activity in these markets

is undertaken by the managers of large institutions, such as pension funds,
not by individual investors (Siconols, 1992).  Hence, as the market crash of

1987 demonstrated, buying and selling by a remarkably small number of
people can have dramatic and far-reaching effects.  So, to the extent that

stress influences those individualsÕ choices, its ramifications extend far be-
yond their personal welfare and affect most people.¥The potential effects of stress on cognition are further amplified bythe changing nature of work itself.  In almost every arena, today
Õs jobsplace greater emphasis on cognitive than on motor performance.  For ex-

ample, as noted by Hartzell (1992), at one time a good helicopter pilot had
to exercise extraordinary manual control.  These days, however, a good

pilot depends more on the ability to select appropriate procedural sequences,
which in turn are executed by computer-controlled devices.¥There is also the role of new technology itself.  For instance, it is
now possible for employers to continuously monitor the performance of
workers such as telephone operators and telemarketers.  There is some evi-

dence that this practice itself exacerbates the stress experienced by workers
(e.g., Rogers et al., 1990).A PERSPECTIVEHans Selye (1956) is the scientist who first called special attention tothe concept of stress in humans.  Selye (1983) noted that the body
Õs physi-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS265ological reactions to an injury or intense emotion can be divided into thosethat are peculiar to the particular stimulus in question and those that appear in
response to any noxious stimulus.  He called the latter constellation of re-

sponses the general adaptation syndrome (GAS).  It includes three stages

(Selye, 1983:4-5): (a) an 
Òalarm reaction,Ó representing a 
Ògeneral call toarms of the bodyÕs defensive forces,Ó including changes in body temperature,
blood pressure, and hormonal secretions; (b) a Òstage of resistance,Ó in which
there is adaptation to the stressor and the reduction or even disappearance of
the elements of the alarm reaction; and (c) a Òstage of exhaustion,Ó when the
compensatory measures in the resistance stage deplete the available resources.
Selye essentially equated stress with this nonspecific physiological response
pattern.  For some time, most work on stress and psychological functioning

continued to emphasize this biological, response-oriented characterization of
stress.  Thus, for instance, Broadbent (1963) and others sought to account for

stress effects in terms of fluctuations in arousal.The concept of stress has evolved over the years.  Stress researchers are
far from unanimous in their use of the term (see, e.g., Everly and Sobelman,
1987:Chapter 1).  And this situation has prompted at least some authors to

suggest that the very concept of stress has outlived its usefulness (e.g.,
Hammond and Doyle, 1991).  Nevertheless, there is reasonable consensus

about the meaning of the expression in work on cognition, and we will
interpret it here according to that consensus (see Hancock and Warm, 1989).
Therefore, by stress we mean an individual
Õs reactions to apparent signifi-cant threats to his or her welfare, reactions that often entail heightened
emotion (see Keinan et al., 1987; Yates, 1990).  As articulated by Novaco

(1988:4), a threat is a self-perceived imbalance between the demands made
on a person and the resources he or she can apply to satisfying those de-
mands.  That is, the person doubts his or her ability to meet the challenge

imposed by the circumstances.  Several implications of this stress concep-

tion can be highlighted with the aid of Figure 10.1.To start with, stress is a response to situational conditions.  If these
conditions induce the perception of threat, they achieve the status of stres-sorsÑi.e., Òthat which causes stressÓ (Selye, 1983:9).
The personal circumstances element in Figure 10.1 calls attention to
the fact that identical conditions can have different threat implications at
different times.  That is, a given individual
Õs varying resources, physicaland otherwise, alter that personÕs vulnerability.  A problem-solving task
that is daunting when one is exhausted at dayÕs end is Òno sweatÓ after a
good nightÕs sleep.The personal characteristics feature highlights two kinds of stable indi-
vidual differences.  First are the differences in people
Õs abilities to respondto challenges.  Second are differences in the intensity with which people

experience (or anticipate) the losses that would ensue should they fail toEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.266EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHFIGURE 10.1  A schematic representation of stress and its connections with other
entities.Situationalconditions(stressors)Threatreactions(stress)Personalcircumstances,
characteristics,appraisalsCognitionOtherfactorsmeet a challenge.  These differences are well illustrated in the discussion of
medical devices used in the home in Chapter 4.  Even a trained outpatient is

likely to see himself or herself as less competent at using the equipment
than a professional and is thus more likely to experience stress in an emer-
gency.  And since the patient
Õs own health or lifeÑnot someone elseÕsÑisat stake, stress should be even more intense.The personal appraisals element in Figure 10.1 is an acknowledgment
that ignorance or special sensitivity to situational conditions can preclude or
exacerbate the experience of threat (Lazurus and Folkman, 1984; Paterson
and Neufeld, 1987).  As an extreme case,  if a surgical attendant is com-

pletely oblivious of a cardiac monitorÕs malfunctioning, he or she will per-ceive no threat to the patientÕs survival and hence experience no stress.Finally, the other factors part of Figure 10.1 is a recognition that, in
virtually any situation, the cognitive activities in question will be affected
by other things besides stress.  And the effects of these factors may or may

not be independent of stress effects.  Lighting quality has an obvious influ-

ence on machine assembly performance.  But within bounds, that influence

may or may not differ for people who are subjected to large rather than
small amounts of stress.The conceptual framework depicted in Figure 10.1 is minimal.  Never-
theless, it does provide a useful perspective for the ensuing discussion, and
it will be elaborated in the context of that discussion.MANAGING STRESS-COGNITION EFFECTSHuman factors as a discipline focuses on the interactions between thepeople and the artifacts that together compose human-technology systemsEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS267for accomplishing various tasks.  Thus, a nuclear power plant has a human
factors problem if displays of reactor status induce high probabilities of
operator error, and an anesthesiology protocol has poor human factors fea-
tures if it encourages physicians and technicians to administer inappropriate
dosages of gas.  Typical activities that people undertake in human-technol-

ogy systems have both cognitive and noncognitive aspects.  Implicit in the

earlier discussion is the assumption that stress often has adverse effects on
the cognitive elements of those activities.  This is a common and plausible

assumption, but there may be conditions under which stress has beneficial
influences on cognition.  Indeed, several theories imply what some of those

conditions might be (e.g., Easterbrook, 1959; Yates, 1990:Chapter 13).  We

thus submit that a major theme in human factors research should be deep-
ening our fundamental understanding of stress-cognition relationships.  A

complementary aim should be the development of practical techniques for
counteracting negative effects and exploiting positive ones.A PREREQUISITE:  METHODOLOGICAL ADVANCES
Consider an experiment by Rothstein (1986).  On any given trial in that
experiment, the subjectÕs task was to predict a criterion variable, C.  The
subject was shown vertical bars labeled A and 
B.  The heights of these bars
served as numerical cues for C, which was statistically related to A and 
B in
a particular way.  For instance, in one condition, the optimal rule for pre-

dicting C might have the form
CÕ = 
f(A) + g(B),where f and 
g are specific linear or inverted-U functions.  Via a block of
subject-controlled trials with feedback, each subject first learned to predict
the criterion to a satisfactory level of accuracy.  Half of the subjects then

performed test trials under time pressure.  On each trial, the subject had to

predict C from A and B within a deadline of six seconds.  One of RothsteinÕsconclusions was that time pressure induced the subjects to apply more widely
differentiated weights to the cues.  So, if a subject initially tended to predict

C according to a rule similar to
C* = 
f*(A) + g*(B),then time pressure altered that rule to one more likeC* = 2
f*(A) + g*(B)orC* = 
f*(A) + 2g*(B).Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.268EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHThe tentative generalization was that time pressure tends to make judgmentpolicies less evenhanded.RothsteinÕs (1986) results are interesting in themselves.  But we high-
light his experiment here because in one important respect it is typical of
laboratory studies of stress and cognition.  Recall that the consensus defini-

tion of stress requires a person to doubt his or her ability to meet a task
demand.  Missing-response data suggest that Rothstein
Õs six-second timelimit did indeed engender such doubt.  However, another stress requirement

is that the affected person should recognize task failure as a significant
threat to his or her welfare.  For average college students (as were RothsteinÕssubjects), failing to complete any assigned intellectual task is probably an
ego threat.  But in Rothstein
Õs study, that seemed to be the only plausible
threat; subjects were simply ÒrequiredÓ (p. 85) to respond within the time
limit.  Therefore, in terms of threat, the stressfulness of Rothstein
Õs timepressure was probably minimal.  Rothstein did not explicitly apply the term

stress to his time pressure conditions.  Nevertheless, his manipulations were
actually quite representative of how researchers have often sought to induce
stress in controlled settings.The problem illustrated by this example is that the stressors used inlaboratory studies are essentially benign (almost a contradiction in terms);
they constitute almost no threat to the subject.  From an ethical, as well as a

strictly legal, perspective (in the United States, at least), this is how it
should and must be.  After all, no responsible researcher would want to risk

causing the serious harm implicit in the Òsignificant threatÓ element of the
stress construct.Standard informed consent protocols have another consequence, too.Not only must the potential consequences of a subjectÕs actions be mild; theconditions confronting the subject cannot be surprising.  As numerous stress
specialists (e.g., Levine, 1988) have noted, uncertainty, including complete
unexpectedness, is a critical element in many truly stressful situations.  As a
fanciful example, consider the popular science fiction film Alien.  Perhaps
the filmÕs most terrifying moment occurs shortly after the protagonists con-clude that their embryonic extraterrestrial tormentor had inexplicably but
surely disappeared, leaving them safe and secure.  Then, with shocking

suddenness, they learn that the monster has been with them all along.  It had
been maturing parasitically within a crew memberÕs body.  Everyone would
agree that the crewÕs stress levelÑto say nothing of the audienceÕsÑis thenmuch higher than had the alien been the usual, garden-variety, Godzilla-
type monster.Most experimentalists are surely aware that the stress levels they in-duce in the laboratory are far milder than those in the real-world situations
to which they wish to generalize.  So, implicit in their work is the hopeful

assumption that, although the effects of laboratory stressors are markedlyEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS269weaker than those of severe natural stressors, they are qualitatively thesame.  But not all stress investigators are so optimistic.  Take the situation

in which the stakes in a real-world decision problem can be a significant
stressor in themselves (Janis and Mann, 1977).  The prospect of losing a 50-
cent bonus because of a bad decision in a laboratory experiment might seem
so inconsequential that the subject can treat the decision task as simply an
exercise in pure reasoning, on a par with solving a math problem.  But

suppose the situation entails the possibility of losing a daughterÕs life be-cause of choosing the wrong medical treatment (see Ritov and Baron, 1990).
Mann (1992) speculates that the very nature of the decision process is fun-
damentally different in this kind of distinctly stressful circumstance.Right now it is impossible to say whether what we have learned fromlaboratory studies of stress and cognition does, in fact, generalize to more
extreme levels of the stressors involved.  But, as was implied above, we do

know that those experiments can tell us virtually nothing about the role of
uncertainty in stress effects.  There is yet another limitation: the fact that

experiments are short-term affairs.  Acute stressors are present only briefly,
whereas chronic stressors are sustained for extended periods (e.g., on long
space flights or submarine tours of duty).  For the most part (there are

exceptions, of course), human factors and basic cognition researchers have
experimentally examined the contemporaneous effects of acute stressors on,
for instance, task performance in the presence of noise or extreme tempera-
tures (see Hancock, 1986b).  In contrast, clinical psychologists and other

health care providers (e.g., Newberry et al., 1987) have more often ad-
dressed the long-term consequences of extended stress exposure, conse-
quences that might occur in contexts completely removed from the locus of
the stressor.  Post-traumatic stress syndrome, such as combat fatigue, is

perhaps the best-known example (Levine, 1988).  As suggested by the work

of Cohen (1980; Cohen and Spacapan, 1978), the effect of chronic stress
can present surprises.  These surprises seem inaccessible via standard labo-

ratory techniques.Given the above observations, it is essential that human factors investiga-tors of stress and cognition seek to create ethical yet effective means of study-
ing the influences of stressors that more closely approximate those in real-
world human-technology systems.  Indeed, it is plausible that a major reason

for the very sparseness of the stress and cognition literature is that researchers
often find it prohibitively difficult to create appropriate conditions.How might this methodological research challenge be approached?  Numerousavenues could be explored.  One point of departure is to note that the issues

are similar to those that confront investigators in education and medicine.
In these fields, the stakes can be the difference between a childÕs academicsuccess and failure or even between life and death.  (Should this child

participate in a new, experimental learning method?  Should this patient
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.270EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHreceive a new drug or a placebo?)  Methodologists and ethicists in educa-
tion and medicine have responded to the challenge with numerous innova-
tions (e.g., Cook and Campbell, 1979).  Human factors researchers would

do well to see whether some of those innovations can be adapted to the
demands of stress research.  At a minimum, human factors methodologists

might find it instructive to examine the process by which their counterparts
in education and medicine have addressed analogous dilemmas.It is impossible to anticipate which, if any, research strategies devel-oped in education and medicine warrant close examination for emulation in
stress and cognition research.  However, a good case can be made for

investigating the feasibility of methods that entail central roles for two
specific techniques: (a) the analysis of naturally occurring incidents and (b)
the study of simulations, including competitive games.Incident AnalysesHelmreichÕs (1990) inquiry into the Air Ontario crash at Dryden is agood illustration of incident analysis.  The investigator sifted through the

available records of a significant, catastrophic event, trying to reconstruct
conditions that may have led or contributed to it.  Among those conditions

were ones that fit prevailing stress theories.  It so happened that, because of

his previous work, Helmreich was aware of stress effects and hence would
have been on the lookout for their possible involvement in the Dryden
incident.  This might not always be the case whenever incident analyses are

routinely performed (e.g., in high-risk domains such as aviation, nuclear
power, and surgery).  We therefore recommend that protocols for regularly

commissioned incident analyses (e.g., by  the Nuclear Regulatory Commis-

sion, the Federal Aviation Administration, and various surgery review boards)
be designed so that the possible role of stress can be evaluated critically.Among the inherent weaknesses of full-blown mishap analyses are theirexpense and the (fortunate) rareness of the incidents.  One variation on the

incident analysis approach relies on statistical explorations of richer (but
necessarily less detailed) routine archival data and could thus circumvent
these drawbacks.  An example of the requisite kind of information source is

the database maintained by the National Aeronautics and Space AdministrationÕsAviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS).  This is an archive of reports

submitted by individuals throughout the U.S. civilian aviation system.  Such
reports, which are recorded anonymously, describe any conditions or activi-
ties the reporter thinks might be hazardous.  Williams et al. (1992) success-

fully analyzed ASRS reports about incidents involving resource manage-
ment and geographic disorientation.  There is nothing to preclude similar

analyses of stressed-related incidents.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS271Another variation on incident analysis entails embedding experimentsor quasi-experiments (Cook and Campbell, 1979) within naturally occurring
activities that are likely to be stressful, but to which certain individuals
have already voluntarily committed themselves.  One example (which was

not considered particularly successful by the investigators themselves) was
a study by Idzikowski and Baddeley (1983) of the reactions of inexperi-
enced public speakers prior to delivering colloquium papers.  Another widely
cited pair of studies were those in which Fenz (1974; Fenz and Jones, 1972)
traced arousal patterns in parachutists preparing to make jumps.  The em-

bedding studies that have perhaps been least susceptible to subject self-
selection biases are those that tested ways of teaching surgery patients to
manage the stress associated with their impending operations (e.g., Langer
et al., 1975).Incident analyses have been performed for years (see, e.g., Woods,1993).  The reports resulting from such analyses, as well as the manuals

that sometimes guide them, suggest a remarkable degree of methodological
sophistication and thoroughness.  For example, the National Transportation

Safety BoardÕs InvestigatorÕs Manual prescribes in great detail who is to
participate in the investigation of airplane crashes and what their roles should
be.  An especially attractive feature of the manual is a checklist of human

performance factors that should be examined; for example, life habit pat-
terns, training, and control design.  There has been some discussion of

critical issues underlying incident analyses (e.g., Reason, 1990).  Neverthe-

less, it appears that the scholarly literature on such issues is surprisingly
scant.  The rarity of relevant reports highlights both an opportunity and a

need for methodological developments to which human factors stress re-
searchers could be major contributors.In collaboration with practicing incident analysts from diverse back-grounds, human factors specialists should aggressively seek to extend the
public literature on incident analysis techniques.  There are numerous spe-

cific issues such a literature should address, as our illustrations have high-
lighted.  Take the case of HelmreichÕs (1990) examination of the Air Ontariocrash at Dryden.  We conjectured that Helmreich
Õs awareness of stresstheories probably sensitized him to the possible role of stress in the crash.
But critics might say that such awareness actually threatens the integrity of
incident analyses.  For example, research has shown (e.g., Chapman and

Chapman, 1967) that clinical psychologists who hold theories that certain
signs ought to be indicative of patientsÕ true conditions tend to see 
ÒillusorycorrelationsÓ between those signs and conditions even when in reality no
connections exist.  A strong literature on incident analysis methods would

address techniques for precluding such validity threats.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.272EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHSimulationsIn any simulation, the aim is to duplicate some, but not all, of theessential features of a particular experience (see Jones et al., 1985).  For

instance, flight simulators are used in pilot training mainly because they are
much cheaper to build and operate than real aircraft; they closely approxi-
mate the behavior of an aircraft but not its costs.  The present research

recommendation is that the same approach be attempted in the domain of
stress and cognition.  That is, an effort should be made to develop stress

simulators as research tools that would induce realistic stress reactions but
would not actually expose subjects to the threat of serious harm that is an
essential element of stress.Passable stress simulators should in principle be more difficult to con-struct than physical simulators.  History has shown that a functional flight

simulator needs to emulate only the physical response to an operatorÕs ma-nipulation of a control device (including what is seen through the cockpit
windshield).  The details of actually building such a simulator might be

quite involved, but the underlying physical (and perceptual) principles are
well known.  The builder of a stress simulator, however, must bring about

psychological illusions; the subject should feel stress without actually being
subject to the hazards that are normally a prerequisite for it.  Unfortunately,

what we know about stress principles is not enough to guide us in creating
those illusions in a systematic way.  Thus, to the extent that stress simula-

tors are feasible, they must emanate from researchersÕ intuitions and every-
day experiences.One starting point for developing stress simulators might be common-place activities that appear to already approximate what we would like the
simulators to do.  Several examples come to mind: (a) films, (b) amusement

park rides, (c) role-playing exercises, and (d) competitive games.  We can

all recall encounters with one or more of these activities in which we expe-
rienced what felt like serious stress.  (Think of your most memorable horror

movie, fun house, or roller coaster ride.)  At one level of consciousness, we

were fully cognizant that we were in no real danger; otherwise, we would
never have agreed to participate.  However, that assessment was tempo-

rarily suspended and put completely out of mind.  Effectively, we allowed

ourselves to be encapsulated within a small, insular world where gut-wrenching
threats abounded.It is unclear exactly what makes an effective horror movie, for instance.And perhaps that is the genius of artistry.  But it should be possible to

systematically review good and poor films, rides, role-playing exercises,
and the like in order to glean hints of techniques that could be mimicked in
building useful stress simulators.  For example, one plausible working hy-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS273pothesis is that a good simulator must insulate the subject from externalstimulation that would encourage thoughts like, ÒThis is only a game,Ó ÒIrealize that nothing bad can actually happen to me,Ó or ÒIn the larger schemeof things, this just doesnÕt matter.ÓIn the abstract, the kinds of stress simulators suggested here seem al-most far-fetched or frivolous.  They are not, however.  Instantiations of

similar ideas already exist and have proven their value.  Take the case of

role-playing.  Armstrong (1987) has reviewed research (including some of

his own) about forecasting the outcomes of conflict situations, such as union
negotiations.  He specifically compared the relative accuracy of forecasts

generated by expert opinion and those that relied on role plays of the con-
flict situations.  Forecasts based on role-playing tend to be far better.
Or take competitive sports.  There is an active subarea of sports psy-
chology that focuses on stress and performance among athletes (see Jones
and Hardy, 1990).  Work in this area should be examined not only for

methodological ideas but also for possible generalizations of its substantive
findings beyond the domain of sports.There is currently considerable activity in the development of virtualreality technology.  Much of that work is proceeding at a breakneck pace in

the private entertainment industry, to the point that several virtual reality
games and ÒridesÓ are currently available to consumers in special arcades
and amusement parks (Corliss, 1993).  One perspective on these develop-

ments is that they are expected to be so lucrative precisely because they
promise to be so much better than competing technologies (e.g., conven-
tional video games and films) at simulating extreme stressors.  We suggest

that their potential as stress and cognition research platforms be thoroughly
explored.  Should the anticipated commercial success of virtual reality en-

tertainment devices be realized, researchers might also find themselves with
a ready-made volunteer subject pool analogous to the skydivers studied by
Fenz (1974) and his colleagues.  In fact, researchers might even want to

explore developing research simulators that are in fact ÒgamesÓ included
among other games in commercial arcades and parks.  Decision researchers

have sometimes tested the generalizability of behavioral decision-making
principles in the high-stakes, real-world environment of Las Vegas casinos
(e.g., Goodman et al., 1979; Lichtenstein and Slovic, 1973).One paradoxical complication of stress simulation should be acknowl-edged and addressed by stress research methodologists and ethicists.  Our

discussion has emphasized the simulation of stress without the real danger
of direct physical harm.  For instance, in a simulator, there is no chance of a
subjectÕs being killed in a high-speed crash.  But to the extent that real
stress is induced, there is still the potential for psychological and indirect
physical harm from the stress itself (see, e.g., Cox, 1988).  In the vernacu-
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHlar, the simulation might Òscare the subject out of his wits.Ó  Screening
subjects on appropriate risk factors is one seemingly reasonable approach to
such possibilities (e.g., Shanteau and Dino, 1993).STRESS-HANDLING APPROACHESWe have noted that existing stress and cognition theories suggest thatthere are conditions in which stress can be expected to enhance perfor-
mance.  However, the overarching theme of our recommendations for sub-

stantive research is that human factors investigators should develop practi-
cal means for counteracting or handling adverse stress-cognition interactions.
Five approaches to solving human factors stress problems can be distin-
guished:Approach 1:  Eliminate or weaken the stressor.
Approach 2:  Reduce stress reactions by the current system participants.

Approach 3:  Select system participants who are stress resistant if not
stress immune.Approach 4:  Train system participants to function effectively even when
stressed.Approach 5:  
Design system features and procedures so that system goalsare achieved despite the presence of high stress levels among system par-
ticipants-Ñstress-proofing, as it were.To varying degrees, all five of these approaches are discernible in thestress-related literature (most of which does not explicitly address human
factors).  Nevertheless, some of them
Ñapproaches 1 and 2, in particularÑare emphasized more than others.  In fact, approaches 1 and 2 can be seen

as the standard strategies for dealing with stress.  The underlying idea is

that if stress is a bad thing, get rid of it.  In approach 1, the work situation is
designed to minimize the presence and intensity of stressors, for instance,
by eliminating noise or altering workload schedules (see Chiles, 1982).  In

approach 2, an effort is made to change how system personnel react to
stressors.  A classic example of this approach is 
Òstress inoculation training(SIT)Ó (Meichenbaum, 1985).  When a person is inoculated against an in-
fectious disease (e.g., chicken pox), he or she is exposed to mild forms of
the disease with the expectation that the body will develop the ability to
resist the more severe natural forms of that disease.  Similarly, a key ele-

ment of SIT is that an individual is exposed to progressively more intense
forms of a stressor and is assisted in developing tools for managing that
stressor, to the point that stress reactions no longer occur.The logic of stress-elimination approaches is not unreasonable.  How-
ever, as noted by Druckman and Swets (1988), it is impossible to eliminateEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS275or even reduce stress all the time.  No matter what we do, some crises will
inevitably occur.  We should not simply concede defeat and allow nature (in
this instance, dysfunctional stress-cognition interactions) to take its course.
Approaches 3 to 5 are specific tacks for engineering effective system per-
formance no matter what circumstances might arise.  We will now make

research recommendations for each of these strategies.Selecting Stress-Resistant PersonnelImplicit in the conceptual scheme of Figure 10.1Ñand consistent withcommon experienceÑis the assumption that individuals tend to differ inhow stressful they find particular circumstances and how well they perform
under those conditions.  Also as suggested by the conceptual scheme, part

of the reason for this variation is that people have different competencies.
Thus, Operator A is less stressed by task demands than Operator B because
he or she knows the job better; it constitutes no threat.  The more interest-

ing situation is that in which equally competent individuals differ in their
stress reactions.  Our conceptual scheme implies that this could occur for

either of two reasons.  First, these individuals might appraise situations and

their competencies differently; the stressed person could see tasks as more
demanding and his or her skills as weaker, thereby anticipating less ad-
equate performance.  Alternatively, individuals might vary in the intensity

with which they feel the pain of task failure.  Such appraisal and reactivity

differences are a major focus of work on decision and motivation processes
(see Arkes, 1982; Yates, 1990).  Consider, for example, why not all con-

sumers choose the same car or why not all students pursue their studies
vigorously.Fortunately, stress and cognition researchers have begun seeking tounderstand the nature of individual differences and the bases for them (see
Hockey et al., 1986, especially Section IV: ÒIndividual Differences, Adap-tation, and CopingÓ).  However, for our purposes, the essential issues are
somewhat different.  In particular, the primary question is whether and how

we can accurately and economically predict which individuals are likely to
be unaffected by severe stressors in given situations.Consider air traffic control.  To the lay observer, the responsibilities
and the pace of air traffic control seem crushingly stressful.  Airplanes

appear to converge on airports unceasingly, and a single mistake could be
fatal for hundreds of people.  There is some evidence that air traffic control

specialists (ATCSs) do exhibit unusually high stress symptoms (e.g., Cobb
and Rose, 1973), but the literature is by no means unanimous on this con-
clusion (Crump, 1979; Smith, 1985).  Numerous studies indicate that  ATCSs
do experience stress levels comparable to those of other workers but they
regard stress as among the least of their concerns.  It is conceivable
ÑinEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.276EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHfact, plausibleÑthat the stress resistance of the individuals who composethe corps of working ATCSs is higher than that of the initial pool of train-
ees.  Somehow, because of self-selection and dismissals for correlated fac-

tors, stress-prone trainees leave the program.  This natural filtering process

might be an effective way to choose stress-resistant participants for a sys-
tem in which stressors are inevitable.  However, that process is undoubtedly

expensive and perhaps risky and inefficient.  It thus seems appropriate that

a priority for stress and cognition researchers is to explore other ways to
identify people who are stress resistant.Do people, in fact, exhibit behaviors that could be used to predict stressresistance?  Perhaps so.  For instance, there are indications that ATCSs are

reliably distinct from the general population with respect to several easily
assessed personal characteristics, such as low trait anxiety and tendencies
toward nonconformity (Smith, 1985).  Research in the more general person-

ality literature reveals other encouraging signs (but see Driskell and Salas,
1991b).  For example, Allred and Smith (1989) have shown that individuals

who score high on so-called hardiness scales tend to find pleasant and
inviting challenges in what others regard as unpleasant stressors (see also
Kobasa, 1979).  Parkes (1986) similarly found that extraversion scores among
nurses were correlated with their reactions to work stressors.  Finkelman

and Kirschner (1980) have reported data consistent with their proposal that
laboratory measures of information processing, such as delayed digit recall,
could be used as specific predictors of stress resistance in human-technol-
ogy contexts such as air traffic control.  And work reviewed by Reason

(1988) indicates that stress vulnerability is correlated with simple question-
naire reports of everyday Òcognitive failures.Ó  We previously recommendedthe development of various forms of stress simulators, such as competitive
games and virtual reality experiences.  If that effort succeeds, then it seems

only natural that performance in the simulations be examined for their abil-
ity to predict individualsÕ performance in the work situations of ultimate
interest:  if trainee Smith thinks clearly in tight game situations, is it rea-

sonable to expect him or her to do the same when a catastrophe strikes the
workroom?Training for Stressful ConditionsKeinan and Friedland (1984) performed an interesting experiment inwhich Israeli military personnel served as subjects.  The focal task required

the subject to search a page for randomly dispersed instances of a desig-
nated digit, say, Ò3.Ó  At the end of the session, the subject
Õs skill at thetask was evaluated by performance on three criterion trials.  (Surprisingly,

there are actually better and worse ways of performing such tasks.)  After

each of the first two test trials, the subject received a 1.5 mA shock to hisEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS277fingers.  The five conditions in the experiment were distinguished accordingto the context in which the subject was trained to perform the task.  During

high-fidelity training, the subject received a 1.5 mA shock after 4 of the 10
training trials.  In low-fidelity training, these shocks were of 0.2 mA inten-

sity.  Shocks of 0.2, 0.75, 1.0, and 1.5 mA intensity were administered in

succession during graduated-intensity training.  Shocks at these same levels

of intensity were administered in random sequence during random-intensity
training.  Finally, subjects in a no-stress condition received no shocks dur-

ing training.  Figure 10.2 shows the mean numbers of correct target identifi-

cations, by condition, during the three criterion trials and the last three
training trials.  We recommend that a priority for future research be the

development of procedures for training personnel to perform well even un-
der stressful conditions (see also Means et al., 1993).  Keinan and FriedlandÕsresults speak directly to how such development might proceed.First, note that the performance of the group trained under no stress wassuperior to that of any other group.  Moreover, the performance of the

graduated-fidelity and random-intensity subjects was especially poor.  This

suggests that stress can be expected to interfere significantly with skill
acquisition (but see Christianson, 1992, for a contrasting view). Moreover,70605040
30High-Low-Graduated-Random-None
fidelityfidelity fidelityintensity
Training stressTrainingtrialsCriteriontrialsFIGURE 10.2  Mean number of correct target identifications as a function of train-
ing session stress.  SOURCE:  Keinan and Friedland (1984:Table 1).
Correct target identifications (mean number)Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.278EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHit seems that the worse the stress, the worse the interference. (Consistentwith previous discussions about stress effects, the apprehension and uncer-
tainty in the graduated-fidelity and random-intensity conditions should am-
plify the associated stress.)  The implied conclusion is that personnel should
be trained to perform required tasks under relaxed conditions.  This con-

trasts with the strategy behind the various stress conditions in the Keinan
and Friedland experiment.  In that view, training should be most effective

when it occurs under conditions similar to those in which trainees must
eventually perform.Keinan and FriedlandÕs results indicate that we should expect a relaxed-training approach to yield some performance decrement when a stressor is
eventually encountered.  (Observe that criterion performance was worse

than terminal training performance for the no-stress group.)  But there might
be a way to preclude this decrement.  A plausibly effective hybrid training

strategy would train in basic skills under relaxed conditions and then allow
trainees to ÒoverlearnÓ those skills under stressful conditions.  Yet another
potentially effective strategy would be to concede that skill acquisition is
slower under stress, but insist that it simply needs to be extended for a
longer period of time.  Neither of these strategies was tried directly by

Keinan and Friedland, but these and others should be high on the research
agenda.Leaving aside the use of electrical shock, research like that of Keinanand Friedland is clearly the logical starting point for the kind of work that is
required to inform the development of techniques for training people to
perform well under stress.  But as we have suggested, this work needs to be

extended in various ways.  There are also numerous matters of detail.  The

Keinan and Friedland experiment addressed only one training issue:  When

and in what form should stress be introduced into a training regimen?  Con-

sider some of the other issues, which are closely tied to fundamental ques-
tions about stress and cognition.Task Type:  Well Defined Versus Free Form
Visual search similar to that required of Keinan and FriedlandÕs sub-jects is clearly an important part of many duties in human-technology sys-
tems.  However, there are many other activities in which such well-defined

tasks play a minimal role.  In fact, we can expect that in crisis situations

(e.g., during catastrophic weather conditions or equipment breakdowns) the
required tasks will be anything but well defined; instead, they will be free
form in the extreme.  As was argued above, the inherent uncertainty in such

unique situations can be expected to intensify the stress that is experienced
(Harris, 1987).  A close examination of the stress literature suggests that

almost all experimental stress research has studied performance on well-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS279defined tasks.  Therefore, our beliefs about stress influences, including thoseindicated by Keinan and FriedlandÕs results, might not be as generalizableas we would like.  Future studies should determine whether or not this is the
case.Strategic Versus Reactive Stress EffectsThe notion of controlled versus automatic information processing iswidely recognized (Schneider and Shiffrin, 1977; Shiffrin and Schneider,
1977).  This notion is different from the distinction between strategic and

reactive stress responses but is related to it.  In a strategic response, the

individual executes a deliberate plan for coping with stressful conditions.
For instance, faced with a stringent time limit for making a choice, a deci-
sion maker might rationally elect to alter the decision process, giving tem-
poral priority to those aspects of the options that are deemed most important
(e.g., Ben Zur and Breznitz, 1981).  The decision maker realizes that there

might be insufficient time to deliberate all the factors he or she would
ideally weigh and thus concludes that he or she must ignore some of them
(see also Payne et al., 1988).  In contrast, a reactive response is automati-

cally evoked by a stressor; the individual cannot help himself or herself.
An example is suggested by Janis and MannÕs (1977) theory of decisionbehavior.  This theory proposes that the nature of the decision process is

conditioned by the intensity of the stress involved.  When stress is at its

zenith, the theory suggests that the decision maker enters a stage of hypervigilance
characterized in part by the kind of loss of control associated with pure
reactivity (see also Janis et al., 1983).It seems that the nature of stress performance training should be dic-tated by whether a stressful situation tends to evoke strategic or reactive
responses.  If responses tend to be strategic, then we might want to focus on

things like incentives for selecting one type of action rather than others.
Such tactics would be ineffective when responses are normally reactive.  In

the latter case, we would have to ÒreprogramÓ the subject to spontaneously
perform different actions given appropriate conditions, a process that must
rely on seemingly countless repetitions.  A good analogy is what occurs in

sports training.  Tennis coaches sometimes have their students repeat a

maneuver over and over again.  That way, when the corresponding condi-

tions occur during a tense match, the player does the right thing without
having to think; it just happens.  Thus, part of the stress training research

agenda should be directed toward distinguishing which stress responses are
strategic and which are reactive.  A related issue that must be addressed is

deciding which responses an organization might want to be strategic rather
than reactive, or vice versa.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.280EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHSpecific CountermeasuresExactly what should personnel be trained to do when performing theirduties under stress?  Suppose that an operator is instructed to do A, then B,

and then C under normal conditions.  On one hand, we might expect stress

to induce the operator to deviate from the A-B-C routine when he or she
ought to adhere to it.  If so, training must be directed to maintaining that

adherence.  But how?  On the other hand, an emergency might require that

ideally the operator act differently from what would be appropriate under
normal conditions.  How should the operator be taught to respond most

adequately to the altered circumstances?  To the best of our knowledge,

these kinds of essential issues have not been directly addressed, and clearly
they must be.  One way researchers might proceed is to begin with what

previous research has taught us about adverse stress-cognition interactions.
Stress-performance training protocols can then be pointedly designed to
counteract those interactions, as we will illustrate below.We noted previouslyÑand hence this call for more researchÑthat thestress and cognition literature has always been sparse.  Nevertheless, that

literature indicates consensus about several fundamental principles that we
hope will be verified by future work (see, e.g., Hamilton and Warburton,
1979; Hockey, 1983, 1986; Hockey and Hamilton, 1983).  For instance,

there seems to be general agreement that stress tends to reduce short-term
memory (STM) performance.  It is not clear how and why this occurs (see

also Christianson, 1992).  There might be a reduction in sheer capacity.

Alternatively, capacity might remain constant, but must now be divided
between a focal task and other tasks, such as monitoring the stressor (Cohen,
1978; Reason 1988).  It is important for stress researchers to determine the

basis for this decrement in STM performance.  Suppose that worsened STM

performance is due to attention being shared with monitoring and managing
the stressor.  It should be easier to recover the attention if that stressor is an

ambient stressor than if it is a task stressor.  An ambient stressor (e.g., heat,

noise, close confinement) is one whose presence is independent of the personÕstask performance, whereas the opposite is true of a task stressor (e.g., time
pressure or high performance stakes) (Yates, 1990).Regardless of the basis for the reduction of STM performance withstress, there are direct training implications.  For example, suppose a task

analysis indicates that an operatorÕs duties require him or her to performmental operations that rely heavily on STM (e.g., operations like those
required in the decision algorithms Zakay and Wooler, 1984, trained their
subjects to perform).  Then the operator should be taught to distrust his or

her ability to carry out those operations unaided when under duress; instead,
the operator might use paper and pencil and double-check.Another consensus conclusion is that stress reduces the scope of per-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS281ceptual attention (Baddeley, 1972), a phenomenon sometimes called tunnel-ing.  Thus, stress reduces the range of elements in the environment a person

sees or hears.  An adjustable-beam spotlight provides a useful metaphor for

perceptual narrowing.  The claim is that stress reduces the width of the

beam.  A plausible alternative hypothesis is that the width of the beam

remains constant but the beam simply develops a more erratic sweep (see
Keinan, 1987; Keinan et al., 1987).As in the case of STM, there are several fundamental issues that need tobe resolved.  Assuming that perceptual narrowing does indeed occur, along

what gradient does it proceed?  As noted by Yates (1990), in the context of

decision making, at least three different gradients have been proposed in the
literature.  In the Easterbrook (1959) hypothesis, attention is restricted ac-

cording to the objective, functional significance of various items of infor-
mation for decision quality.  The thesis implicit in the work of Ben Zur and

Breznitz (1981), however, says that attention is reduced according to the
personal evaluative significance of various features of the choice alterna-
tives.  And then there is the idea that (in one form, originated in drive

theory) stress reduces attention according to the inverse of the probabilities
of information being taken into account under nonstressful conditions (see
Zajonc, 1968).  Another attention-narrowing question concerns memory.

Much of the information used in cognitive tasks is retrieved from memory.
Does stress induce retrieval-narrowing phenomena analogous to perceptual
restrictions?The ultimate resolution of fine-grained theoretical issues like percep-tual-narrowing gradients will indeed have practical implications.  Neverthe-

less, stress training designers need not wait for a complete understanding of
the theoretical issues.  As suggested in the case of STM decrements, train-

ees might be warned that perceptual narrowing is likely to occur.  But if the

experience of debiasing in judgment and decision making is a guide (see
Fischhoff, 1982), this is unlikely to decrease inappropriate narrowing to any
great extent.  Instead, the trainee must be given specific prescriptions and

must be taught when and how to apply them, or perhaps even ÒconditionedÓto implement them essentially automatically.  Exactly what those prescrip-

tions might be will depend on the designersÕ ingenuity.
There have been some indications that stress alters peopleÕs reliance oninformation from different sources.  For instance, Wickens et al. (1989) cite

evidence that stress encourages people to depend more heavily on informa-
tion retrieved directly from long-term memory (LTM), presumably at the
expense of information that is perceived directly from the environment or
synthesized anew in STM (see also Klein, 1989).  It is as if stress increases

the significance of a personÕs prior experiences.  Perhaps this is why, inde-
pendently of competency differences, stress is sometimes found to have
greater effects on performance for novices than for experts (Baddeley, 1972;Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.282EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHHancock, 1986a).  Greater dependence on LTM might be advantageous in
some stressful situations.  However, the kind of rigidity it implies might

well be dysfunctional in crisis situations involving novel circumstances (e.g.,
a breakdown in a mechanism that has never broken down).  There is at least

some evidence that stress does in fact reduce certain forms of creativity that
are required in such circumstances (Shanteau and Dino, 1993; Voss, 1977).
Once again, training designers must be inventive in devising ways to coun-
teract these effects.Stress-Proofing Human-Technology SystemsOur final recommendation is similar to the previous one, but it appliesto human-technology systems rather than to individual participants. Specifi-
cally, we suggest that researchers seek to develop system features and rou-
tines that allow the systems to achieve their goals even when participants
are stressed.  This should begin with an effort to understand how stressors

affect both individual and group behavior.  We have already discussed some
of what is known about stress and cognition interactions at the individual
level, including the fact that the literature is so sparse.  For various reasons

the literature on stress at the group level is even more limited (see Davis et
al., 1992; Park, 1990).  Thus, researchers who take up the challenge posed

by this final proposal will need to make contributions to fundamental under-
standing of the problem as well as to practical innovations.The reactions of the individual are key to the design of systems thatfunction well in stressful circumstances.  In our previous discussion, we

suggested that training efforts be directed toward equipping system partici-
pants with personal skills to counteract the adverse effects of stress on
cognition.  The system could also be redesigned in a way that gives partici-

pants tools and procedures to counteract those effects.  For example, recall

that one effect of stress is to restrict the range of attention and consider
crisis situations, such as the medical emergencies involving outpatientsÕoperating sophisticated equipment discussed in Chapter 4.  A specially con-

structed expert system might force operators to explicitly acknowledge that
they have reviewed checklists presented to them by the system.Or consider the creativity limitations we should expect in crises, whencreativity is at a premium.  Although the kinds of options that would occur

to any single individual during stress are likely to be restricted, different
individuals should be expected to generate somewhat different ideas.  Thus,

systems might be designed so that under stressful conditions, procedures
require that inputs from multiple participants be elicited and synthesized.
(ÒTwo heads are better than one,Ó and so on.)  Not surprisingly, such activi-
ties can be done in ways that are more of a hindrance than a help (see Hill,Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS2831982).  Fortunately, however, there is a literature that discusses how such
group Òprocess lossesÓ can be avoided (e.g., Dennis and Valacich, 1993).
As we have indicated, stress influences on group processes have beenstudied less extensively than we might like.  Nevertheless, the literature that
does exist suggests that stress is likely to alter communication and perhaps
authority patterns among human-technology system participants and that
not all of those changes are for the better (e.g., Driskell and Salas, 1991a;
Gladstein and Reilly, 1985).  For instance, Janis (1972) has proposed that

stress is a major antecedent of the dysfunctional form of organizational
decision making called Ògroupthink.Ó  In groupthink, a policy-making groupbecomes so preoccupied with achieving concurrence that other aspects of
the decision task suffer from sometimes-fatal neglect.  As researchers at-

tempt to develop the kinds of stress-resistant systems envisioned, they should
include features that anticipate and circumvent such dysfunctional social
patterns.SUMMARYAs we noted at the outset, there are numerous indications that the stressesexperienced by the people involved in human-technology systems have in-
tensified in recent years and are likely to continue doing so for some time in
the future.  Human roles in these systems increasingly place greater de-

mands on cognitive than on, say, motor activities.  This implies that good

human factors design will increasingly rely on our understanding of the
connections between stress and cognition.  An examination of the literature

reveals that the requisite knowledge base is surprisingly skimpy, given broad-
based interest in stress.  We concluded that a major contributor to this state

of affairs is probably the inherent difficulty of inducing significant stress in
subjects while protecting those subjects from the potential harm inherent in
the stress construct.Our analysis implied that a prerequisite for meeting the challenge is thedevelopment of better methods of doing stress and cognition research.  Hence,
our first class of research recommendations is methodological.  Perhaps

modeling their efforts on those of methodologists and ethicists in education
and medicine, human factors investigators should seek to develop tech-
niques that are practically and ethically feasible yet capable of revealing
how significant stress does indeed affect cognition.  Any and all promising

approaches should be explored.  But we argued that two especially promis-

ing methodological avenues should have priority.  One of them relies on

analyses of naturally occurring incidents involving stressful conditions, such
as accidents.  The other uses various forms of simulation, including com-

petitive games and virtual reality technologies.We concluded that the pressing needs for substantive research on stressEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.284EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHand cognition are most productively conceptualized in terms of alternativeapproaches for handling adverse effects of stress on cognitive performance.
Three particular approaches seem to demand special attention:¥Selecting stress-resistant personnel.  The critical assumption under-
lying this approach is that people differ reliably in their tendencies to per-
form cognitive tasks well or poorly under stressful conditions.  The aim of

the research recommended in this area is identifying easy-to-assess predic-
tors of such individual differences.¥Training people for stressful conditions.  A fundamental yet unre-
solved training issue that needs to be addressed is when and in what form
stress should be introduced into training programs.  Other recommendations

address questions that need to be resolved in order to provide specific guid-
ance to stress trainers:  How, if at all, do stress effects on cognition depend

on whether the cognitive task is well defined as opposed to free form?
Which cognitive responses to stress are strategic and which are reactive,
and what are the implications of the distinction?  What specific countermea-
sures for such adverse stress responses as diminished short-term memory
performance are effectiveÑand why?¥Stress-proofing human-technology systems.  Most discussions of
stress have emphasized the behavior of individuals.  However, a good case

can be made that much is to be gained by designing human-technology
systems, including protocols for social interactions, so that the systems
function well even during times of heightened stress.  Our broad recommen-
dation is that human factors researchers seek out principles that would in-
form such design objectives.  Specific recommendations call for the devel-

opment of expert systems and organization schemes that compensate for
anticipated human difficulties, such as restricted attention and reduced cre-
ativity.The practical challenges posed by research on stress and cognition areformidable and have undoubtedly contributed to the paucity of such work in
the past.  However, there is reason to be optimistic that developments along

the lines suggested here will meet with greater success than in the past.
That work promises more than immediate practical benefits.  It should also

lead to significant advances in our understanding of fundamental principles
of cognition and stress.REFERENCESAllred, K.D., and T.W. Smith1989The hardy personality:  cognitive and physiological responses to evaluative threat.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 56:257-266.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS285Arkes, H.R.1982Psychological Theories of Motivation, 2nd ed.  Monterey, Calif.:  Brooks/Cole.
Armstrong, J.S.1987Forecasting methods for conflict situations.  Pp. 157-176 in G. Wright and P.
Ayton, eds., Judgmental Forecasting.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Baddeley, A.D.1972Selective attention and performance in dangerous environments.  
British Journalof Psychology 63:537-546.
Ben Zur, H., and S.J. Breznitz1981The effect of time pressure on risky choice behavior.  
Acta Psychologica 47:89-
104.Broadbent, D.E.1963Differences and interactions between stresses.  
Quarterly Journal of ExperimentalPsychology 15:205-211.
Chapman, L.J., and J.P. Chapman1967Genesis of popular but erroneous psychodiagnostic observations.  
Journal of Ab-normal Psychology 72:193-204.
Chiles, W.D.1982Workload, task, and situational factors as modifiers of complex human perfor-
mance.  Pp. 11-56 in E.A. Alluisi and E.A. Fleishman, eds., 
Human Performanceand Productivity.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum.
Christianson, S.-A.1992Emotional stress and eyewitness memory:  a critical review.  
Psychological Bulle-tin 112:284-309.
Church, G.J.1993Jobs in an age of insecurity.  
Time November 22:32-39.
Cobb, S., and R.M. Rose1973Hypertension, peptic ulcer, and diabetes in air traffic controllers.  
Journal of theAmerican Medical Association 224:489-492.
Cohen, S.1978Environmental load and the allocation of attention.  Pp. 1-29 in A. Baum, J.E.
Singer, and S. Vallins, eds., Advances in Environmental Psychology.  Hillsdale,
N.J.:  Erlbaum.
1980Aftereffects of stress on human performance and social behavior:  a review of
research and theory.  Psychological Bulletin 88:82-108.
Cohen, S., and S. Spacapan1978The aftereffects of stress:  an attentional interpretation.  
Environmental Psychol-ogy and Nonverbal Behavior 3:43-57.
Cook, T.D., and D.T. Campbell1979Quasi-Experimentation:  Design and Analysis Issues for Field Settings
.  Chicago,
Ill.:  Rand McNally.
Corliss, R.1993Virtual, man!  
Time 1(November):80-83.
Cox, T.1988Psychobiological factors in stress and health.  Pp. 603-628 in S. Fisher and J.
Reason, eds., Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health.  New York:  Wiley.
Crump, J.H.1979Review of stress in air traffic control:  its measurement and effects.  
Aviation,Space, and Environmental Medicine 50:243-248.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.286EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHDavis, J.H., T. Kameda, and M.F. Stasson1992Group risk taking:  selected topics.  Pp. 163-199 in J.F. Yates, ed., 
Risk-TakingBehavior.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Dennis, A.R., and J.S. Valacich1993Computer brainstorms:  more heads are better than one.  
Journal of Applied Psy-chology 78:531-537.
Driskell, J.E., and E. Salas1991aGroup decision making under stress.  
Journal of Applied Psychology 76:473-478.
1991bOvercoming the effects of stress on military performance:  human factors, train-
ing, and selection strategies.  Pp. 183-193 in R. Gal and A.D. Mangelsdorff, eds.,
Handbook of Military Psychology. Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Druckman, D., and R.A. Bjork, eds.1991In the MindÕs Eye:  Enhancing Human Performance
.  Committee on Techniques
for the Enhancement of Human Performance, National Research Council.  Wash-
ington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Druckman, D., and J.A. Swets, eds.1988Enhancing Human Performance:  Issues, Theories, and Techniques
.   Committee
on Techniques for the Enhancement of Human Performance, National Research
Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Easterbrook, J.A.1959The effect of emotion on cue utilization and the organization of behavior.  
Psycho-logical Review 66:183-201.
Everly, G.S., Jr., and S.A. Sobelman1987Assessment of the Human Stress Response.  New York:  AMS Press.
Fenz, W.D.1974Arousal and performance of novice parachutists to multiple sources of conflict and
stress.  Studia Psychologica 16:133-144.
Fenz, W.D., and G.B. Jones1972The effect of uncertainty on mastery of stress:  a case study.  
Psychophysiology9:615-619.Finkelman, J.M., and C. Kirschner1980An information-processing interpretation of air traffic control stress.  
Human Fac-tors 22:561-567.
Fischhoff, B.1982Debiasing.  Pp. 422-444 in D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, eds., 
Judg-ment Under Uncertainty:  Heuristics and Biases
.  New York:  Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.Gladstein, D.L., and N.P. Reilly1985Group decision making under threat:  the tycoon game.  
Academy of ManagementJournal 28:613-627.
Goodman, B., M. Saltzman, W. Edwards, and D.H. Krantz1979Prediction of bids for two-outcome gambles in a casino setting.  
OrganizationalBehavior and Human Performance 24:382-399.
Hamilton, P., and D. Warburton, eds.1979Human Stress and Cognition.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Hammond, K.R., and J.K. Doyle1991Effects of Stress on Judgment and Decision Making, Part II.  Final Report for
Contract No. DAAL03-86-D-001.  Research Triangle Park, N.C.:  U.S. Army
Research Office.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS287Hancock, P.A.1986aThe effect of skill on performance under an environmental stressor.  
Aviation,Space, and Environmental Medicine 57:59-64.
1986bSustained attention under thermal stress.  
Psychological Bulletin 99:263-281.
Hancock, P.A., and J.A. Warm1989A dynamic model of stress and sustained attention.  
Human Factors 31:519-537.
Harris, J.H.1987Prior task experience and psychological stress:  an investigation.  Pp. 45-53 in J.H.
Humphrey, ed., Human Stress:  Current Selected Research
, Vol. 2.  New York:
Ames Press.Hartzell, J.1992Army-NASA Aircrew-Aircraft Integration (A
3I) Program.  Presentation (in Octo-
ber) to the Committee on Human Factors, National Research Council, Atlanta, Ga.Helmreich, R.L.1990Human factors aspects of the Air Ontario crash at Dryden, Ontario:  analysis and
recommendations to the Commission of Inquiry.  Pp. 319-348 in V.P. Moshansky,
ed., Technical Appendices to the Final Report of the Commission of Inquiry Intothe Air Ontario Crash at Dryden, Ontario.Hill, G.W.1982Group versus individual performance:  are N + 1 heads better than one?  
Psycho-logical Bulletin 91:517-539.
Hockey, G.R.J., ed.1983Stress and Fatigue in Human Performance.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Hockey, G.R.J.1986Changes in operator efficiency.  In K. Boff, L. Kaufman, and J. Thomas, eds.,
Handbook of Perception and Performance, Vol. II.  New York:  Wiley.
Hockey, R., and P. Hamilton1983The cognitive patterning of stress states.  Pp. 331-362 in G.R.J. Hockey, ed.,
Stress and Fatigue in Human Performance.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Hockey, G.R.J., A.W.K. Gaillard, and M.F.H. Coles, eds.1986Energetics and Human Information Processing.  Dordrecht, Netherlands:  MartinusNijhoff.Idzikowski, C., and A. Baddeley1983Waiting in the wings:  apprehension, public speaking and performance.  
Ergonom-ics 26:575-583.
Janis, I.L.1972Victims of Groupthink.  Boston, Mass.:  Houghton Mifflin.
Janis, I.L., and L. Mann1977Decision Making.  New York:  Free Press.
Janis, I.L., P. Defares, and P. Grossman1983Hypervigilant reactions to threat.  Pp. 1-42 in H. Selye, ed., 
SelyeÕs Guide toStress Research, Vol. 3.  New York:  Scientific and Academic Editions.
Jones, J.G., and L. Hardy, eds.1990Stress and Performance in Sport.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Jones, E.R., R.T. Hennessy, and S. Deutsch, eds.1985Human Factors Aspects of Simulation.  Working Group on Simulation, Committee
on Human Factors, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy
Press.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.288EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHKeinan, G.1987Decision making under stress:  scanning of alternatives under controllable and
uncontrollable threats.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 52:639-644.
Keinan, G., and N. Friedland1984Dilemmas concerning the training of individuals for task performance under stress.
Journal of Human Stress 10:185-190.
Keinan, G., N. Friedland, and Y. Ben-Porath1987Decision making under stress:  scanning of alternatives under physical threat.
Acta Psychologica 64:219-228.
Klein, G.A.1989Recognition-primed decisions.  
Advances in Machine Systems Research 5:47-92.
Kobasa, S.C.1979Stressful life events, personality, and health:  an inquiry into hardiness.  
Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology 37:1-11.
Langer, E.J., I.L. Janis, and J.A. Wolfer1975Reduction of psychological stress in surgical patients.  
Journal of ExperimentalSocial Psychology 11:155-165.
Lazarus, R.S., and S. Folkman1984Stress, Appraisal, and Coping.  New York:  Springer.
Levine, S.1988Stress and Performance.  Background paper prepared for the Committee on Tech-
niques for the Enhancement of Human Performance, National Research Council,Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.  Available through the National
Academy PressÕs Publication-on-Demand Program.Lichtenstein, S., and P. Slovic1973Response-induced reversals of preference in gambling:  an extended replication in
Las Vegas.  Journal of Experimental Psychology 101:16-20.
Mann, L.1992Stress, affect, and risk taking.  Pp. 201-230 in J.F. Yates, ed., 
Risk-Taking Behav-ior.  Chichester, England:  Wiley.
Manuso, J.1983The Equitable Life Assurance Society program.  
Preventive Medicine 12:658-662.
Means, B., E. Salas, B. Crandall, and T.O. Jacobs1993Training decision makers for the real world.  Pp. 306-326 in G.A. Klein, J. Orasunu,
R. Calderwood, and C.E. Zsambok, eds., Decision Making in Action:  Models and
Methods.  Norwood, N.J.:  Ablex.
Meichenbaum, D.1985Stress Inoculation Training.  New York:  Pergamon.
Mross, E.F., and K.R. Hammond1989Annotated Bibliography for Cognition and Stress.  Report No. 295.  Center for
Research on Judgment and Policy.  Boulder:  University of Colorado.
Newberry, B.H., D.R. Baldwin, J.E. Madden, and T.J. Gerstenberger1987Stress and disease:  an assessment.  Pp. 123-151 in J.H. Humphrey, ed., 
HumanStress:  Current Selected Research
, Vol. 2.  New York:  Ames Press.
Novaco, R.W.1988Stress Reduction Programs.  Background paper prepared for the Committee on
Techniques for the Enhancement of Human Performance, National Research Council.
Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.  Available through the National
Academy PressÕs Publication-on-Demand Program.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COGNITIVE PERFORMANCE UNDER STRESS289Park, W.-W.1990A review of research on groupthink.  
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making3:229-245.Parkes, K.R.1986Coping in stressful episodes:  the role of individual differences, environmental
factors, and situational characteristics.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-ogy 51:1277-1292.
Paterson, R.J., and R. Neufeld1987Clear danger:  situational determinants of the appraisal of threat.  
PsychologicalBulletin 101:404-416.
Payne, J.W., J.R. Bettman, and E.J. Johnson1988Adaptive strategy selection in decision making.  
Journal of Experimental Psychol-ogy:  Learning, Memory, and Cognition
 14:534-552.
Reason, J.1988Stress and cognitive failures.  Pp. 405-421 in S. Fisher and J. Reason, eds., 
Hand-book of Life Stress, Cognition and Health.  New York:  Wiley.
1990Human Error.  New York:  Cambridge University Press.
Ritov, I., and J. Baron1990Reluctance to vaccinate:  omission bias and ambiguity.  
Journal of BehavioralDecision Making 3:263-277.
Rogers, K.J.S., M.J. Smith, and P.C. Sainfort1990Electronic performance monitoring, job design and psychological stress.  Pp. 854-
858 in Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 34th Annual Meeting.  Santa
Monica, Calif.:  Human Factors Society.
Rothstein, H.G.1986The effects of time pressure on judgment in multiple cue probability learning.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 37:83-92.
Schneider, W., and R.M. Shiffrin1977Controlled and automatic human information processing:  I.  detection, search, and
attention.  Psychological Review 84:1-66.
Selye, H.1956The Stress of Life.  New York:  McGraw-Hill.
1983The stress concept:  past, present, and future.  Pp. 1-20 in C.L. Cooper, ed., 
StressResearch.  New York:  Wiley.
Shanteau, J., and G.A. Dino1993Environmental stressor effects on creativity and decision making.  Pp. 293-308 in
O. Svenson and A.J. Maule, eds., Time Pressure and Stress in Human Judgmentand Decision Making.  New York:  Plenum.
Shiffrin, R.M., and W. Schneider1977Controlled and automatic human information processing:  II.  perceptual learning,
automatic attending, and a general theory.  Psychological Review 84:127-190.
Siconols, M.1992Individual investors
Õ holdings of U.S. stocks fall below 50% of total market for
the first time.  The Wall Street Journal 13(November):C1.
Smith, R.C.1985Stress, anxiety, and the air traffic control specialist.  Pp. 337-358 in I.G. Sarason
and C.D. Spielberger, eds., Stress and Anxiety, Vol. 9.  New York:  Hemisphere
Publishing.Time1983June 6 issue.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.290EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHU.S. Army1992aFratricide:  reducing self-inflicted losses.  
CALL Newsletter 92(April):4.  Fort
Leavenworth, Kans.:  U.S. Army Combined Arms Command.
1992bFratricide risk assessment for company leadership.  
CALL Handbook 92(March):3.
Fort Leavenworth, Kans.:  U.S. Army Combined Arms Command.
Voss, H.-G.1977The effect of experimentally induced activation on creativity.  
Journal of Psychol-ogy 96:3-9.
Wickens, C.D.1992Engineering Psychology and Human Performance, 2nd ed.  New York:  Harper
Collins.Wickens, C.D., A. Stokes, B. Barnett, and F. Hyman1989The Effects of Stress on Pilot Judgment in a MIDIS Simulator (U).  Armstrong
Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory Report No. AAMRL-TR-88-057.  Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio:  Army Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory.
Williams, H.P., M. Tham, and C.D. Wickens1992Resource Management and Geographic Disorientation in Aviation Incidents:  A
Review of the ASRS Data Base.  Aviation Research Laboratory Report No. ARL-
92-3/NASA-92-2.  Savoy:  University of Illinois.
Woods, D.D.1993Process-tracing methods for the study of cognition outside of the experimental
psychology laboratory.  Pp. 228-251 in G.A. Klein, J. Orasunu, R. Calderwood,
and C.E. Zsambok, eds., Decision Making in Action:  Models and Methods.  Norwood,N.J.:  Ablex.
Yates, J.F.1990Judgment and Decision Making.  Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:  Prentice Hall.
Zajonc, R.B.1968Social facilitation.  
Science 149:269-274.
Zakay, D., and S. Wooler1984Time pressure, training and decision effectiveness.  
Ergonomics 27:273-284.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29111Aiding Intellectual Work
John D. GouldINTRODUCTIONNearly all human intellectual work is aided by technology.  In the next
decade, new technology will make possible many new potential aids.  The

main thrust of this chapter is to structure the problem of aiding intellectual
work in such a way that human factors researchers can contribute toward
the development and evaluation of electronic systems that will indeed aid
their users.The ProblemThe problem focused on in this chapter is how to carry out humanfactors research aimed at augmenting human intellectual work with elec-
tronic aids.  Aids include artifacts or tools, as well as procedures, tech-

niques, organizational structures, and facilitated, encouraged communica-
tion patterns.  Most human intellectual work tends to be mentally demanding,
with a priority on timeliness and with a high premium on getting the Òright
informationÓ (i.e., not just the right answer to a question asked, but infor-
mation that is relevant to questions that should have been asked but were
not).Today, all human intellectual work is augmented to some degree.  Elec-
tronic aids for intellectual work include ubiquitous, simple Òsingle-func-
tionÓ tools, some of which are largely electronic versions of establishedEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.292EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHbooks (e.g., dictionaries, thesauruses, foreign language translators) and someof which are more (e.g., calculators, spelling verifiers).  There are spread-

sheets for businesspeople, high-level programming languages and tools for
computer application developers, Cadam and very large-scale integrated
(VLSI) tools for hardware designers, and conferencing systems for group
work.  To help users transfer learning from one computer application to

another, software developers have attempted to standardize user interface
styles  (e.g., Apple Corporation
Õs Macintosh style and IBMÕs CUA style).Many jobs simply could not be performed without electronic aids (e.g.,
work related to forecasting, reservations, large databases, simulations, and
much medical practice).Aiding intellectual work performance is a broad topic.  Several domainshave been addressed by recent National Research Council committees and
are not explicitly covered here.  One report summarized evidence on whether
human performance is enhanced through techniques that have their roots in
academic research, as well as techniques that have their roots in commercial
enterprise.  The various techniques used to enhance human performance

include training, pain management, stress management, expert guidance,
meditation, self-help subliminal audiotapes, self-assessment techniques, mind-
altering drugs, and sports-psychology techniques to aid performance under
pressure (see Druckman and Bjork, 1991; Druckman and Swets, 1988).
Another National Research Council report (Ferber et al., 1991) discusses
how human intellectual work performance can be affected by the linkages
between work and such family and personal areas as finances, marital sta-
tus, child care, the need to support elderly relatives, marital stress, illness,
and working at home.  Other studies have reviewed intellectual work aids

for (a) people with special needs (e.g., sensory and motor impairments,
communication difficulties) (see Chapter 3) and (b) students in primary,
secondary, and collegiate schools.Why Is Aiding Intellectual Work Important?There are three main reasons for understanding how to better aid humanintellectual work.It Increases Productivity and CreativityProductivity is a national problem:  many studies report that the pro-
ductivity of the U.S. labor force is relatively stagnant.  Some widely used

electronic aids have not helped much.  Nevertheless, there is the belief,

supported by informal evidence, that electronic aids, if developed with us-
ers and their work organizations in mind, do enhance productivity and cre-
ativity and can allow people to work in new ways.  For example, using
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK293electronic spreadsheets, business professionals routinely run Òwhat ifÓ analysesin seconds, a task that previously took hours or days or that would simply
not have been done a few years ago.  A variety of intellectual workers use

simulations to provide quick studies of situations that previously could be
studied only by actually building an object itself (if indeed it could be
built).  Scientists move single atoms, study their effects, and produce new

combinations with awesome possibilities.  With new visualization systems,

engineers and scientists can see how wings are affected by wind or how a
thunderstorm forms and thus develop an understanding that cannot be gained
from studying the thermodynamics and the underlying isolated equations
themselves.  Powerful visualization machines have led to a change in the

design of drugs:  Òscientists use graphics workstations to visualize a proteinin three dimensions and determine which drugs will fit best into its active
sites.  Such visualization is so powerful that no pharmaceutical researcher

would try to do the job without itÓ (Pool, 1992).  An entire new field
(experimental mathematics) and a way of thinking for mathematicians has
developed based upon these new visualization tools (Pool, 1992).It Is Socially ResponsibleThe abilities of people to cope with increasing intellectual work de-mands and their resulting self-images are affected by tools they are given
(e.g., see the section below on ÒOrganizational Impact of a New Technol-ogyÓ; see also Kraut et al., 1989).  Some workers are deficient in problem-
solving skills, spelling, composing, calculating, language skills (including
second language problems), giving instructions, and so forth.  Intellectual

aids have the potential to reduce these deficiencies.  Intellectual aids also

have the potential to help people deal with problems outside work (e.g.,
financial planning, finding support groups, interacting with their children),
and these, in turn, impact on their work lives (Ferber et al., 1991).  Human

factors researchers can help identify which intellectual tasks, if aided, could
lead to the most benefits (for individuals and society), and they can help
identify aids that can effectively help people with specific intellectual defi-
ciencies compensate for what is latent or missing.Our Expanding Technology Makes It Easier to DoRapid advances in electronic technology provide opportunities to im-prove existing intellectual aids, create effective and unforeseen new ones,
and reduce costs, thereby bringing heretofore expensive aids to larger audi-
ences.  The productivity and creativity of individuals and work groups can

be dramatically affected, in unforeseen ways, by the faster, cheaper proces-
sors with larger storage that are becoming available.  In the next decade, the
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.294EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHcosts of electronic storage and of computer processing are expected to con-tinue decreasing at about the same rate as they have been (about 10 to 20
times per decade).  The speed of computer processing is expected to con-

tinue increasing at about the same rate as it has been (about 10 to 20 times
per decade).  Communications bandwidth is expected to grow even more

dramaticallyÑabout 100 times during the next decade.Human Factors Special InterestThe evaluation and creation of intellectual aids draw on a variety ofdisciplines involved in human factors work, including assessment, cognitive
science, applied and experimental psychology, work science, social science,
organizational theory, and systems theory.  It is the human-centered focus

and the assessment and system development methodologies pioneered by
these disciplines that provide the potential contributions.THREE RECOMMENDED HUMAN FACTORSRESEARCH NEEDS AND STRATEGIESThree human factors research efforts are recommended to improve hu-man intellectual aids.  Although they differ in emphasis, the three research

needs overlap, as do their respective research strategies and methodologies.
Several studies used as examples to illustrate one human factors research
strategy can, from a different angle, be used to illustrate one of the other
research strategies.Assessing Existing Intellectual AidsToday, little experimental and formal empirical evidence exists as tothe impact of various electronic aids on individual worker and organiza-
tional productivity.  Human factors research should be directed at empiri-

cally and experimentally assessing the value of existing intellectual aids,
particularly as related to individual and organizational productivity.Exploring the Nature of the Tasks to be AidedThe fundamental nature of the intellectual tasks to be aided must beunderstood.  Stated differently, the characteristics of aids that will improve

worker and organizational productivity and workersÕ quality of life must be
discovered.  Human factors research should empirically study ongoing in-

tellectual work to identify which work tasks are Òaidable,Ó the cognitive
characteristics of these tasks, and the characteristics that the aids should
have.  There exist a variety of human factors methodologies that can be
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK295used to conduct empirical investigations of intellectual work in creativejobs and work organizations in order to understand what types of intellec-
tual aids would be valuable.  These methods include serious observational

visits to work locations, task analyses, interviews, and thinking-aloud pro-
tocols.Participating in Interdisciplinary EffortsThe disciplines that underlie human factors research are necessary toimprove existing intellectual aids and to create new useful ones.  But they

are not sufficient.  Human factors researchers should participate in serious

interdisciplinary efforts with other scientists and engineers.  This is neces-

sary both because human factors researchers have the potential to make a
contribution and to help ensure that human factors research has a significant
impact.  This chapter provides frameworks for thinking about how to ad-

dress these three research needs, suggestions for following the recommended
research strategies, and examples of existing research.RESEARCH NEED AND STRATEGY 1:ASSESS EXISTING AIDSIt is important to know the effectiveness of the various intellectualwork aids.  It would seem reasonable to assume from observation that, to

augment their intellectual work, people are successful in using some aids
(e.g., actuarial tables) but not others (e.g., whatever aids many mutual fund
managers used in the last decade).  Although free enterprise market forces

and differential commercial success of various intellectual work aids would
seem to be a good indicator of their effectiveness, this may not always be
the case.  The experimental results that do exist sometimes question the

value of the generally accepted intellectual aid studied (see the examples of
studies below; see also Attewell, 1994).Future human factors research should assess existing, ubiquitous intel-lectual aids to learn how well, if at all, they aid human intellectual perfor-
mance and productivity; to understand more deeply how they affect peopleÕsminds and the productivity of their work organizations; and to use the re-
sults as insights in defining new aids that would be valuable.  In addition to

increasing productivity, knowledge about the effectiveness of intellectual
work aids might help identify their common characteristics that have long-
term positive effects (e.g., making workers more productive, improving the
quality of work life).  These discoveries might center on characteristics of

the aids themselves or on characteristics of the processes used to develop
them.  For example, a number of questions might be asked about aid devel-

opment processes.  What design processes lead to the best aids?  Do the
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.296EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHsystem design processes recommended by human factors people lead togood aids (e.g., iterative design, user-centered design; see Helander, 1988)?
If so, then are there more case study data in support of these design and
development processes?  If not, then these recommended processes can be

modified.Experimental assessment of intellectual aids could help identify thecognitive implications of widely used aids.  For example, does a calculator

lead students to become poorer at basic math skills, as is often suspected, or
better at math skills, which one could argue on the basis of accurate feed-
back?  Intellectual aids can have surprising, unpredictable effects and intel-

lectual implications.  A personal example is presented here:  Prior to the

availability of copiers, I used to make notes and know a relatively small
number of journal articles in detail; now I have a more peripheral knowl-
edge of a larger number of journal articles and, when I need to know any
details, I rely on remembering the existence and location of the copies that I
have stacked in my office.  Experimental studies of existing aids would

focus energy on tasks for which the aids are designed to help, rather than on
convenient lab or toy tasks that are often used in psychological investiga-
tions.  This may lead to developing new methodology and a worthwhile

theory about the work under study.  It also can lead either to the identifica-

tion of ways to improve an aid or to ideas about the design of new aids.Figure 11.1 summarizes key points to be kept in mind when designingexperiments or empirical field studies to assess an existing intellectual aid.
Although a few readers may think that some of these points are obvious,
many of us are familiar with studies that fail to follow ÒobviousÓ sugges-
tions.Examples of StudiesA few studies are described here to illustrate how to successfully assessa potential aid.Composing AidsComposing by Dictation  In the 1970s dictation was often used to produce
office correspondence.  Vendors and employers encouraged their profes-

sional employees to compose letters and memos this way; office dictation
systems, including hardware, software, and required procedures, were being
designed, purchased, and used.  There were several generally accepted no-

tions about dictation at that time, as summarized in Figure 11.2.  To test

these commonly held views, in a series of about 20 laboratory experiments,
participants were given a specific topic on which to compose a letter and a
specific composition method with which to do it.  They composed similar
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK297Key Methodological Points in Assessing Existing Aids¥Try to pick a ubiquitous, important task and a ubiquitous, important aid.¥Continually ask the question: does this aid do what it claims to do?  Does
it do it in the SHORT run and in the LONG run?¥Figure out how the task can be studied experimentally in the laboratory orempirically in the field.  Often short-term laboratory experiments are not as

informative as longer-term empirical studies conducted in context.¥In laboratory experiments, include appropriate experimental controls, e.g.,have participants do the same work with and without the aid (if this is possible).
In empirical field studies, strive to do comparative studies of multiple groups orlongitudinal studies of the ÒaidedÓ group, especially if newly Òaided.Ó¥Use tasks, equipment, material, procedures which relevant users and ven-dors would agree, a priori, provide a fair evaluation and could lead to theiraltering their behavior depending upon the outcome.¥Design experiments so that results generalize to intended users (e.g., useappropriate people as experimental participants) and to a useful range of varia-tion in the intellectual task under study (e.g., if it is querying a database makesure enough different types of queries are studied).¥Choose meaningful dependent variables, including performance ones andattitudinal ones.¥Try to identify and understand theoretically the underlying mental pro-cesses involved in the tasks and use of the aid.¥Provide limits of generalization of the results in the study report.¥Suggest how to improve the aid studied, or the possible use of alternativeones.¥Prior to starting the experimental work, write conclusions sections thatvary depending upon what is found.  Show them to a few friends and get their
reaction.  This will help you determine whether it will be possible to draw any
conclusions from the study design under consideration.FIGURE 11.1  Key points in designing experiments to assess existing intellectual
aids.letters with each method studied.  Their performance and behavior were
measured while they composed, and the quality of their work was measured
in various ways.The results showed that, contrary to what was generally supposed, itdoes not take a long time to learn to dictate with dictating equipment (Gould,
1978a).  Eight college graduates who had never dictated spent part of one

day learning to dictate to a machine.  The next day, they dictated four

business letters and handwrote four similar business letters.  The experi-

mental results showed that they dictated and wrote letters in about the same
time and with about the same resulting quality.  Quality was rated by judges

who viewed typed copies of the letters and who did not know which method
was used to compose them.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.298EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHCommon Notions about Dictation in the 1970s1.ÒDictating requires a long time to learn.Ó2.ÒEventually, dictating is much faster than writing.  That is, potential maxi-
mum output rates, as measured informally, are 200 words per minute(wpm) and 40 wpm, respectively.3.ÒDictating may be qualitatively superior to writing because the higher po-tential output rate permits faster transfer of ideas from limited capacityworking memory, thus reducing forgetting through interference or decay.Ó4.On the other hand, handwriting was thought to have 
Òan advantage overdictating because it is easier to review and modify.ÓFIGURE 11.2  Hypotheses about different composition methods in the 1970s.  SOURCE:
Gould (1980:101).A second key result was that, contrary to what was generally supposed,(Figure 11.2), people experienced at using dictation equipment did not dic-
tate several times faster than they wrote.  Indeed, eight business executives

who dictated regularly for years dictated routine business letters about 60
percent faster than they wrote them (p < .001), and they dictated more
complex letters (e.g., essays on the Bicentennial celebration, on the issue of
capital punishment, on their favorite teacher) about 25 percent faster than
they wrote them (p < .01) (Gould, 1978b).  These experienced dictators
dictated routine business letters about 20 percent faster than did novice
dictators (p < .05), and they dictated more complex letters in about the sametime as did the novice dictators.  Dictated and handwritten letters, when

typed, were rated as similar by judges blind as to the method of composi-
tion and the experience of the authors.  Part of the aid assessment strategy

recommended in this chapter is to develop a theoretical understanding of
usersÕ tasks and to relate the results of experiments to that understanding.
These dictation studies found that the reason people do not dictate five
times faster than they write, even though they can say words five times
faster than they can write them (40 wpm vs. 200 wpm), is that the genera-
tion component of composition (i.e., the actual moving of oneÕs hand ormouth) takes only a small fraction (25 percent or less) of the total time.
Planning (i.e., pausing and thinking) takes two-thirds of the total time.A third key result was the discovery that inexperienced dictators feel it
takes them longer to learn to dictate than it actually does because they thinkthe quality of their dictation is poorer than it actually is.  Novice dictators,

just after composing a letter, rated their dictated letters as significantly
poorer than their written letters (Gould and Boies, 1978).  Upon receiving a

typed copy of their dictated and written letters and incorporating proofread-
ing and editing changes, they elevated the ratings of their dictated letters to
those of their handwritten letters.  Experienced dictators, on the other hand,
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK299rated their dictated and written letters equivalently at both stages.  Judges
later rated the quality of the final versions of the dictated and written letters
as equivalent.A fourth key result had to do with the just-emerging method of com-posing by speaking Òvoice documents,Ó which recipients listen to (rather
than read).  Experimental results showed speaking to be a much faster

method of composing than dictating or writing.  Authors could use syntax,

phraseology, and organization that they had learned over the years to be
appropriate for listening but not necessarily for reading.  In addition, in

contrast to dictating, authors did not have to give typing instructions, which
is potentially a cognitively disrupting ÒsecondaryÓ task (Gould, 1980).  This
information on voice documents had an impact on technology.  In the middle
1970s, researchers at IBM had begun work on a Òsuper dictating system,Óone that allowed users to apply great editing power to their aural docu-
ments.  The results of the research project described here were a key factor

in IBMÕs decision to shift the emphasis away from a super dictation systemand toward a voice messaging system (Gould and Boies, 1983).  Since then,

voice messaging has grown dramatically as an industry (e.g., voice mail,
telephone answering machines, etc.), whereas dictation has declined.Composing With Text Editors  In the 1970s, office professionals began
using text editors to compose their own memos and documentsÑand tocreate the final text versions without the aid of secretaries.  This trend led

to research in the late 1970s to experimentally assess the productivity of
professionals using text editors to compose documents (Gould, 1982), the
method of composition that has since become dominant in much American
industry.  In the first study, 10 professionals, who regularly used a com-

puter-based, mainframe, line-oriented text editor to compose their own cor-
respondence and longer documents, composed four letters with a text-editor
(T letters) and four letters with handwriting (W letters).  A secretary typed

each W letter, and then the participants revised and proofread the typed
copy.The results questioned the productivity advantage of using the line-oriented text editors of the 1970s.  The basic result was that participants

spent significantly more time composing T letters (29.5 minutes) than they
did composing W letters (19.2 minutes) (p <.001).  There was no difference
in the judged quality and effectiveness of the T and W letters (based upon
ratings by judges afterwards).  Participants made many more modifications

to T letters (41.3) than to W letters (8.5).  There was no difference in the

length of T and W letters, and there were no observable differences in the
style of T and W letters.  The report concluded that no productivity advan-

tages were found for professionals who composed their own letters with
their own text editor.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.300EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHThese results seemed questionable to some, particularly because of thelack of differences in quality between the T letters, with all their additional
modifications, and the W letters.  A few years later, Card et al. (1984)

repeated this study, using the same tasks, materials, and procedure, but
using a Òdisplay-orientedÓ editor (called Bravo) rather than a line-oriented
editor.  Again, participants
Õ T and W letters were of the same length and
were judged to be of the same quality and style.  Again, participants made

several times more modifications to T letters than to W letters, and again
these did not lead to higher quality in the T letters.  However, in this

experiment the composition times for the two methods were about equiva-
lent (mean times for T and W, respectively, were 22.8 and 21.7 minutes
versus 29.5 and 19.2 minutes in the Gould study).  That is, the mean time

for T letters was reduced to about that of W letters.  Besides extending the

findings to other editors, an important point for this chapter is that results
showed that experiments aimed at assessing aids can lead to cumulative
knowledge.Comment  Note how these experiments reflect the recommended method-
ological points of Figure 11.1.  Important aids were studied.  Participants

were experienced with all methods of composition.  This helps generaliza-
tion to the intended audience.  Appropriate tasks, that is, letters rather than,

for example, sentences or minor utterances, were used.  A variety of letter

types were studied, which leads to greater generalization of the results.
Meaningful dependent variablesÑtime and effectivenessÑwere measuredin a variety of ways.  In real work, these variables reflect productivity.

Since the goal of communication is often to persuade, having judges select
the most persuasive letters in some of the studies was better than simply
judging spelling, syntax, and stylistic considerations.  The experimental

results were repeatable, extendable, and cumulative.Some of the work had an impact on composing technology.  Human
factors research should not just question the value of existing aids but,
whenever possible and perhaps aided by theory, find something that is a
good replacement.  Speaking documents as a method of composition was so

identified.Each report contained a theoretical explanation of the results, a seriousdiscussion of limitations, and a pointed conclusion paragraph.  For example,
the Gould (1982) report on text-editing systems pointed out that only one
text editor was studied; that even though there were no other experimental
data on the use of text editors in composing tasks, it was known that the
text editor used can affect the speed of routine secretarial editing tasks
(Roberts, 1979); that line-oriented editors can lead to longer editing times
for very simple editing tasks than display-oriented editors (Card et al., 1979);
that the results are limited to one-to-two-page letters, typical of those com-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK301posed in industry; that these were not letters in which participants weredeeply ego-involved or did an extensive number of drafts.Missing from these studies, however, was a serious discussion, basedupon interviews with participants afterwards, about why they were not go-
ing to modify their behavior after learning about the results.  In other words,
a powerful dependent variable in assessment studies is to try to take some
ÒaidÓ away from people and see how much they resist this or fight to get it
back.  Related to this is the observation that many developers do not, even

when appropriate, themselves use the aid that they are making for others to
use.Everyday AidsNorman (1988) analyzed the way many ÒeverydayÓ aids (e.g., door-
knobs, VCRs, stoves, faucets, automobile controls) work in his popular
book on the subject. The book is valuable for its motivational, theoretical,
and methodological content.  It is largely anecdotal, empirical, and analyti-

cal (rather than experimental) in its approach.  It shows an excitement to get
started, a motivation to focus on existing aids.  It articulates theories of

mental mechanisms involved in using common aids.  It correctly describes

how successful artifact design proceeds.  The book finds fault with many

existing implementations of intended aids, but sometimes points to success-
ful ones as well.  Norman
Õs methods can be extrapolated to aiding intellec-tual work.Behavioral and Motivational Effects of AutomationOne work setting that has become increasingly automated is the flightdeck of modern jet transports.  Many intellectual tasks, such as flight plan-

ning and navigation, have been delegated to flight management computers,
with the tasks of flying becoming increasingly centered on entering data
and monitoring electronic displays.  This, of course, has been done to 
ÒaidÓthe crew and improve airline safety.  But some researchers have raised

questions about unintended consequences of this automation, such as compla-
cency, overreliance on malfunctioning automated systems, reduced job satis-
faction, changes in authority relationships, and loss of skills.  One recent

study found no differences in technical performance (errors) between crews
flying an automated version and those flying a standard version of the same
aircraft on a simulated flight involving mechanical malfunctions and diver-
sions from planned routing (Wiener et al., 1991).  There are probably many

broad, longer-term issues surrounding the impact of using Òelectronic col-leaguesÓ that go beyond performance results from laboratory studies.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.302EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHOrganizational Impact of a New TechnologyThe studies described above have focused more on individuals than ongroups and more on outcomes than on processes.  The next study shows

how to focus on all four.  Methodology derived from experimental psychol-

ogy is not the only way to assess the effect aids have on productivity.
Empirical field studies, especially if they are aimed at organizations of
people, rather than just individuals, can provide another powerful approach.
While lacking some of the control of laboratory experiments, empirical
field studies can assess whether individual productivity, measured in the
laboratory, translates into organizational productivity and can also take into
account contextual variables.Kraut et al. (1989) studied what happened to productivity and quality ofworking life when a large company introduced a computerized record sys-
tem to replace a microfiche record system in their customer service depart-
ment.  Management
Õs goal was to increase efficiency and cut labor costs.Customer service representatives, who were the highest-paid nonmanage-
ment employees in the company, were the primary contact between the
company and customers.  They attempted to solve customers
Õ problems,
collect overdue bills, and sell new company services.Kraut et al. studied 10 customer service offices, collecting survey datafrom each (a) prior to the introduction of the new technology, (b) one
month after its introduction, and (c) three months after its introduction.
This approach allowed pre/post comparisons within an office.  Each month

the new system was introduced into another office.  Thus, Kraut et al.

started studying each office at successive monthly intervals (e.g., office 1 in
November, office 2 in December, etc.).  This 
Òlagged, time-seriesÓ design
also allowed comparison among offices in various stages of automation.ManagementÕs main goal was realized.  Productivity of service repre-
sentatives, as estimated by the service representatives themselves (more
objective data were not available), increased by 50 percent.  They reported

that their jobs got easier.  However, they also reported (Kraut et al., 1989:230)
that their jobs:became less satisfying, less interesting, and generally of poorer qualityfollowing the introduction of the computerized record system.  Further-
more, contact with work colleagues became a less frequent and less satis-fying component of service representativesÕ work life. . . . Interview data
suggest[ed] that these changes resulted partly from changes in social inter-action, based upon new seating arrangements, new privacy panels, andservice representativesÕ limited physical movement that came from coordi-
nating information through a database rather than through word of mouthand transfer of documents.The supervisors of these service representatives, on the other hand,Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK303reported their jobs became much more difficult after the introduction of thecomputerized system.  They reported that they now worked harder.  Evalua-

tion became more time-consuming, largely because obtaining the relevant
data from the new system was harder than before.  Overflow work could no

longer be done at home; it now had to be squeezed into business hours.
Supervisors no longer felt expert in the details of the work that service
representatives did, although service representatives reported that their su-
pervisors were good sources of information and responded well to pressure
and uncertainty during the transition.Comment  This study by Kraut et al. (1989) is a valuable example of how to
conceptualize the issues, design an empirical study of the organizational
impact of a new technology, and summarize the experience. It demonstrates
the value of being guided by a general theoretical view of human work that
takes into account a multiplicity of factors.  The results showed that the

new systemÕs effects depended on workersÕ jobs, the tasks they performed,
and the types of offices in which they worked.  The study illustrates that

impact on productivity is not the only key measurement of an aid.  ÒBotheconomic and social theory as well as a rich case study literature suggest
that while information technology may increase productivity it can degrade
the work lives of those who use itÓ (Kraut et al., 1989:220).  Quality of
work life can sometimes be neglected in formulating a study, because nearly
all human factors people work for management (not labor); this has power-
ful consequences, often subtle, on the goals of the work.In developing and refining group aids, it is important to consider notonly how they affect group processes and team efforts, but also how these
affect individual motivation, skills, and job satisfaction in the long term and
how they shape organizational cultures and norms.  These goals would

probably require that even longer studies be carried out.Group Work AidsAttempts to aid collaborative group work have taken many forms, in-cluding new systems, technologies, facilities, and procedures (and the tools
and infrastructure to create them) and have been aimed at many tasks, in-
cluding  collaborative writing, design, problem solving, consulting, and pro-
gramming. The emphasis has been upon tools for interactive, real-time work,
although there have been some attempts to help people who are separated in
time as well as in space.A combination of experimental laboratory work and empirical field studiesto assess various aids for group work is a valuable human factors approach.
One such approach was carried out by Judy and Gary Olson (Olson et al.,
1992:91) at the University of Michigan:Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.304EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHOur research strategy began by understanding group work in the field wherewe noted important baseline features of group work and gathered ideasabout how various kinds of technology can help.  We have now moved to

the laboratory to study specific phenomena such as how technologies changethe flow of activities in meetings or affect the quality of the work.  From
these laboratory studies, we will move back to the field, assessing the use
of these new technologies in the full organizational context.  This strategy
has the benefit that we are informed by actual practice and can eventuallytest ideas in the field, but also puts the burden on us to construct laboratory
situations that mirror the field in important ways.In one experiment, Olson et al. (1992) compared the work processesand performance of small groups whose members were mainly business
degree holders with business experience.  Some groups used a group editor

that allowed all participants to see and edit the same document at the same
time, and other groups used paper and pencil, white-boards, and similar
traditional aids.   Each group worked face to face and collaborated for 90

minutes to draft the initial requirements statement for an automated post
office.  The designs produced by the 
ÒaidedÓ groups were of higher quality
than those produced by the groups working with traditional methods.  The

ÒaidedÓ groups focused more on the core issues of the problem (in other
words, they did less extensive exploration of the design space).  However,

the ÒaidedÓ groups did not like their experience in the experiment as well as
the control groups.Research interest has been dramatic.  In the most recent Association for
Computing Machinery conference on computer-supported cooperative work,
191 research papers were submitted (48 were selected for inclusion) (Turner
and Kraut, 1992:1).  The conference papers appear to reinforce the research

strategies recommended above.  In the area of assessment, there was a feeling

that empirical studies of the impact of aids on group work need to be longer-
term than studies of individual work.  According to Cool et al. (1992:31),

Òwhile the basic cycle of build-study-redesign is still valid, the implementa-tion should be more complete and robust, and the study should extend over a
longer time period before one trusts conclusions about ultimate value of a
new communications system.Ó  Regarding the second recommendation
Ñstudyexisting work situations in order to determine how best to aid themÑBerlinand Jeffries (1992) did precisely that for consultants helping apprentices.
Bentley et al. (1992) carried out an ethnographic study of air traffic control-
lers in the United Kingdom.  This methodology, relatively new to systems

design, uses observational methods and puts emphasis upon identifying the

social and cooperative processes involved in group work.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK305RESEARCH NEED AND STRATEGY 2:EMPIRICALLY STUDY ONGOING INTELLECTUAL WORKIn contrast to the first strategy (assessment), in which the emphasis isupon studying both an aid and a task, here the emphasis is upon studying an
intellectual work domain or task itself (which, of course, is already aided in
some way, since all tasks are).  This means identifying the social, organiza-

tional, physiological, and cognitive mechanisms involved in the task.  The

goal is to use these observations to gain insights into what would make
good new aids.  There is no cookbook for this transition; one hopes the

studies cited below will help generate ideas.  Particularly in the case of

group work, deciding which task to study can be a major challenge.  Issues

include whether to study long-term tasks (such as effectiveness in increas-
ing sales, morale, safety, and student learning) or short-term tasks (such as
teacher-student contact hours), entire work assignments (such as changes in
productivity of a group) or subtasks (such as effectiveness in communicat-
ing).  The underlying belief is that mental analysis and task analysis can

help in aiding intellectual work more effectively.To this end, it is probably more important to study the work of groupsand organizations than the work of individuals because (1) it is harder to
do, (2) most people work in organizations, and (3) there is uncertainty about
how increases in individual performance affect organizational performance
(see Chapter 1).Many formal and informal human factors methods are available forcarrying out empirical studies of ongoing intellectual work.  Figure 11.3
Methods for Observing On-Going Intellectual Work¥Visit worker locations.¥Study the work organizationÑunderstand the target groupÕs role.¥Observe workers workingÑwith and without existing aids they may use orwish they had.¥Talk with workersÑabout their work and any existing aids.¥Have workers think aloud while they work.¥Videotape workers doing their jobs with and without intellectual aids.¥Try the job yourselfÑwith and without intellectual aids.¥Collect opinions from associated workers outside the target group.¥Study worker-made notes attached to equipment, documentation, bulletinboards for insights into what would be a better aid.¥Surveys and questionnaires.¥Use computer forums to learn about other possible aids.FIGURE 11.3  Methods for collecting data on ongoing intellectual work.  SOURCE:
Gould (1988).Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.306EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHKey Methodological Points in Identifying theCharacteristics of Useful Intellectual Aids¥Understand the work that you want to aid, so that the proposed aid willlikely have the right characteristics.¥Focus on the work itself and the workers themselves:  this keeps you
close to the tasks you are trying to aid.¥Pay attention to the social and organizational interactions and needs.¥Analyze at a sufficiently abstract level for the purpose of identifying newways for people to work.¥Understand the context of the work (e.g., what policemen actually do) so
that a proposed aid (e.g., a geographic database system) will be appropriate.¥Go beyond activity analyses; involve workersÕ personal and organizational
intentions, motivations, socialization.¥Will the aid reduce manufacturing and development cycle times (Òdesignfor manufacturingÓ)?¥Consider the trade-offs between integrating several intellectual aids, ratherthan using intellectual separate aids.FIGURE 11.4  Key points in studying ongoing intellectual work for the purposes of
identifying the characteristics of useful intellectual aids.lists some informal ones; these are described more fully in Gould (1988),with the emphasis upon designing computer applications.  In addition, there

is a substantial sociological and anthropological literature on participant
observation and ethnography.  All of these methods emphasize coming into

direct contact with workers, their organizations, and the intellectual tasks
they do or could perform.  Failure to do this will lead to misunderstanding

the characteristics of potentially valuable aids as surely as if one attempted
to define an important aid for intellectual workers who live on other plan-
ets.  Figure 11.4 provides further methodological guidelines.
The studies cited below are more valuable even than the followingmethods and results might indicate.  Nearly every one provides a thoughtful

discussion of the motivation, methods, results, and their implications.Example of StudiesWork Activity AnalysesObservational studies, using a variety of methodologies, have summa-rized how office workers spend their time.  For example, Klemmer and

Snyder (1972) had observers note specific types of work behavior exhibited
in a large research and development laboratory in offices, hallways, and
other areas.  In addition, employees answered questionnaires on how they
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK307spent their time.  They found that office professionals in the late 1960s
spent most of their work time (42 percent) communicating interactively
(talking face to face or on the telephone) and less time writing (14 percent)
and reading (12 percent).  They spent only 3 percent of their time interact-

ing with office machinesÑwhich is certainly less than the time office work-ers spend today interacting with computer terminals.  Mintzberg (1973)

followed five very-high-level executives for two weeks each, observing and
categorizing their activities, and wrote a widely read book summarizing the
findings.  Panko (1992) recently reviewed over 50 of these use-of-time

studies and made general suggestions for office automation technology con-
sistent with the main results.While these studies, and many others, have illuminated how white-collar workers spend their work time, few intellectual work aids have so far
emerged based upon insights from them, especially as related to the work of
groups and organizations.  What has been needed for some years are studies

that relate these observed activities to personal and organizational motiva-
tions and goals, trigger events, and interruptions.  New methodology is

needed to go beyond Òactivity countsÓ and gain insights into work processesthat can be aided.  Although such studies are very hard to carry out cor-

rectly, they could provide insights into potentially valuable aids.A related approach to these activity analyses has involved detailed cod-ing and classification of verbal communications at the level of individual
utterances.  This approach has been used to analyze group interactions in

flight simulations and in the investigation of aircraft accidents (e.g., Kanki
and Palmer, 1993; Predmore, 1991).  A more holistic approach has used

experienced raters to evaluate interactions in real time using specific behav-
ioral markers to exemplify effective and ineffective processes (Helmreich et
al., 1990).  Both methodologies can be useful in evaluating aids since they

appear to be transferable to a variety of work situations of which the re-
searchers have a detailed knowledge.Desk OrganizationTo learn more about office work, Malone (1983) interviewed 10 profes-sional and clerical workers about the way they organized their desks and
offices.  Participants first gave a verbal tour of their offices, explaining

what information was where and why they put it there.  As an indicator of

their information-retrieval ability, the participants were then asked to find
certain documents (chosen by a knowledgeable co-worker as being either
easy or hard to find).  Malone
Õs motivation was to obtain insights intodesigning natural and convenient computer-based information systems to
aid office workersÕ productivity.  His two main conclusions (1983:99), whichhave implications for the design of intellectual aids, were the following:Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.308EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCH(1) A very important function of desk organization is to remind the user of
things to do, not just to help the user find desired information.  Failing to
support this function may seriously impair the usefulness of electronic
office systems, and explicitly facilitating it may provide an important ad-vantage for automated office systems over their non-automated predeces-sors.  (2) The cognitive difficulty of categorizing information is an impor-

tant factor in explaining how people organize their desks.  Computer-based
systems may help with this difficulty by (a) doing as much automaticclassification as possible (e.g., based on access dates), and (b) including
untitled ÒpilesÓ of information arranged by physical location as well as
explicitly titled and logically arranged Òfiles.ÓThe point is not so much to focus on these particular implications ofMaloneÕs study, but rather to appreciate how he drew implications for sys-tem design from his observational methodology.  A second, more general,

point has to do with the distinction between the need to design electronic
aids (e.g., to replace paper) that allow people to work in about the same
way they now work (an approach MaloneÕs conclusions seem to favor),versus the need to design electronic aids that allow people to work in rela-
tively new ways.Communication in Software Development OrganizationsProbably millions of people are employed in system development work.To understand better how to aid the coordination of work activities in sys-
tem development, Kraut and Streeter (1995) studied the communication
practices of people in such organizations.  Hundreds of software profession-

als in the software development divisions of one companyÑincluding man-agers, analysts, software engineers, programmers, testers, and documenta-
tion specialistsÑcompleted a written survey.  They reported that they got
much of their important information directly from other people.  When they

had a large network of personal contacts outside the project, information
flow improved, especially when the project was uncertain.  They said that

interpersonal techniques for getting information from beyond their immedi-
ate work group were underused, while more formal procedures for tracking
routine information were overused in terms of their value.  The design

implication seems clear: aids to facilitate informal communication are needed.
Kraut and Streeter note that planners are especially ill-served by current
coordination techniques.  Importantly, Kraut and Streeter conclude with

valuable organizational and technological suggestions for increasing com-
munication across project boundaries.  This type of well-designed study

should be imitated by future researchers.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK309Software DevelopmentMany studies have contributed to a shared understanding of the social,cognitive, and behavioral characteristics of the software development pro-
cess (e.g., Boehm, 1988; Jones, 1986).  The study by Kraut and Streeter

(1995), just described, and one by Curtis et al. (1988) show how human
factors researchers can investigate very large task domains through surveys,
visits, observations, and interviews.  Using their findings, they can then

develop theoretical understandings of work organizations, which in turn can
lead to ideas about the characteristics of helpful electronic aids.  Curtis et

al. (1988) carried out extensive visits to workplaces and interviewed many
individuals involved in 17 large software development projects.  They found
three general classes of behavioral problems that limited development pro-
ductivity:  thin spread of application domain knowledge, communication

and coordination breakdowns, and conflicting requirements.  It is possible

to design new tools for software developers that address these problems.Diagnostic JudgmentsDiagnostic judgments and decision making are intellectual activitiesthat cut across most work domains.  People frequently make diagnostic

judgments to answer important questions in their work lives (e.g., which
person to hire? which applicants to admit to law school? what is the likely
response from this drug treatment?), as well in their personal lives, which in
turn affect their work lives (e.g., should I marry this person? should we
have children? what is the best form of discipline to use with my children?
at which supermarket should I shop?).Consider a clinician examining a patient who is feeling ill, an employerselecting salespeople, a teachersÕ committee deciding whether to refer a
youngster to special classes for learning disabilities, and a graduate school
admissions committee selecting students for scholarships.  If these 
ÒjudgesÓbase such difficult decisions upon years of personal experience as success-
ful diagnosticians, intuition about particular cases, and knowledge of the
individuals involved, then they are using the clinical method of decision
making.  This is said even if they base their judgment upon one or more

quantitative predictors as well.On the other hand, sometimes people rely only on statistical predictorsto make judgments (the actuarial method).  ÒTo be truly actuarial, interpre-tations must be automatic (that is, prespecified or routinized) and based on
empirically established relationsÓ (Dawes et al., 1989:1668).  The insurance
industry, for example, predicts peopleÕs life expectancy (and therefore in-surance rates) based only on a combination of statistical predictors.  No
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.310EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHintuition or human element is involved.  ÒIn the clinical method the deci-sion-maker combines or processes information in his or her head.  In the

actuarial or statistical method the human judge is eliminated and conclu-
sions rest solely on empirically established relations between data and the
condition or event of interestÓ (Dawes et al., 1989:1668).
Nearly all of over 100 studies comparing these two general approacheshave shown that actuarial methods lead to more accurate diagnostic judg-
ments than do clinical methods (Dawes et al., 1989).  The topics studied

included prediction of progressive brain damage, survival time following
HodgkinÕs disease, differential diagnosis of psychiatric disorders, length ofpsychiatric hospitalization, violent behavior, paroleeÕs behavior after re-lease, and graduate student performance.  Even when clinicians are able to

combine actuarial test results with their own interview data, the predictions
based only upon the test results proved superior (Dawes et al., 1989).  In

other words, in this case, a third approach consisting of combining the two
methods does not seem to help.  This conclusion is not limited to clinical

and social science situations.  Murphy and Brown (1984) reported that 
Òob-jectiveÓ (actuarial) weather forecasting is equal to or sometimes superior to
ÒsubjectiveÓ weather forecasting.  The important point is that in straightfor-
ward ways, actuarial methods have the potential to be useful electronic aids,
once the variables that correlate with successful predictions about the topics
being judged are established.There are elements of all three recommended research strategies in theaggregate of these studies.  One problem for human factors research is how

to put this conclusion into practiceÑwhere it presumably would have realvalue for society in many domains.  To date, the results have had little

impact.  Dawes et al. (1989) cite several reasons, including lack of familiar-

ity with the evidence, the continuation of previous practices in spite of the
evidence, the feeling that an actuarial approach dehumanizes people, mis-
conception, and inflated confidence about oneÕs own ability to make accu-rate predictions (including situations in which the actuarial method, although
superior to clinical judgment, achieves only modest results).  Actuarial methods,
when applied to new domains, can seem mechanistic, antidemocratic, inhu-
man.  One task for human factors researchers is to figure out how to get

people to internalize the research conclusion in this area so that it affects
their behavior.  McCauley (1991) notes that, when psychologists have to

select National Science Fellows from a large list of applicants, they do not
make use of available actuarial predictors.A second problem for human factors research is how to extend theseresults to new domains (e.g., labor disputes, employee conflicts, system
development planning).  Here, one needs to identify the crucial predictors

(which may already be known), carry out the empirical work when neces-
sary, figure out ways to present the data effectively to potential users, assistEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK311them in using the data, and design and carry out the necessary follow-upstudies to verify whether the actuarial method helps in the new domain of
concern.Additional ApproachesThere are several other approaches to studying ongoing intellectual work.There are many variations of task analysis methodology (see Drury et al.,
1987).  One can apply task analysis to the work of an isolated individual or

to that of individuals working within an organization.  Task analysis can be

limited to Òlogical analysisÓ of all the possible steps in a work process (as
with an entirely new, nonexisting work system), or it can involve behavioral
observations.  Task analysis has been carried out mainly in military organi-

zations, but there are many examples in industrial settings.  The same hand-

book containing the Drury et al. paper contains chapters describing task
analyses applied to process control systems (Woods et al., 1987) and to air
traffic control systems (Lenorovitz and Phillips, 1987).Another possible approach is to carefully study, through interviews,observations, task analyses, and other methods, experienced, successful workers
performing crafts of high intellectual content (e.g., a physician diagnosing,
a nurse treating, a musician composing, an architect designing, a teacher
teaching).  The goals would be to identify the intellectual skills involved,

develop a theory about the task, and identify the characteristics of an aid
that would presumably be helpful.  Some designers find that, in the early

stages of designing and developing a complex system, they want a list of
classes of subtasks that most need augmenting or even automating.  The

challenge is to identify in general terms, if possible, these classes (e.g.,
spatial orientation, data interpretation, handling radioactive materials).Another possible approach is to identify intellectual skills that cut acrossa large number of human intellectual tasks and then identify the characteris-
tics of useful aids for that work.  Existing examples of such aids are elec-

tronic verifiers for spelling and even grammar and electronic calculators for
arithmetic.  The idea is to determine not what the tasks have in common,

but what common mental operations are carried out while working on a
variety of tasks.RESEARCH NEED AND STRATEGY 3:INTERDISCIPLINARY DEVELOPMENT WORKHuman factors researchers, to date, have been more likely to assess thevalue of an aid developed by others (e.g., the studies under strategy 1) than
to join with others to develop an aid and then carefully assess its value andEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.312EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHimpact. There is a need for human factors researchers to become involvedin interdisciplinary efforts to create superior intellectual aids.  This work is

needed for several reasons.First, working alone is generally not enough.  It is hard to find ex-
amples of human factors researchers who, by themselves, develop effectiveelectronic aids.  Making good electronic aids requires many disciplines.

Second, many engineers and scientists have come to realize that ÒhumanfactorsÓ determine the difference between success and failure of most aids.
Third, there is evidence that human factors involvement in development
projects is cost-effective (Karat, 1992).  Fourth, iterative testing and im-

provement of proposed aids are vital if the aids are to increase productivity
and enhance the quality of work life.If human factors researchers are involved, such testing and improve-ment are likely to be carried out much more thoroughly.  Thus, the potential

aid under development has a greater probability of improving organiza-
tional or individual productivity or other aspects of work lives.  Chapters 4

and 5 have made similar recommendations for interdisciplinary work in,
respectively, emerging medical and environmental domains, areas that offer
great rewards for successful collaboration.  Fifth, successfully instantiating

ideas into technology is a much bigger problem than most human factors
researchers uninitiated in this process realize, and it is something they often
cannot carry out on their own.  This is true no matter how well the ideas

seem to have worked in the experimental psychology laboratory or with
prototypes.  The studies referred to above on decision making and those

described below by Landauer et al. (1993) illustrate this.  Finally, many of

the disciplines underlying human factors, such as computer science and
experimental psychology, have a much larger supply of techniques, proce-
dures, and results than there is a demand for by others.  This proposed

advanced development strategy can identify, select, and shape the tech-
niques that others want and the context in which they must fit. Human factors researchers should become partners with others in de-
signing, developing, and iteratively improving good aids.  This recommended
strategy is not just a plug for employment opportunities for human factors
researchers or a profession-oriented expression of the importance of human
factors.  The idea is not just to work in support roles, as most industrial and

government human factors workers now do, but to work as equal, long-term
participating partners, with all the commitment, risk, and pressure that lead-
ership demands.  The idea is that as co-partners, human factors researchers

should develop a sense of responsibility for the initiation and successful
completion of an interdisciplinary project to produce a significant aid, with
all the burdens this entails.  For many human factors researchers, this re-

quires new learning, motivations, work organizations, and professional pay-Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK313off (particularly as related to the university promotion system).  It requires
a new conceptualization of what constitutes legitimate research.  As out-

lined below, there are already some situations that can serve as organiza-
tional models of how to do the work and write it up for professional credit.This recommended interdisciplinary workÑwherein end users actuallyuse, on a regular basis, the aid that human factors researchers jointly made
with other necessary disciplinesÑmay be hard to carry out because of per-sonal and institutional barriers.  It is longer-term work than is typical of

many graduate school projects and may require longer-term commitments
of funding than traditional research.  To be successful, it will also require

professional recognition and rewards, including ammunition for gaining tenure.
There has been a start toward giving this work professional recognition.
Case studies describing innovative research and development efforts involv-
ing human factors researchers in advanced development work exist, includ-
ing XeroxÕs Star system (Smith et al., 1982), IBMÕs Audio DistributionSystem (Gould and Boies, 1984), and IBMÕs multimedia 1984 OlympicMessage System (Gould et al., 1987).  It is generally accepted that these

systems were innovative and have influenced others who have made similar
ones.  Figure 11.5 summarizes key points to keep in mind carrying out

interdisciplinary development work.  These points are based upon personal

experience and published case studies.Key Characteristics about Effective Multidisciplinary Development Work¥Strong technical leader and mentor, not lacking greatly in people skillsÑatechnical champion.¥Small group of talented people.¥Individual members do what they are good at.¥Commitment to colleagues.¥Drive to become famous as a group for making an outstanding aid.¥Willing to do what is necessary to be successfulÑno 80/20 or 90/10 rule,where the remainder is left to others.¥Use iterative engineering, including good development tools.¥Make early prototypes.¥Involve intended users from the outset.¥Use the aid that you are making yourselves whenever possible (if
applicable).¥Follow up, and measure the value of the aid created.FIGURE 11.5  Key points in interdisciplinary work aimed at making effective aids
for intellectual work.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.314EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHExamples of StudiesSuperBookMany developers believe that electronic computers hold greater poten-tial than printed books for helping people find desired information.  Yet

Landauer et al. (1993), working at Bellcore, noted that nearly every experi-
mental study failed to find an advantage for various electronically presented
text systems over comparable printed versions.  They concluded that a sig-

nificant human factors problem is to develop an electronic text system that
people will use to better advantage than a standard printed book.Because of experimental results on the use of command languages andnavigational tools, as well as results related to other relevant cognitive
issues they had been studying (summarized in Landauer et al., 1993), Landauer
et al. felt that they had a chance to change this history.  They observed that

much information already exists in published books and that this is the
favorite medium of most authors.  So, in contrast to most development

efforts, which focus on electronic books only, they focused on how to help
people find information in already published books that are also stored in
computers.  They called this approach SuperBook.  They combined 
Òfulltext indexingÓ with a 
Òdynamic, hierarchical table of contentsÓ of the stored
book.  A review of some of their previous research is in order.
Two fundamental problems that users have in trying to find helpfulinformation in electronic databases have to do with the command language
they use and how they navigate through databases.With respect to command languages, almost all electronic informationretrieval systemsÑbe they library subject catalogs, dial-up query systems,relational databases, or computer file systemsÑrequire users to select orenter some words that must match words used as identifiers by the authors
or indexers.  After many observations, Landauer et al. became convinced

that most occasional users are usually unsuccessful in using standard query
languages or in producing Boolean expressions from ands and 
ors to get
desired information from databases.  Thus, they rejected this approach as a

way of helping casual users of electronic data bases.Why not discover what words people naturally prefer to use?  When
trying to devise new command names that would help novices learn word
processors, the Bellcore group (Landauer et al., 1993:76) decided:that any two people were unlikely to agree on a best term, so the commonexpedient of a one word command, file name or table label will usually failto put a user in touch with data stored by someone else. . . .  The chances
that any two people would choose the same name for a command were less
than twenty percent, and the most popular term was chosen by only thirtypercent of potential users.  This observation was extended to the use of
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK315terms for queries in data bases of several kinds, from classified ad listingsto recipe files and program names.The Bellcore researchers built upon these observations by experimen-tally evaluating inventions of their own derived from their results.  For

example, unlimited aliasing (i.e., using every term that a sample of users
apply to an item as an index to that item) led to a hit rate of over 70 percent
in an interactive retrieval task on a small database of 188 recipes, with little
increase in false positives.  The same level of success was achieved with

full text indexing (i.e., every word contained in each item in the database is
part of the index for that item).  Unfortunately, these results do not scale up

to much larger databases because too many irrelevant items (i.e., false posi-
tives) are returned.  Note how these researchers were not misled by optimis-

tic lab results based upon limited tasks.With respect to navigation, the Bellcore experimental studies (Landaueret al., 1993:80) found that people have fundamental problems when using
menus to navigate through electronic databases:Typically menu selection schemes have a branching factor of four to tenoptions; more often than not, users stray from the path to their target by thethird hierarchical level.  Put differently, if there are more than about thirty
items in the data base, the chances of finding the right one in a single
error-free traversal drop below half.They concluded provisionally that (Landauer et al., 1993:82):menu-traversal methods are fundamentally, and probably irremediably flawed
as a primary method for information retrieval.  As conceived by humans,
almost all categories are essentially fuzzy; most items belong only partiallyor with only moderate probability to any one category, and can often fit
reasonably well into several.The Bellcore group also retained a Òrather cautious use of links in theSuperBook systemÓ (Landauer et al., 1993:129).
Thus, as the experiments showed, neither full text indexing nor a dy-namic, hierarchical table of contents is sufficient by itself, but the Bellcore
group thought a combination of the two might help.  Full text indexing

returns a superset of desired items, as they had already found, but the
dynamic table of contents, they reasoned, should provide contexts to help
users narrow this superset of items to those that are relevant to their inten-
tions.  So they built a prototype, and used it themselves (Landauer et al.,

1993:98):We were . . . perfectly delighted with our system design.  We were so
overwhelmed with its obvious superiority to anything we had previouslyseen, and so pleased with our early in-house use that we dubbed it ÒSuper-Book.Ó  We immediately began technology transfer efforts, efforts to make
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.316EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHthis marvelous new tool available to other organizations at Bellcore. . . .Fortunately, [a new group member] reminded us of some of our publicpronouncements about, and past experiences with the necessity of evalua-
tion studies.To judge how well the SuperBook actually aided people, the Bellcoregroup gave college students queries which they had to answer using either a
published statistics book or its electronic clone.Using the first version of the electronic aid (version 0), participantsfound slightly more correct answers with SuperBook than with the original
printed book, but took significantly longer to do so.  So the Bellcore group

made many changes to its electronic aid, most based upon analyses of its
experimental data.  With the next version, participants answered their que-

ries faster and more accurately with SuperBook than with the original printed
book.  Based upon what they learned in this experiment, the Bellcore re-

searchers made more changes to their electronic aid and tested it again.
This third evaluation study found that participants performed even better
with SuperBook.This interdisciplinary effort illustrates many important points.  No one
discipline could have done all the design, implementation, testing, and transfer
efforts.  Human factors researchers, like experts in other disciplines, can be

overenthusiastic about their own inventions when empirical data are absent.
Development of a successful aid usually takes a long time.  The work shows
the potential payoff of interdisciplinary effort directed at a very hard prob-
lem.  The work reflects elements of all three recommended research strate-

gies.The experimental evaluations showed the status of the aid and sug-gested possible improvements.  And the testing still goes on:  Landauer et

al. (1993) have carried out several other experimental evaluations with other
materials and have made SuperBook available to over 40 research labs.Aid for Detecting Drunk DriversHarris (1980) designed and carried out a study to develop an aid to helppolice officers spot drunk drivers.  In the end, Harris provided officers in

patrol cars with a low-tech, effective aidÑa list of driver behaviors thatbest predict which motorists are driving while intoxicated (DWI).  More

important here is the process that led up to his designing, implementing,
and evaluating this aid.  His study is valuable for its methodology, com-

pleteness, impact, clear write-up, and (inexpensive) aid developed to help
police select which drivers to stop.In general, six percent of drivers at night have a blood-alcohol level of0.10 or greater (most states define this as DWI), and another 9 percent haveEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK317a blood-alcohol level between 0.05 and 0.10 (some states define this asÒdriving while impairedÓ).First, Harris studied 1,288 DWI arrests throughout the United States,analyzing the reported driver behaviors associated with each of these ar-
rests.  These driver behaviors could all be observed by police officers mak-

ing the arrests (e.g., swerving, straddling) and could therefore serve as

visual cues to aid in deciding whether or not to stop a potentially drunk
driver.  Harris also rode with officers in two states as they stopped drivers,

and he noted the driving behaviors of those motorists and the conditions
under which they were stopped.  Nearly all of the stopped drivers (93

percent) were given a blood-alcohol test when they were stopped:  38 per-

cent had a blood-alcohol level greater than 0.10 (DWI), and another 23
percent had a blood-alcohol level between 0.05 and 0.10.  (This 61 percent

is already 4 times higher than the 15 percent that could be expected by
chance.)  From these analyses he produced a drunk driver detection guide, a

small card listing several visual cues (e.g., following too closely) and the
percentage of drivers with this behavior who have a blood-alcohol level
greater than .01 (e.g., 60%).  The card was for police to carry with them or

to attach wherever convenient.  Harris then went on to study the value of

this aid by studying 10 law enforcement agencies across the United States.
before and after they used his guide.  He found that DWI arrest rates in-

creased significantly overall (from 66 to 74 percent; p < .Ol) for these 10
agencies.  (No mention is made of false positives
Ñarrests that did not leadto convictions.)  Harris (1980:731) also reported:
Experienced police officers . . . were generally skeptical that . . . the guidewould enhance their own DWI detection ability.  However, most officers
considered the guide to be a valuable aid for increasing patrol awareness of
useful detection cues, training inexperienced patrol officers, preparing DWIarrest reports, and supporting court testimony.Other Approaches The Landauer et al. (1993) studies provide an excellent example of
extending the cognitive findings of oneÕs own group to the design of a realelectronic aid.  Human factors researchers could take the initiative to extend
other existing behavioral and cognitive knowledge to applied domains (a
task much harder than many experimental and cognitive psychologists gen-
erally suppose).  For example, for some years many secretaries and profes-

sionals have used commercially available computer-executable, rule-based
styles to lay out and format their documents, for example, in prespecified
fonts, margins, number of columns, line spacing, headings, and graphics.
Now, if there exists behavioral knowledge of how to design textbooks and
related reading material to enhance learning, human factors people, workingEmerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.318EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHwith computer scientists, could develop a similar rule-based style to lay outdocuments according to this knowledge.  Another example would be to

extend the results on human decision making, described above, to real-
world aids.  The Landauer et al. (1993) studies provide an excellent ex-

ample of extending oneÕs own cognitive findings to the design of a realelectronic aid.Another approach might take existing technology or aids and combinethem in behaviorally innovative ways.  Perhaps the Xerox Star system (Smith
et al., 1982), the highly influential graphic user interface developed at Xerox
Parc in the 1970s, is an example of this.  The developers took existing

hardware (bit-mapped displays, mouse), existing software techniques, be-
havioral knowledge, and cognitive engineering models and integrated them
into something much greater than the sum of the parts.  Many observers

agree that this work influenced subsequent graphic user interfaces made by
other major corporations.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSI thank Liz Gould, Bob Helmreich, Bob Kraut, Tom Landauer, RayNickerson, Lynn Streeter, Jacob Ukelson, and Frank Yates, who provided
helpful written reviews and suggestions to improve this chapter, and several
other committee colleagues for additional suggestions.REFERENCESAttewell, P.A.1994Information technology and the productivity paradox.  Pp. 13-53 in D.H. Harris,
ed., Organizational Linkages:  Understanding the Productivity Paradox
.  Panel on
Organizational Linkages, Committee on Human Factors, National Research Coun-cil.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Bentley, R., J.A. Hughes, D. Randall, T. Rodden, P. Sawyer, D. Shapiro, and I. Sommervile1992Ethnographically-informed systems design for air traffic control.  Pp. 123-129 in
J. Turner and R. Kraut, eds., Proceedings of the Conference on Computer-Sup-ported Cooperative Work.  New York:  ACM Press.
Berlin, L.M., and R. Jeffries1992Consultants and apprentices:  observations about learning and collaborative prob-
lem solving.  Pp. 130-137 in J. Turner and R. Kraut, eds., 
Proceedings of theConference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work.  New York:  ACM Press.
Boehm, B.W.1988Improving software productivity.  
IEEE Computer September:43-56.
Card, S.K., W.K. English, and B. Burr1979The Keystroke-Level Model for User Performance Time With Interactive Systems.Report SSL-79-1.  Palo Alto, Calif.:  Xerox Palo Alto Research Center.
Card, S.K., J.M. Robert, and L.N. Keenan1984On-line composition of text.  Pp. 231-236 in 
Proceedings of InteractÕ84, FirstIFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 1.  London, England:  ElsevierNorth Holland.Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK319Cool, C., R.S. Fish, R.E. Kraut, and C.M. Lowery1992Iterative design of video communication systems.   Pp. 25-32 in J. Turner and R.
Kraut, eds., Proceedings of the Conference on Computer-Supported CooperativeWork.  New York:  ACM Press.
Curtis, B., H. Krasner, and N. Iscoe1988A field study of the software design process for large systems.  
Communications ofthe ACM 31:1268-1287.
Dawes, R.M., D. Faust, and P.E. Meehl1989Clinical versus actuarial judgment.  
Science 243:1668-1673.
Druckman, D., and R.A. Bjork, eds.1991In the MindÕs Eye:  Enhancing Human Performance
.  Committee on Techniques
for the Enhancement of Human Performance, National Research Council.  Wash-

ington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Druckman, D., and J.A. Swets, eds.1988Enhancing Human Performance:  Issues, Theories, and Techniques
.  Committee
on Techniques for the Enhancement of Human Performance, National ResearchCouncil.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy Press.
Drury, C.G., B. Paramore, H.P. Van Cott, S.M. Grey, and E.P. Corlett1987Task analysis.  Pp. 370-401 in G. Salvendy, ed., 
Handbook of Human Factors.New York:  Wiley.
Ferber, M.S., B. OÕFarrell, and L. Allen, eds.1991Work and Family:  Policies for a Changing Work Force
.  Panel on Employer
Policies and Working Families, Committee on WomenÕs Employment and RelatedSocial Issues, National Research Council.  Washington, D.C.:  National Academy

Press.Gould, J.D.1978aAn experimental study of writing, dictating, and speaking.  Pp. 299-319 in J.
Requin, ed., Attention and Performance VII.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.1978bHow experts dictate.  
Journal of Experimental Psychology:  Human Perception
and Performance 4(4):648-661.
1980Experiments on composing letters:  some facts, some myths, and some observa-
tions.  Pp. 97-118 in L. Gregg and E.R. Steinberg, eds., 
Cognitive Processes inWriting.  Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum and Associates.
1982Writing and speaking letters and messages.  
International Journal of Man-Ma-chine Studies 16:147-171.
1988How to design usable systems.  Pp. 757-789 in M. Helander, ed., 
Handbook ofHuman-Computer Interaction.  Amsterdam, Netherlands:  North-Holland,  ElsevierScience Publishers.Gould, J.D., and S.J. Boies1978How authors think about their writing, dictating, and speaking.  
Human Factors20:495-505.1983Human factors challenges in creating a principal support office system:  the speech
filing system approach.  ACM Transactions of Office Information Systems 4(1):273-298.1984Speech filing:  an office system for principals.  
IBM Systems Journal 23:65-81.
Gould, J.D., S.J. Boies, S. Levy, J.T. Richards, and J.W. Schoonard1987The 1984 Olympic Message System:  a test for behavioral principles of system
design.  Communications of the ACM 30(9):758-769.
Harris, D.H.1980Visual detection of driving while intoxicated.  
Human Factors 22(6):725-732.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.320EMERGING NEEDS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR HUMAN FACTORS RESEARCHHelander, M., ed.1988Handbook of Human-Computer Interaction.  Amsterdam, Netherlands: North-Hol-
land,  Elsevier Science Publishers.
Helmreich, R.L., J.A. Wilhelm, S.E. Gregorich, and T.R. Chidester1990Preliminary results from the evaluation of Cockpit Resource Management training:
performance ratings of flightcrews.  Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine61(6):576-579.Jones, T.C.1986Programming Productivity.  New York:  McGraw-Hill.
Kanki, B.G., and M.T. Palmer1993Communication and crew resource management.  In E.L. Wiener, B.G. Kanki, and
R.L. Helmreich, eds., Cockpit Resource Management.  San Diego, Calif.:  Aca-
demic Press.Karat, C.1992Cost-justifying human factors support on software development projects.  
HumanFactors Society Bulletin 35(11):1-4.
Klemmer, E.T., and F.W. Snyder1972Measurement of time spent communicating.  
Journal of Communication 22:148-
158.Kraut, R., S. Dumais, and S. Koch1989Computerization, productivity, and quality of worklife.  
Communications of theACM 32(February):220-237.
Kraut, R.E., and L.A. Streeter1995Coordination in software development.  
Communications of the ACM 38(3):69-81.
Landauer, T., D. Egan, J. Remde, M. Lesk, C. Lochbaum, and D. Ketchum1993Enhancing the usability of text through computer delivery and formative evalua-
tion:  the SuperBook project.  In C.M. McKnight, A. Dillon, and J. Richardson,
eds., Hypertext:  A Psychological Perspective
.  New York:  Horwood.
Lenorovitz, D.R., and M.D. Phillips1987Human factors requirements engineering for air traffic control systems.  Pp. 1724-
1770 in G. Salvendy, ed., Handbook of Human Factors.  New York:  Wiley.
Malone, T.W.1983How do people organize their desks:  implications for designing office automation
systems.  ACM Transactions on Office Automation Systems 1:99-112.
McCauley, C.1991Selection of National Science Foundation Graduate Fellows.  A case study of
psychologists failing to apply what they know about decision making.  AmericanPsychologist December:1287-1291.
Mintzberg, H.1973The Nature of Managerial Work.  New York:  Harper and Row.
Murphy, A.H., and B.G. Brown1984A comparative evaluation of objective and subjective weather forecasts in the
United States.  Journal of Forecasting 3:369-393.
Norman, D.1988The Psychology of Everyday Things.  New York:  Basic Books.
Olson, J.S., G.M. Olson, M. Storrosten, and M. Carter1992How a group-editor changes the character of a design meeting as well as its
outcome.  Pp. 91-98 in J. Turner and R. Kraut, eds., 
Proceedings of the Confer-ence on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work.  New York:  ACM Press.
Emerging Needs and Opportunities for Human Factors ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AIDING INTELLECTUAL WORK321Panko, R.R.1992Managerial communication patterns.  
Journal of Organizational Computing 2(1):95-122.Pool, R.1992Computing in science.  
Science 256(April 3):44-64.
Predmore, S.C.1991Microcoding of communications in accident analyses:  crew coordination in United
811 and United 232.  Pp. 350-355 in 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Sym-posium on Aviation Psychology.  Columbus:  Ohio State University.
Roberts, T.L.1979Evaluation of Computer Text Editors.   Unpublished PhD dissertation.  Computer
Science Department, Stanford University.Smith, D.C., C. Irby, R. Kimball, B. Verplank, and E. Harslem1982Designing the star user interface.  
Byte 7(4):242-282.
Turner, J., and R. Kraut, eds.1992Proceedings of the Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work.  New
York:  ACM Press.
Wiener, E.L., T.R. Chidester, B.G. Kanki, E.A. Palmer, R.E. Curry, and S.E. Gregorich1991The Impact of Cockpit Automation on Crew Coordination and Communication.  I.
Overview, LOFT Evaluations, Error Severity, and Questionnaire Data.  NASA
Contractor Report No. 177587.  Moffett Field, Calif.:  NASA-Ames Research

Center.Woods, D., J.F. OÕBrien, and L.F. Hanes1987Human factors challenges in process control:  the case of nuclear power plants.
Pp. 1724-1770 in G. Salvendi, ed., Handbook of Human Factors.  New York:
Wiley.