DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/4944Revolution in the U.S. Information Infrastructure88 pages | 5.5 x 8.5 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-05287-0 | DOI 10.17226/4944National Academy of EngineeringRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Revolutionin theU.S. InformationInfrastructureNational Academy of EngineeringNATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWashington, D.C.1995
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS  ¥  2101 Constitution Ave., NW  ¥  Washington, DC 20418NOTICE: The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the
federal government.  The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer-
ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research,and recognizes the superior achievement of engineers.  Dr. Robert M. White is presi-

dent of the National Academy of Engineering.This publication has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according toprocedures approved by a National Academy of Engineering report review process.
The interpretations and conclusions expressed in this volume are those of the authorsand are not presented as the views of the council, officers, or staff of the NationalAcademy of Engineering.Library of Congress Catalog Card Number  95-69120
International Standard Book Number  0-309-05287-4
Copyright 1995 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of AmericaRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iiiAlthough terms like Ònational information infrastructureÓ and
Òinformation superhighwayÓ have only recently become part of the
vernacular, societies have always had information infrastructures.
From mail carried by ship and Pony Express, to the telegraph, tele-
phone and wireless, we have developed means and technologies that
permit communication with others who are far from us.  What is so

dramatically different about todayÕs information infrastructure, how-ever, is its power and reach.  Digital technology, optical transmission

of information, and the continuing surge in the microchipÕs data-processing capability have spawned a spreading communications net-

work throughout the world.  These technological developments offer

untold opportunities in fields as diverse as entertainment and indus-
trial management.  The public and private sectors are investing sub-

stantial sums to develop and implement the hard and soft infrastruc-
ture necessary to realize the promise of these advances.Because of the complexity of the myriad undertakings nowunder way, and because the general public understands little of their
implications, the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) decided
to focus its 1994 Annual Meeting Technical Session on the revolu-
tion in the information infrastructure.  The intent of the meeting, held

October 6, 1994, in Washington, D.C., was to obtain the views of a
diverse set of speakers whose current activities and future plans coverPrefaceRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.a broad range of approaches to the subject.  The symposium ad-
dressed three broad questions:¥What technical and economic factors will determine the stan-dards of and marketplace demand for products and services?¥What roles are government and private investment, demon-stration projects, and regulation and regulatory reform likely to play
in the development of the infrastructure during the next decade?¥What are the problems and promises for peopleÕs lives andorganizationsÕ work as video and data communications approach and
surpass the interactivity of telephones?As is reflected in the papers in this volume, the technological andmarket forces that are driving changes in the information infrastruc-
ture are fairly easy to identify.  As is also evident in the papers, given

the rapid evolution and growth in the infrastructure, there is a great
diversity of opinion about how this future will come about.  There is,

however, agreement that rich technological capabilities and abundant
market potentials will enhance the national information infrastruc-
ture and will lead ultimately, in a process already begun, to the real-
ization of a global information infrastructure.In addition to the authors, I would like to thank William R. Wulffor his illuminating and insightful closing remarks at the symposium.
Other individuals who should be noted for their work, either in orga-
nizing the symposium or in getting this volume ready for publication,
are Gerald Dinneen, Bruce Guile, Janet Hunziker, Greg Pearson,
Vivienne Chin, Maribeth Keitz, and Mary Lee.ROBERT M. WHITEPresident
National Academy of EngineeringivPREFACERevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Evolution of Information Infrastructures:The Competitive  Search for Solutions1
John S. MayoThe Role of Government in the Evolution of the Internet13
Robert E. KahnThe Promise of the National Information Infrastructure25
Robert W. StearnsSatellite Communications in the Global Information39
InfrastructureSteven D. DorfmanCurrent Trends and Likely Futures in Wireless Systems53
John E. MajorAntitrust Enforcement and the TelecommunicationsRevolution:  Friends, Not Enemies63
Robert E. LitanContentsvRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Revolutionin theU.S. InformationInfrastructureRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1While reflecting on what might be said about the Òsearch forsolutionsÓ noted in the title of this paper, I recalled the story of the
young executive who was about to leave the office at 6:00 p.m., when
he found the boss standing with a piece of paper in front of the
shredder.ÒThis is very important, and my secretary has left,Ó said the boss.ÒCan you make this thing work?ÓÒCertainly, sir,Ó said the young executive.  He turned on the
machine, inserted the paper, and pressed the start button.ÒExcellent, excellent!Ó said the boss as his paper disappearedinside the machine, ÒI just need the one copy.ÓThe message of this story is that a solution that has worked wellin the past might be totally wrong for the problem at hand.  This

message also applies to the search for information infrastructure so-
lutions.With this in mind, I plan first to examine the driving forces thatare propelling the emerging multimedia revolution and the evolution
of information infrastructures.  Then, I will discuss where these forces

are taking us:  to the National Information Infrastructure (NII) and,

ultimately, to the Global Information Infrastructure (GII).  Finally, I

will briefly examine the consequences of this powerful and pervasive
technological change on those involved in research and development.The Evolution of InformationInfrastructures:  The Competitive
Search for SolutionsJOHN S. MAYORevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2JOHN S. MAYOFORCES DRIVING CHANGES IN THEINFORMATION INFRASTRUCTUREIt is no secret that information technology is the driving forceand the key enabler of the emerging multimedia revolution and the
evolution of the NII, as well as a host of other advances that together
are changing the way we live, work, play, travel, and communicate.
We have seen technological capability double every year in certain
fields, such as computing and photonics, and double every 18 months
in microelectronics.  Even software, once a 
ÒbottleneckÓ technology,
is beginning to advance rapidly in major areas like telecommunica-
tions, thanks to object-oriented programming and reuse of previously
developed software modules.MicroelectronicsIn microelectronics, we have witnessed the exponential growthof the familiar Moore Curve as the number of components per chip
moves steadily toward known physical limits.  In the early part of the

next century, familiar Òbulk effectÓ solid-state devices may mature
with transistors that measure about 400 atoms by 400 atoms eachÑthe smallest such transistor likely to operate reliably at room tem-
perature.  The new frontier then will not involve making the devices

smaller, but in creatively and economically using the vast increase in
complexity and power made possible by this remarkable technology.The amazing progress of microelectronics represents a micro-cosm of the broad thrust of information technology and the other key
driving forces made possible by information technology
Ñall the mostvital forces that are leading to the multimedia revolution and the
evolution of the NII.  Let me examine the progress and impact of

these related forces.After the invention of the integrated circuit, every time the com-plexity of silicon chips increased by a factor of a thousand, some-
thing had to be re-engineered.  The first re-engineering that was done,

as we headed toward that first thousandfold increase, was to change
all of our design processes, which had been based on discrete compo-
nents.When we reached 1,000 components per chip, we used the newdigital circuitry to re-engineer our products from analog to digital, asRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURES3did many other industries.  Let me stress that this early progress
toward digital products, enabled by microelectronics and software,
has brought about the digitalization of most systems and services
domestically and, more and more, internationally.  Digitalization is a

powerful force driving us toward multimedia communications and
the NII.About a decade ago, it became possible to make chips approach-ing 1 million components, and this brought us powerful microcom-
puters, along with all the peripherals related to microcomputers and
the necessary software systems.  This led, in turn, to an explosion of

advanced telecommunications services that forced AT&T to re-engi-
neer itself from a company that provided largely voice and data-on-
voice telecommunications services to one focused on universal infor-
mation services, or the provision of voice, data, and images anywhere,
anytime, with convenience and economy.  Providing advanced ser-

vices on an increasingly intelligent global network was the beginning
of multimedia communications, which has now become the revolu-
tion of the 1990s and beyond.We are currently experiencing another thousandfold increase incomponents per chip.  Re-engineering has now extended beyond our
company and is leading to the merging of communications, comput-
ers, consumer electronics, and entertainment.  The convergence of these

four industries is being accomplished through joint projects, joint
ventures, mergers, acquisitions, and some start-up companies.  This

industrial re-engineering appears to be the next-to-last stage of the
information revolution brought on by the invention of the transistor.The last stage, and one that may go on forever, is the re-engi-neering of societyÑof how we live, work, play, travel, and commu-nicate.  Education will change with distance learning and home

schooling; virtual offices and working at home will transform our
work lives; routine tasks such as visiting and shopping more and
more will be done from home.  Let me add, however, that many of

these changes will be generational; social change, as well as technol-
ogy, is needed to make them happen.Speech ProcessingThe trend toward increasingly powerful silicon chips is enablingexponential increases in the processing power of fixed-point digitalRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4JOHN S. MAYOsignal processors.  This trend makes it possible to use much less
processing power to process a specific speech-recognition or speech-
synthesis algorithm.  Today, for example, a single chip can recognize

a 100-word vocabulary, a function that would have required 20 to 30
chips 5 years ago.Based on these advances, we can project that speaker-indepen-dent automatic speech recognition and synthesis will become com-
monplace.  These technologies will mature in a variety of service

capabilities based on the ability of intelligent machines to talk and
listen much as people do.  In addition, speech in one language will be

automatically translated into a second language, which might then be
synthesized with the voice characteristics of the original speaker.
Virtually unrestricted recognition vocabulary will permit natural lan-
guage interactionÑwith humans, machines, and databases.Automatic speech recognition is vital to the multimedia revolu-tion not because it replaces human operators, but because it is a
powerful technology for making multimedia systems easy to use.
Ease of use is an imperative for broad marketplace success.Image ProcessingThe emerging technology of image processing is related in manyrespects to speech processing and is another driving force toward
multimedia communications and the evolution of our information
infrastructure.  The same key information technologies that are en-

abling progress in speech processing are also fueling rapid progress
in image processing, especially in the important areas of image and
video compression.Consider video compression.  At the network capacity of two
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) Basic Rate Interface
channels, or 128 kilobits per second, we can have video that is com-
pressed using the so-called p X 64 international standard for video-
telephony, for person-to-person communications.  This standard was
designed for sending videotelephony over phone lines in multiples of
64 kilobits per second.  At this capacity, we have the ISDN video-

phone, which is likely to be a highly attractive product as long as
copper wires make up the local telephone plant.  At the network

capacity of 1.5 megabits per second, we can have high-quality desk-
top video compressed with the maximum level of the pX 64 stan-
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURES5dard.  This network capacity can support National Television System
Committee (NTSC) color television with VHS quality, using the
Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) standards, which are de-
signed for capturing moving images on CD-ROM and for storing and
transmitting movies and broadcast television.  However, with avail-

able compression technology, a capacity of 1.5 megabits per second
would not deliver broadcast quality for scenes with rapid motion and
detail.The network capacity of 45 megabits per second will readilysupport high-definition TV (HDTV) compressed to about 20 mega-
bits per second, using variations of the MPEG-2 coding algorithm.
That is a considerable reduction (about 50:1 compression) from the
roughly 1 billion bits per second required for uncompressed HDTV.
That same network capacity will also support near studio-quality
video (HDTV or NTSC) that has been compressed by using varia-
tions of the identical coding algorithm.Common StandardsAnother force driving the progress of multimedia communica-tions and the evolution of the information infrastructure is the world-
wide push toward common standards that will encourage global net-
working.  Photonic transmission facilities, for example, will be based

on the evolving international standard called SDH, for Synchronous
Digital Hierarchy.  Because SDH defines standard network inter-

faces, service providers and end users will be able to use equipment
from many different vendors without worrying about compatibility.
SDH will provide efficient transport of broadband services and will
simplify networks.  Similar standards in domestic networks will al-

low digital communications into the workplace and home, and they
will make possible services dependent on high rates of data transmis-
sion.Broadband Integrated Services Digital Network (B-ISDN) is anew digital format as well as an international standard that supports
multiple services, such as voice, data, and new video services, using
fiber-optic transmission facilities.  B-ISDN is currently defined at

interface rates of 155 megabits per second and 622 megabits per
second.  Based on the fast-packet technology of asynchronous trans-

fer mode (ATM), B-ISDN could herald an exciting new era in globalRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6JOHN S. MAYOcommunications networking, as equipment vendors and service pro-viders adopt compatible standards to provide sophisticated high-band-
width services.Market DemandThe demands of the marketplace, more than technology, set thepace for the multimedia and infrastructure revolution.  For the greater

part of this century, the customer willingly accepted whatever tech-
nological capabilities we were able to achieve.  Thus, the telecommu-

nications industry was supplier driven, and the suppliers managed the
evolution of the industry and the NII.  However, the technology

became so rich that it made possible many more products and ser-
vices than the user could accept or was willing to pay for.  That

marked the transition from a supplier-driven industry to todayÕs cus-tomer-driven industryÑfrom supplier push to marketplace pull.Competition The global transfer and assimilation of information technology,along with political and regulatory forces, such as the move to priva-
tize telecommunications around the world, are leading to strong in-
ternational competition in providing communications products and
services.  Such pervasive competition is another powerful force driv-

ing the evolution of both multimedia communications and informa-
tion infrastructures.  The public policy challenge is to provide a frame-

work in which that evolution may occur.THE MULTIMEDIA REVOLUTIONLet us look a bit deeper into these subjects, starting with themultimedia revolution.  After all, the pursuit of multimedia is creat-

ing social pressures on the NII and the information superhighways.
So, what is ÒmultimediaÓ?  A reasonable working definition is that
the term multimedia refers to information that combines more than
one medium, including speech, music, text, data, graphics, fax, im-
age, video, and animation.  At AT&T, we tend to focus on multime-

dia products and services that are networked, or connected over a
communications and information network.  Examples of this range
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURES7from videotelephony and videoconferencing; to real-time video ondemand, interactive video, and multimedia messaging; to remote
collaborative work, interactive information services such as elec-
tronic shopping, and multimedia education and training.  Eventually,

we will have virtual reality, which will enable people to experience a
place or an event indirectly and remotelyÑand do so in all dimen-sions.We are excited about multimedia because public switched net-works, or information infrastructures, can currently accommodate a
wide array of networked multimedia communications. Given the di-
rections in which those networks are evolving, they will be able to
handle an increasingly vast range of such communications.  More-

over, a potentially enormous market is out there for multimedia hard-
ware and supporting software.  Although estimates differ widely, the

most commonly quoted projection for the total worldwide market for
multimedia products and services is roughly $100 billion by the year
2000.AT&T is playing a major part in facilitating the emerging multi-media revolution:  We provide services, network products to local

service providers, and products to end users.  These are familiar roles

for AT&T, so let me briefly describe another perhaps less well known
aspect of the multimedia revolution that we are studying.  That role is

as the host for a wide variety of digital content and multimedia appli-
cations developed by others.  Hosting is a function that connects end
users to the content they seek.  Customers will gain easy and timely

access to personal communications, transactions, information ser-
vices, and entertainment via wired and wireless connections to tele-
phones, handheld devices, computers, and, eventually, television sets.
Sources for this digital content will range from publishers and large
movie studios to small software houses.Global standards and open critical interfaces are vital to thiscomplex hosting function.  The entertainment industry, for example,

must have software systems that are compatible with those of the
hosting industry.  These software systems must, in turn, be compat-

ible with those of the communications and information-networking
industry, which must be compatible with customer premises equip-
ment and systems. In the age of multimedia communications, consumers who are
geographically separated from each other will do more than just playRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8JOHN S. MAYOgames together over networks.  According to the AT&T vision,
people will increasingly seek new relationships based on Òtele-presenceÓÑa new type of community and social experience indepen-dent of geography.  This potential for interactive networks is quite

unlike what will result from the 500 preprogrammed cable TV chan-
nels proposed for the United States.  The beauty of interactive net-

works is that consumers will have the freedom to choose any subject
or service from the intelligent terminals in their homes.  And they

will be able to network clusters of friends or associates to enjoy such
services as a group.Although I have focused heavily on the impact that multimediawill have on the consumer, networked multimedia communications
will dramatically change the nature of work and will therefore have a
broad effect on business.  Videoconferencing, for example, can en-

hance productivity, save time, and reduce travel.  Moreover, current

developments in multimedia telephony are making realistic the possi-
bility of remote collaboration.  In a few years, a person could be

working in real time with colleagues in New York, Washington,
Hong Kong, Paris, and Sydney.  They could, for example, accom-

plish the task of producing printed materials, presentation slides, and
a videotape introducing a new product line.EVOLUTION OF THE NII The quest for multimedia is driving social issues that relate to
the NII and the information superhighway.  The NII might be viewed

as the superhighway plus all the terminals and databases connected
to it.What is AT&TÕs vision of the NII?  It is to bring people together,
giving them easy access to each other and to the information and
services they want and need, any time, anywhere.  In AT&T
Õs view,the NII is a seamless web of communications and information net-
works, computers, databases, and consumer electronics, which will
put huge quantities of information at the fingertips of a variety of
users.  Quite simply, we see the communications component of the

NII as a vast interoperable network of local, long-distance, and glo-
bal networks; wireless; broadcast and cable; and satellites.  In addi-

tion, the NII encompasses the Internet as well as the test beds associ-
ated with the High-Performance Computing Initiative, such as theRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURES9Blanca test bed with which AT&T is affiliated.  However, the NII is
not a uniform end-to-end network developed and operated by gov-
ernment or any one company.  It is the totality of networks in our

nation, interconnected domestically and internationally.These networks consist of a wide variety of technologies thatprovide a complete range of features and transport speeds.  In the

United States, competitive backbone information superhighways of
optical fibers are already in place and expanding rapidly.  However,

access to the backbone is still largely via copper wire pairs, espe-
cially for homes, schools, and small businesses.  Many consumers

and small firms will be able to get substantial value from the NII
using recent technological advances, such as ISDN.  Genuine and

effective competition in the local exchange is a long-term possibility
and is the key to advancing the deployment of needed digital and
higher-bandwidth access services.  We also believe that the coaxial

cables of the CATV networks can become important elements of the
nationÕs broadband superhighways. One key to making this network of networks a true global infor-
mation superhighway for multimedia and other communications is a
system of open, user-friendly interfaces and global standards.  Such a

system both promotes maximum interoperability and connectivity
and supports a multivendor environment that allows maximum cus-
tomer choice of equipment and services.To ensure that people can use whatever NII capabilities theyneed when they need them, a range of bandwidth offerings should be
made available.Several policy issues are associated with the NII:(1)The government should help provide the vision for the way
the NII will evolve and operate.  Private industry should build, own,

and operate the NII under competitive conditions.(2)The government should provide incentives and opportuni-
ties, such as tax credits for investment in equipment, R&D, or worker
training, to encourage the private sector to invest in and deploy new
information technology.  The government should continue to focus

its direct support on precompetitive projects or applications that dem-
onstrate and test new NII technologies.(3)In order to realize the broad benefits of the multimedia revo-
lution and the NII, there must be full and fair competition in allRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10JOHN S. MAYOsectors of our communications and information industry, both do-mestically and internationally.(4)Private industry must continue to play the lead role in work-
ing to define the interoperability standards of the NII.  The govern-

ment must continue to work with and represent industry in some
international treaty organizations that develop standards.  Jointly, we

need to speed up the standards-setting process.(5)Perhaps the broadest policy challenge is that of facilitating
public acceptance of and comfort with the benefits of multimedia
communications and the NII.  This will require setting ground rules

to protect electronically available intellectual property, creating a
framework to ensure privacy and security of information, and estab-
lishing mechanisms to make these benefits available to the largest
number of users.  This last point is vital if we are to avoid having a

nation of information ÒhavesÓ and 
Òhave nots.Ó  The challenge, sim-
ply put, is to develop a new definition of universal service.Fortunately, most of the key issues and challenges surroundingmultimedia and the NII are already being addressed by cooperative
government and private-sector efforts.  Much more remains to be

done.  The ultimate resolution of these issues will require the support

of all of us.IMPACT ON R&DAt the beginning of this paper, I noted that a solution that hasworked well in the past might be totally wrong for the problem at
hand.  This applies broadly to R&D and R&D environments.  The

forces behind the emerging multimedia revolution and the evolution
of information infrastructures, along with the benefits associated with
the information age, are also bringing about a new paradigm for
R&D and a new R&D environment.The traditional R&D approach of past decades was to use proto-typing and redesign:  to do, then learn, and then redo as often as

necessary to produce a good product, and to do so through serial
handoffs from one function to another.  Today, that approach is not

competitive because of the increasingly complex and rapid advances
of information technology, multimedia communications, and infor-
mation infrastructures.  The marketplace demands more and cheaperRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURES11products and services with ever-shorter delivery intervals.  In addi-
tion, an increasing demand exists for the customization of products to
ever-smaller buying units.Thus, in contrast to the traditional R&D approach, we must pur-sue concurrent engineering, together with the important integration
function of deciding and planning precisely what to do before we
build anything.  Instead of talking to the customer after we complete
a project, we do so before starting, because the customer is really in
control.  The vital integration function, which helps ensure that the

product or service works the first time, is becoming an ever-larger
piece of the R&D effort.Functionally structured R&D has yielded to customer-focused,multifunctional teams.  This shift has helped generate a new R&D

paradigm and a new R&D environment with very different processes
and demands on people.  Let me illustrate with the typical challenge

of trying to pursue a number of R&D projects at once.  Within today
Õslean, cost-effective R&D organizations, there are usually many more
projects than there are expert staff.  Therefore, dedicating these ex-

perts to specific projects would result in poor overall project perfor-
mance.  Instead, support systems must facilitate the training and shar-

ing of expertise, most often through well-orchestrated multifunctional
teams and new techniques for learning, including a strong focus on
intergroup learning.Another key element of the new R&D paradigm and its associ-ated environment is a focus on reusable assets, such as previously
designed and tested software modules and hardware platforms.  Re-

usable assets facilitate the creation of products and services from
higher-level elements.  They enable organizations to share key skills

across projects and create world-class experts, while also developing
rapid and cost-effective solutions, customizations, and competitive
advantage.  Reusable assets are the most powerful mechanism we

have today for improving R&D productivity.  Proper use of such

assets can make possible perhaps as much as a tenfold improvement
in design productivity.  The reusable-asset concept also extends to

families of reusable processes, which unify architectures and facili-
tate efficient realization of products and services.Structuring R&D around reusable assets produces an environ-ment in which research is more important than ever.  A major part of

doing good research is finding good problems on which to work.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12JOHN S. MAYOBell Labs has never had to look far; every day we face many realproblems for which we do not have good solutions.  Moreover, re-

search results are themselves reusable assets; they help reduce the
development effort and shorten the development interval.  The new

R&D approach also yields lower costs and higher quality.The new R&D paradigm and R&D environment cannot by them-selves fulfill the demands of the new marketplace paradigm of growth
through new corporate structures, new customers, and new competi-
tors.  R&D, however, must play the important role of identifying the
new opportunities and parameters that a corporation must pursue
with its total resources.SUMMARYRich information technology, the worldwide push toward globalstandards, ever-increasing customer demands, and growing interna-
tional competition are key forces behind the emerging multimedia
revolution and the evolution of national information infrastructures.
The growth of multimedia communications and the further competi-
tive evolution of our National Information Infrastructure, as well as
the Global Information Infrastructure, raise some difficult issues and
challenges, but these advances promise a broad range of information-
age benefits to virtually every citizen of our nation.Already, we find that yesterdayÕs R&D solutions are no longeradequate for the revolution at hand.  A new R&D paradigm for a new

R&D environment is developing rapidly.  And each and every one of

us, especially those in R&D, must understand and assimilate this new
paradigm.  We must ensure that it both serves society well and cre-

ates an environment in which the best minds of the world seek ca-
reers in science and engineering.  Long-term progress depends on it,

and it can be done.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13This paper discusses the role of government in the continuingevolution of the Internet.  From its origins as a U.S. government

research project, the Internet has grown to become a major compo-
nent of network infrastructure, linking millions of machines and tens
of millions of users around the world.  Although many nations are

now involved with the Internet in one way or another, this paper
focuses on the primary role the U.S. government has played in the
InternetÕs evolution and discusses the role that governments around
the world may have to play as it continues to develop.Very little of the current Internet is owned, operated, or evencontrolled by governmental bodies.  The Internet indirectly receives

government support through federally funded academic facilities that
provide some network-related services.  Increasingly, however, the

provision of Internet communication services, regardless of use, is
being handled by commercial firms on a profit-making basis.This situation raises the question of the proper long-term role forgovernment in the continued evolution of the Internet.  Is the Internet

now in a form where government involvement should cease entirely,
leaving private-sector interests to determine its future?  Or, does
The Role of Government in theEvolution of the InternetROBERT E. KAHNA version of this paper appeared in the August 1994 issue of Communications ofthe ACM.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14ROBERT E. KAHNgovernment still have an important role to play?  This paper con-
cludes that government can still make a series of important contribu-
tions.  Indeed, there are a few areas in which government involve-

ment will be vital to the long-term well-being of the Internet.ORIGINS OF THE INTERNETThe Internet originated in the early 1970s as part of an AdvancedResearch Projects Agency (ARPA) research project on Òinternet-working.Ó  At that time, ARPA demonstrated the viability of packet
switching for computer-to-computer communication in its flagship
network, the ARPANET, which linked several dozen sites and per-
haps twice that number of computers into a national network for
computer science research.  Extensions of the packet-switching con-

cept to satellite networks and to ground-based mobile radio networks
were also under development by ARPA, and segments of industry
(notably not the traditional telecommunications sector) were show-
ing great interest in providing commercial packet network services.
It seemed likely that at least three or four distinct computer networks
would exist by the mid-1970s and that the ability to communicate
among these networks would be highly desirable if not essential.In a well-known joint effort that took place around 1973, RobertKahn, then at ARPA, and Vinton Cerf, then at Stanford, collaborated
on the design of an internetwork architecture that would allow packet
networks of different kinds to interconnect and machines to commu-
nicate across the set of interconnected networks.  The internetwork

architecture was based on a protocol that came to be known as TCP/
IP.  The period from 1974 to 1978 saw four successively refined

versions of the protocol implemented and tested by ARPA research
contractors in academia and industry, with version number four even-
tually becoming standardized.  The TCP/IP protocol was used ini-

tially to connect the ARPANET, based on 50 kilobits per second
(kbps) terrestrial lines; the Packet Radio Net (PRNET), based on dual
rate 400/100 kbps spread spectrum radios; and the Packet Satellite
Net (SATNET), based on a 64 kbps shared channel on Intelsat IV.
The initial satellite Earth stations were in the United States and the
United Kingdom, but subsequently additional Earth stations were
activated in Norway, Germany, and Italy.  Several experimental

PRNETs were connected, including one in the San Francisco BayRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET15area.  At the time, no personal computers, workstations, or local area
networks were available commercially, and the machines involved
were mainly large-scale scientific time-sharing systems.  Remote

access to time-sharing systems was made available by terminal ac-
cess servers.The technical tasks involved in constructing this initial ARPAInternet revolved mainly around the configuration of Ògateways,Ónow known as routers, to connect different networks, as well as the
development of TCP/IP software in the computers.  These were both
engineering-intensive tasks that took considerable expertise to ac-
complish.  By the mid-1980s, industry began offering commercial

gateways and routers and started to make available TCP/IP software
for some workstations, minicomputers, and mainframes.  Before this,

these capabilities were unavailable; they had to be handcrafted by the
engineers at each site.In 1979, ARPA established a small Internet Configuration Con-trol Board (ICCB), most of whose members belonged to the research
community, to help with this process and to work with ARPA in
evolving the Internet design.  The establishment of the ICCB was

important because it brought a wider segment of the research com-
munity into the Internet decision-making process, which until then
had been the almost-exclusive bailiwick of ARPA.  Initially, the

ICCB was chaired by a representative of ARPA and met several
times a year. As interest in the ARPA Internet grew, so did interest in
the work of the ICCB.During this early period, the U.S. government, mainly ARPA,funded research and development work on networks and supported
the various networks in the ARPA Internet by leasing and buying
components and contracting out the systemÕs day-to-day operationalmanagement.  The government also maintained responsibility for

overall policy.  In the mid- to late 1970s, experimental local area

networks and experimental workstations, which had been developed
in the research community, were connected to the Internet according
to the level of engineering expertise at each site.  In the early 1980s,

Internet-compatible commercial workstations and local area networks
became available, significantly easing the task of getting connected
to the Internet.The U.S. government also awarded contracts for the support ofvarious aspects of Internet infrastructure, including the maintenanceRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16ROBERT E. KAHNof lists of hosts and their addresses on the network.  Other govern-
ment-funded groups monitored and maintained the key gateways be-
tween the Internet networks in addition to supporting the networks
themselves.  In 1980, the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) adopted

the TCP/IP protocol as a standard and began to use it.  By the early

1980s, it was clear that the internetwork architecture that ARPA had
created was a viable technology for wider use in defense.EMERGENCE OF THE OPERATIONAL INTERNETThe DOD had become convinced that if its use of network-ing were to grow, it needed to split the ARPA Internet (called

ARPANET) in two.  One of the resulting networks, to be known as

MILNET, would be used for military purposes and mainly link mili-
tary sites in the United States.  The remaining portion of the network

would continue to bear the name ARPANET and still be used for
research purposes.  Since both would use the TCP/IP protocol, com-

puters on the MILNET would still be able to talk to computers on the
new ARPANET, but the MILNET network nodes would be located
at protected sites.  If problems developed on the ARPANET, the

MILNET could be disconnected quickly from it by unplugging the
small number of gateways that connected them.  In fact, these gate-

ways were designed to limit the interactions between the two net-
works to the exchange of electronic mail, a further safety feature.By the early 1980s, the ARPA Internet was known simply as theInternet, and the number of connections to it continued to grow.
Recognizing the importance of networking to the larger computer
science community, the National Science Foundation (NSF) began
supporting CSNET, which connected a select group of computer
science researchers to the emerging Internet.  This allowed new re-

search sites to be placed on the ARPANET at NSFÕs expense, and itallowed other new research sites to be connected via a commercial
network, TELENET, which would be gatewayed to the ARPANET.
CSNET also provided the capacity to support dial-up e-mail connec-
tions.  In addition, access to the ARPANET was informally extended

to researchers at numerous sites, thus helping to further spread the
networking technology within the scientific community.  Also during

this period, other federal agencies with computer-oriented research
programs, notably the Department of Energy (DOE) and the NationalRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET17Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), created their ownÒcommunity networks.ÓThe TCP/IP protocol adopted by DOD a few years earlier wasonly one of many such standards.  Although it was the only one that

dealt explicitly with internetworking of packet networks, its use was
not yet mandated on the ARPANET.  However, on January 1, 1983,

TCP/IP became the standard for the ARPANET, replacing the older
host protocol known as NCP.  This step was in preparation for the

ARPANET-MILNET split, which was to occur about a year later.
Mandating the use of TCP/IP on the ARPANET encouraged the addi-
tion of local area networks and also accelerated the growth in num-
bers of users and networks.  At the same time, it led to a rethinking of

the process that ARPA was using to manage the evolution of the
network.In 1983, ARPA replaced the ICCB with the Internet ActivitiesBoard (IAB).  The IAB was constituted similarly to the old ICCB, but

the many issues of network evolution were delegated to 10 task forces
chartered by and reporting to the IAB.  The IAB was charged with

assisting ARPA to meet its Internet-related R&D objectives; the chair
of the IAB was selected from the research community supported by
ARPA.  ARPA also began to delegate to the IAB the responsibility

for conducting the standards-setting process.Following the CSNET effort, NSF and ARPA worked togetherto expand the number of users on the ARPANET, but they were
constrained by the limitations that DOD placed on the use of the
network.  By the mid-1980s, however, network connectivity had be-

come sufficiently central to the workings of the computer science
community that NSF became interested in broadening the use of
networking to other scientific disciplines.  The NSF supercomputer

centers program represented a major stimulus to broader use of net-
works by providing limited access to the centers via the ARPANET.
At about the same time, ARPA decided to phase out its network
research program, only to reconsider this decision about a year later
when the seeds for the subsequent high-performance computer initia-
tive were planted by the Reagan administration and then-Sen. Albert
Gore (D-Tenn.).  In this period, NSF formulated a strategy to assume

responsibility for the areas of leadership that ARPA had formerly
held and planned to field an advanced network called NSFNET.
NSFNET was to join the NSF supercomputer centers with very highRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18ROBERT E. KAHNspeed links, then 1.5 megabits per second (mbps), and to providemembers of the U.S. academic community access to the NSF super-
computer centers and to one another.1Under a cooperative agreement between NSF and Merit, Inc., theNSFNET backbone was put into operation in 1988 and, because of its
higher speed, soon replaced the ARPANET as the backbone of choice.
In 1990, ARPA decommissioned the last node of the ARPANET.  It

was replaced by the NSFNET backbone and a series of regional
networks most of which were funded by or at least started with funds
from the U.S. government and were expected to become self-sup-
porting soon thereafter.  The NSF effort greatly expanded the in-

volvement of many other groups in providing as well as using net-
work services.  This expansion followed as a direct result of the

planning for the High Performance Computing Initiative (HPCI),
which was being formed at the highest levels of government.  DOD

still retained the responsibility for control of the Internet name and
address space, although it continued to contract out the operational
aspects of the system.The DOE and NASA both rely heavily on networking capabilityto support their missions.  In the early 1980s, they built High Energy

Physics Net (HEPNET) and Space Physics Analysis Net (SPAN),
both based on Digital Equipment CorporationÕs DECNET protocols.Later, DOE and NASA developed the Energy Sciences Net (ESNET)
and the NASA Science Internet (NSI), respectively; these networks
supported both TCP/IP and DECNET services.  These initiatives

were early influences on the development of the multiprotocol net-
working technology that was subsequently adopted in the Internet.International networking activity was also expanding in the earlyand mid-1980s.  Starting with a number of networks based on the

X.25 standard as well as international links to ARPANET, DECNET,
and SPAN, the networks began to incorporate open internetworking
protocols.  Initially, Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) protocols

were used most frequently.  Later, the same forces that drove the

United States to use TCP/IPÑavailability in commercial worksta-tions and local area networksÑcaused the use of TCP/IP to growinternationally.1For a brief period in the mid-1980s, there was a small initial NSFNET that linkedthe supercomputer centers with 64 kbps lines.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET19The number of task forces under the IAB continued to grow, andin 1989, the IAB consolidated them into two groups:  the Internet

Engineering Task Force (IETF) and the Internet Research Task Force
(IRTF).  The IETF, which had been formed as one of the original 10

IAB Task Forces, was given responsibility for near-term Internet
developments and for generating options for the IAB to consider as
Internet standards.  The IRTF remained much smaller than the IETF

and focused more on longer-range research issues.  The IAB struc-

ture, with its task-force mechanism, opened up the possibility of
getting broader involvement from the private sector without the need
for government to pay directly for their participation.  The federal

role continued to be limited to oversight control of the Internet name
and address space, the support of IETF meetings, and sponsorship of
many of the research participants.  By the end of the 1980s, IETF

began charging a nominal attendance fee to cover the costs of its
meetings.The opening of the Internet to commercial usage was a signifi-cant development in the late 1980s.  As a first step, commercial e-

mail providers were allowed to use the NSFNET backbone to com-
municate with authorized users of the NSFNET and other federal
research networks.  Regional networks, initially established to serve

the academic community, had in their efforts to become self-suffi-
cient taken on nonacademic customers as an additional revenue
source.  NSF
Õs Acceptable Use Policy, which restricted backboneusage to traffic within and for the support of the academic commu-
nity, together with the growing number of nonacademic Internet us-
ers, led to the formation of two privately funded and competing
Internet carriers, both spin-offs of U.S. government programs.  They
were UUNET Technologies, a product of a DOD-funded seismic
research facility, and Performance Systems International (PSI), which
was formed by a subset of the officers and directors of NYSERNET,
the NSF-sponsored regional network in New York and the lower
New England states.Beginning in 1990, Internet use was growing by more than 10percent a month.  This expansion was fueled significantly by the

enormous growth on the NSFNET and included a major commercial
and international component.  NSF helped to stimulate this growth by

funding both incremental and fundamental improvements in Internet
routing technology as well as by encouraging the widespread distri-Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20ROBERT E. KAHNbution of network software from its supercomputer centers.  Inter-
connections between commercial and other networks are arranged in
a variety of ways, including through the use of the Commercial
Internet Exchange (CIX), which was established, in part, to facilitate
packet exchanges among commercial service providers.Recently, the NSF decided that additional funding for theNSFNET backbone no longer was required.  The agency embarked

on a plan to make the NSF regional networks self supporting over a
period of several years.  To assure the scientific research community
of continued network access, NSF made competitively chosen awards
to several parties to provide network access points (NAPs) in four
cities.  NSF also selected MCI to provide a very high speed backbone

service, initially at 155 mbps, linking the NAPs and several other
sites, and a routing arbiter to oversee certain aspects of traffic alloca-
tion in this new architecture.The Internet Society was formed in 1992 by the private sector tohelp promote the evolution of the Internet, including maintenance of
the Internet standards process.  In 1992, the IAB was reconstituted as

the Internet Architecture Board, which became part of the Internet
Society.  It delegated its decision-making responsibility on Internet

standards to the leadership of the IETF, known as the Internet Engi-
neering Steering Group (IESG).  While not a part of the Internet

Society, the IETF produces technical specifications as possible can-
didates for future protocols.  The Internet Society now maintains the

Internet Standards Process, and the work of the IETF is carried out
under its auspices.ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATIONAs the Internet continues to grow, the role of the research com-munity in developing and evolving standards needs to be addressed.
When the financial implications of decisions about Internet standards
were relatively small, the current standards process proved entirely
satisfactory.  As the financial impact of such decisions becomes in-

creasingly significant, the nature of the standards-setting process will
continue to change to allow more direct industrial involvement.  How

this will ultimately play out is unclear.  However, the vitality of the

current process derives from the broad involvement of the many
communities that have a stake in the Internet.  Unlike typical top-
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET21down standards-setting operations that implement decisions formedby consensus, the Internet process works essentially in reverse
through a kind of grass-roots mechanism.  Candidates for Internet

standards ordinarily result from actual implementation and wide-
spread experimentation within the IETF.  The most promising of

these candidates are selected for placement on the Internet standards
track.  No better process has yet emerged that is as dynamic and

allows as much direct involvement by industry.Further, with the widespread internationalization of the Internet,scores of countries now have fundamental interests in its evolution.
Within the United States, the Internet is seen in many quarters as the
starting point for the National Information Infrastructure (NII).
Around the world, there is growing recognition that the set of NIIs
(assuming each country commits to developing one) should be com-
patible with each other along some still-unknown dimensions.  Who

should take the lead in ensuring this compatibility?  Is this a role for

the private sector, for governments acting together, or for some com-
bination of the two?  There is clearly a role for government, at least to

provide oversight, support, and guidance, if not to participate actively.Apart from these issues is concern about the viability of anyapproach that has no individual or organization with overall responsi-
bility for its evolution.  It seems fair to say that many of the tradi-

tional Internet carriers would prefer that new capabilities be provided
by them as a turnkey service.  Industry surely has the capacity to

provide many of the necessary capabilities, but history has shown the
importance of government involvement.  What guarantees that the

same degree of vitality will be part of its future evolution if market
forces alone determine what new capabilities are added to the Inter-
net?  Furthermore, the Internet offers the possibility of bypassing

conventional service offerings by regulated carriers.  This may both

make it extremely difficult for the regulated carriers to compete ef-
fectively in certain areas and make it hard for government regula-
tors to ignore the Internet.Finally, the carriers can only go so far in providing Internetservices.  Ultimately, the communication pathways must enter the

userÕs machine, pass through layers of software and end up in appli-cations programs.  The computer industry, along with the many ven-
dors of computer-related equipment, must play a role in determining
how this aspect of the Internet will evolve.  The nature of technologi-
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22ROBERT E. KAHNcal innovation almost guarantees that many new technological op-tions will continue to be generated from many different sources and
make their appearance throughout the Internet.  Thus, it appears that

no single entity can possibly be in charge of the Internet.  A key to the

success of the Internet is to insure that the interested parties have a
fair and equitable way of participating in its evolution, including
participation in its also-evolving standards process.  A proper role for

governments would be to oversee this process to make sure that it
remains fair and meets the wide spectrum of public needs.An international infrastructure like the Internet will ultimatelyrequire countries to set policy on many of the details that are now
taken for granted.  For example, Internet names and addresses may

take on additional legal meanings in the various countries as they rely
on the Internet to a greater degree.  Trademark of Internet names and

addresses is only one aspect of concern.  Contracts of all sorts may

have Internet names and addresses embedded within them.  How can

the countries have confidence in the use of such names and addresses
for legal purposes without necessarily assuming responsibility for the
day-to-day operation of this aspect of the system?  Computer viruses

know no national boundaries.  If a major 
ÒinfectionÓ should strike
multiple countries, how will those countries work together to respond
to such a situation?  Finally, the ability to conduct network-based

business between countries will require the resolution of many legal
issues, including the formalization of legal contracts online and the
ability to deal with associated customs and trade-related matters.  At

its core, the issue of online legal contracts seems to require the use of
encryption technology, which has been perhaps the most closely held
of all the network-oriented technologies.  How can this kind of capa-

bility be made available in the international arena in ways that are
acceptable to national authorities?  More generally, how can issues

like those described above, which are likely to arise in the future, be
effectively discussed and resolved?Various subsets of these kinds of problems have arisen in thecontext of other international public networks, including for tele-
phones, and are thus neither unique nor entirely new.  As the Internet

continues to grow, many of the approaches developed for earlier
technologies may apply to the Internet.  Some combination of public-

and private-sector involvement will probably be required to deal with
these problems more generally.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET23Governments have a fundamental role to play in the funding ofadvanced research and development that can push forward the fron-
tiers of technology and knowledge.  Often, this will involve the

development and use of pilot projects to test new ideas in the real
world.  It also seems clear that governments must provide the neces-

sary oversight to insure that the standards-setting process is equi-
table.  Governments must also take responsibility for helping to

resolve problems that arise because of independent decisions made
by multiple countries, for example in legal, security, or regulatory
matters.  In the case of U.S. infrastructure development, the govern-

ment must provide leadership in many dimensions, including the
removal of barriers where they inhibit progress; the insertion of
legal, security, or regulatory mechanisms where the national interest
so dictates; and the direct stimulation of public-interest sectors, for
example in research, education, and certain network aspects of pub-
lic health, safety, and universal access that require government as-
sistance.  Other nations also may find similar incentives for govern-
ment involvement.Two final observations seem appropriate.  First, it will be essen-
tial to separate the process by which standards are selected for the
Internet from the process by which the variety of possible options are
generated.  The current situation is almost ideal, since standards are

selected by a process akin to ratification only after independent imple-

mentation has produced the viable options.  This separation needs to

be maintained.Second, the most important use of the Internet, and indeed theNII, will be to allow individuals to communicate with each other and
to rapidly access information.  In many cases, this information will be

the intellectual property of others.  Every Internet user will also have

the opportunity to become a potential provider of information ser-
vices, thereby vastly increasing the amount of information available.
How much of this information may be deemed valuable in a literary
or business sense remains to be determined, but much of it may be
important in other contexts.  It is essential that we sensitize individu-

als to the value of intellectual property and the need to protect it.
This will have the side benefit of encouraging others to develop and
make available intellectual property of their own.  A combination of

ethics, technology, and law are needed to ensure the effective devel-
opment of this important aspect of the Internet.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24ROBERT E. KAHNCONCLUSIONSOver a span of some 20 years, the role of the U.S. government inthe evolution of the Internet has changed.  While the federal govern-
ment took the lead in virtually every aspect of Internet in the early
days, it currently plays a more limited role.  The government is now

a major funder of network R&D and provides significant oversight of
the evolution of the Internet.  It provides direct support or even con-

trol for several key aspects of the InternetÕs operation, such as theassignment of unique names and addresses and the assurance of ad-
equate backbone capability, although it may decide to relinquish some
of these responsibilities in the future.  It continues to stimulate the

development of Internet architecture in healthy new directions.Although the role of the U.S. government in the Internet hasbeen declining steadily for several years, particularly as private-sec-
tor interest in the Internet has increased, there is a major continuing
set of roles and responsibilities for government to undertake, both in
the United States and around the world.  Governments must be in-

volved in decisions about how different countries cooperate on vari-
ous aspects of the Internet and its use, and they must continue to
oversee the networkÕs evolution, both nationally and internationally.Other national governments may, but need not, assume the leadership
role that the U.S. government has traditionally played in the United
States.  Without substantial U.S. involvement however, it is doubtful

whether the NII will become a reality.  And without government

involvement on an international scale, it is unlikely that a global
information infrastructure will emerge or that the Internet will con-
tinue to evolve in a vital and dynamic way.Taking a long view, network and computer technologies are stillin their infancy, and many of their current uses reflect past practices
carried out more effectively in new environments.  The real challenge

will be for the public and private sectors to work together to harness
the still-untapped potential of new and increasingly powerful tech-
nologies in the network-based setting of the NII, and to nourish and
incubate the powerful, even revolutionary, new ideas that are certain
to surface in the future.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25There is a computer industry joke that is very relevant to a dis-cussion of the National Information Infrastructure (NII).  It explains

why God was able to create the universe in 6 days:  He did not have

an installed base.Creating the NII is certainly not as vast a task as creating theuniverse, although the concept does seem to have boundless poten-
tial.  The joke came to mind because realizing this potential will

require careful navigation through the baggage of old technologies
and partisan and entrenched points of view in industry, government,
and academia.Underlying the sometimes overblown talk about the informationsuperhighway is a widespread recognition that information technol-
ogy has the potential to dramatically change many aspects of our
lives.  We also are recognizing that information systems have the

potential to play a central role in reinvigorating many of the institu-
tions of our society.Over the last decade, information technology has been an essen-tial tool for corporations.  It has enabled the cost cutting, reorganiza-
tion, and re-engineering that have helped re-establish the United
StatesÕ global competitiveness and rejuvenated many U.S. compa-
nies.  We are now discovering that this technology could have a

similar effect on our noncorporate lives:  It could change the ways we
The Promise of the NationalInformation InfrastructureROBERT W. STEARNSRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26ROBERT W. STEARNSeducate our children and ourselves, interact with government, man-age our health, and entertain and socialize.  At Compaq, we believe

we play a central role in the development of the NII, particularly as
the computer evolves from a device used principally for computation
to one that is dominantly used for communication.There are, of course, many different definitions of the NII, de-pending on oneÕs business and/or political perspective.  NII has been
described variously as:  a 500-channel interactive multimedia video/

cable network; numerous ÒedutainmentÓ multimedia products and
services; the natural evolution of todayÕs telephone system from onethat is voice-oriented to one that supports voice, data, image, and
video; an electronic marketplace for commercial and/or consumer
products and services; a commercial version of the Internet; a public
network for government information and services, medical informa-
tion, and education; not a single network at all but a loose aggregate
of many different networks and services with common or related
access; a public-policy debate about social rights and access to infor-
mation; a political battle in which the telecommunication and cable
industries may attempt to reassert their monopolies in the name of
universal service; and a government-funded initiative, created by the
Clinton administration and modeled after the National Highway
Project of the late 1950s and 1960s, which could easily turn into a
new species of high-technology pork.Whatever the technical description, five key issues dominatepolicy discussions:Universal service.All Americans should have easy access to
the NII, at least for some basic level of services yet to be defined.Interoperability.Legacy and future platform devices such as
computers and phones, software applications, and databases should
be able to ÒtalkÓ to each other easily via the highway.
Security, privacy, and protection of intellectual property.The
content and nature of communications on the NII should be carefully
protected from eavesdropping, misappropriation, or unauthorized use.Private-sector versus public-sector model.Should the NII
evolve in a basically unregulated environment that responds to free-
market forces, or should the federal government fund and guide its
development?NIIÕs link to the GII.Is the global information infrastructure
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE27truly a worldwide, unified system or the aggregate of individual ser-vice networks?With these issues as context, I would like to review the recenthistory of the information industry and attempt to characterize the
probable nature of the industry in the future.  I will also explain why
the PC may well play a central role and give some examples of technol-
ogy use that exemplify the fundamental promise of the NII.  Finally,
I will outline the key challenges to realizing the full potential of the NII

and identify some principles that should guide us as we move forward.THE INFORMATION INDUSTRYUnderlying the information revolution has been the dramaticpace of innovation in semiconductor technologies, fiber optics, voice
and data communications, and software.  These innovations have

enabled a shift from incompatible analog technologies to inter-
operable digital technologies and have brought about the conver-
gence of computers, telecommunications, and media.  The informa-

tion user has received an unprecedented improvement in features and
a sharp reduction in cost.The industry structure that is emerging, although confusing, canbe divided into three basic categories:  platform providers, conduit

providers, and content providers.  Platform providers include vendors

of the hardware and software building blocks of personal and corpo-
rate computing.  Conduit providers establish the electronic highways

through which the information flows.  Content providers develop and

commercialize the software applications, information, and entertain-
ment that flow through the highways to and from the platforms.These three categories of providers are inextricably linked.  Thecomputer will increasingly be an access, processing, and storage point
on the network.  The network will increasingly be designed and built

with a higher and higher percentage of the intelligence lying outside
the conduit in the devices connected to the network.  The content

providers will increasingly develop their products in multiple ver-
sions to be compatible with the multiple technologies that will be
used to distribute these products.It is no longer possible for any one provider, by itself, to movethe development of the information infrastructure.  Innovations to the

platform, without a supporting network and content that people want,Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28ROBERT W. STEARNSwill not succeed.  Equally useless are network developments without
the corresponding platform and content innovations.  In short,

progress in the information industry now requires close partnerships.Companies in the computer industry have functioned in this typeof partnership model for the last decade.  During this time, we have

made the transition from an industry that was dominated by vertically
integrated players offering solutions that were often proprietary to a
horizontally stratified one in which the players specialize in one or a
few aspects of the total solution.  In today
Õs computer industry, theprocessor vendors, operating systems vendors, applications develop-
ers, and platform vendors all are highly interdependent.  This model

is being extended rapidly outside the computer industry to include all
elements of the information industry.  The real winners in this change

have been the customers.  They now enjoy a multiplicity of services and

products, 
based on open standards, and offered at ever-lower prices.STAGED TRANSITIONThe popular vision of the 500-channel, high-bandwidth highwayinto the home has received an inordinate amount of attention in the
press.  I believe this vision is incorrect because it embraces a 
Òcouch-potato modelÓ of the consumer and therefore misses the fundamental
promise and essential appeal of what is possible.Recent studies suggest that the cost of installing high-bandwidthservice are prohibitiveÑas much as $2,000 per home.  To date, ex-
perimental offerings of video-on-demand and home-shopping-type
applications show that consumers are unwilling to spend what is
needed to justify the investment.  The most educated consumers, who

can afford to pay, are the least interested in a steady diet of passive
movie entertainment.At the same time, 28% of American households have PCs, peopleare subscribing to online services and using the Internet at an aston-
ishing pace, and sales of multimedia PCs have exploded.  The num-

ber of new users of Internet is increasing at the rate of 10 percent per
month.  Remarkable applications are being developed and utilized in

the areas of health care, education, government, and business, all
based on todayÕs infrastructure.  Customers are using the widely
available narrow-band technology and a PC with a modem and CD-
ROM drive for communication, information access and dissemina-Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE29tion, transaction-oriented tasks, and various ÒedutainmentÓ activities.
The compelling aspect of these applications is their interactivity.
This is the element that is grossly underestimated in the couch-potato
view, which promotes an array of one-way downloads of linear enter-
tainment and advertisements to a passive consumer whose options
are limited to ordering a pizza and a video.Connectivity will allow users to participate actively in commu-nities of interest.  Online services and the Internet provide links for

chatting and information sharing that are easily accessed and can be
precisely focused to the userÕs particular interests.  Children who
have been brought up with interactive games are especially drawn to
this type of application.  They use the technology to connect to others

around the world.  Parents report that children will spend hours chat-

ting online, playing interactive games, and accessing various network
resources.  These same children are bored by passive television.  A

recent study cited in the Wall Street Journal reported that the amount
of TV viewing declines in homes that subscribe to an online service
such as America Online, CompuServe, or Prodigy.  These young

customers of tomorrow view the computer as a portal to a connected
life in which a computer-chat pal in Japan is as normal as a friend
across the street.  It appears that many of the adults developing pas-

sive systems do not understand the key perceptual and behavioral
differences that are now shaping our children.These factors suggest that the development of the informationinfrastructure will proceed in measured stages.  We will develop and
use information technology applications in layers, starting with basic
networked services.  The evolution will be driven by applications that

provide new levels of interactivity and connectivity rather than appli-
cations that are simple extrapolations of the passive models of the
past.  Instead of one or two individual 
Òkiller applicationsÓ attracting
users to the information highway, a large number of diverse applica-
tions that touch many different parts of our lives will drive the de-
mand for incrementally higher and higher levels of bandwidth and
service from the infrastructure.THE PC WILL LEAD THE WAYMany people believe that the TV will be the focus for all servicesin the home.  I doubt that will be the case.  Today
Õs TV is an oldRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30ROBERT W. STEARNSanalog design that receives broadcast signals and displays them usinginterlace scan.  This is hardly a device designed to accommodate the

digital world.  I believe the PC will play the central role in the NII
because it is a multifunctional platform that is well-suited to themosaic of uses that people are demanding.  A PC in the home can be
used as a node on the office network, an educational tool for children,a tool for managing personal finances, the place to play entertainingCD-ROMs, as well as a connection to the Internet.  The platform is

open to all kinds of hardware and software additions and upgrades.These factors make the PC, as it is currently configured, the platformof choice for the near term.  One might say the PC is the 
Òultimatedriving machineÓ on the information highway.
As the infrastructure develops, the PC will evolve with it.  It will
take new forms that will be adapted for even broader uses.  PCs will

be made to fit distinct lifestyle needs and to fit more gracefully intospecific environments.  For example, one could envision PCs for the
living room with a large screen and a wood-grained enclosure or a
kitchen PC that has integrated telephony, a sophisticated messagingsystem, a touch sensitive screen, and links for electronic commerce.We might one day see PCs loaded with CD-ROM reference Òjuke-boxesÓ and linked to office computers and databases used for home-
based study or a playroom PC with multimedia and ÒedutainmentÓperipherals such as joy sticks and virtual reality helmets.  Or imagine
a home mobile PC with embedded wireless communications and
voice recognition used in the yard for how-to applications such asplanting flowers or building a deck.These various devices could be linked to each other via a homelocal area network (LAN) that would allow individual devices toshare components such as software, hard drives, and modems.  Thishome LAN would provide access to the information infrastructure
with its array of services.  Computers would be linked to other smart
products in the home such as security and energy-management sys-tems.  The sharing of components across all of these elements would

make the cost of the total system competitive with what people arespending today on the various separate devices that provide thesefunctions.  Increasingly, what we today call a TV and a PC will

merge into the same powerful programmable digital device, and atthat point, the TV-versus-PC argument will become moot.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE31APPLICATIONS OF NII TECHNOLOGIESWhat are some of the near-term, practical applications of Òhigh-wayÓ technology?  Each of the following applications of information
and communications technologies could have impressive economic
and social benefits.Health CareWe have had a long debate on health care in this country.  One
point of agreement is the great potential for streamlining the adminis-
trative and service aspects of medical care.  Information technology

holds great promise for this type of cost reduction and has the poten-
tial to improve fundamentally the patient-clinician relationship and
allow the patient to be a much more informed and active consumer of
health services.  Systems are being designed that allow patients to

access their own medical records, including information on treatment
options.  Some health care providers are offering online question-

response services and publishing online journals that summarize the
latest medical research to make it useful for the average patient.
These systems supplement and expand patientsÕ knowledge, allow-
ing them to participate more directly in their care.Telemedicine is another exciting application.  This technology is
giving rural communities access to specialists in leading medical
centers.  Using videoconferencing systems with high-speed, high-

resolution imaging, the specialists consult with the doctor in remote
locations, review X-rays, interview the patient, and offer their expert
advice on treatment options.  In places where these systems have

been tested, users find that the technology not only brings better
medicine to the remote areas, but it also enriches rural doctorsÕ lives
by giving them access to the knowledge and counsel of world-class
specialists.BusinessThe continuing importance of information technology to busi-nesses cannot be overstated.  The knowledge and expertise of a

companyÕs workforce and the ability to access and mobilize thisinformation are two of the basic elements of competitive advantage
in todayÕs marketplace and will probably be the most important de-Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32ROBERT W. STEARNSterminants of success in the future.  Realizing the power of the tech-
nology lies in shifting our view of information from something that is
stored or resides in specific experts to something that has its greatest
value when it is fluid and shared for the purposes of problem solving.Companies are learning how to get the right products to marketfaster by using information technology.  They are using communica-

tion technologies to shorten the distance between groups inside the
company and to bring the right teams of experts to bear on a given
project.  Team members are linked for the duration of the project and

are easily redeployed upon completion of their work.These technologies have revolutionary implications for the struc-ture of organizations.  They flatten hierarchies, eliminating levels of

middle managers whose role was to gather information and move it
up or down the organizational pyramid.  The new organizational

structures use teams of implementers connected via information net-
works to those who set policy, thus reducing the need for internal
intermediaries.  The need for external intermediaries is also reduced.
Customers and producers and producers and suppliers are linked more
directly, significantly reducing cost and greatly increasing the utility
and currency of the information passed back and forth.Information technology also has the potential to allow a betterbalance between our home and work lives.  Telecommuting allows

employees to spend more time at home with their families, and it will
benefit the environment as auto exhaust emissions fall with reduc-
tions in commuting.As the infrastructure develops, it will spawn a more efficientoperating environment that rewards innovation and high-quality, low-
cost products.  It will also alter fundamentally many of the current

business models.  For example, as home shopping on a PC super-

sedes shopping at the mall or through a catalog, this new channel will
earn ÒrentÓ for its virtual 
Òshelf space.Ó  While it is not clear at this
point how the conduit and platform vendors will share this income,
we can be certain that providing access to the home shopper will earn
a return.GovernmentWe all believe that many aspects of government are unwieldy,uncoordinated, and expensive.  We try repeatedly to reorganize gov-Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE33ernment but fail to get the results we want.  Information technology,
if applied properly, could be an essential part of the solution.  It may
even help us return to a more democratic society by bringing people
together electronically.The most notable effort in this arena is the Reinventing Govern-ment initiative, championed by Vice President Albert Gore.  The initia-

tive, 
which uses information technology to reduce paperwork andstreamline administrative processes, already is starting to show results
in terms of greater government efficiency, faster processing, increased
accuracy, improved service levels, and reduced administration costs.The new information technologies are also allowing the govern-ment to provide new potentially valuable services.  For example, the

Department of Commerce collects and makes available online reams
of market data that companies can use to operate in a more informed
manner.  Also exciting is the potential for involving more people in

the political process.  Information technology can closely link the

electorate and the elected at the local, state, and national levels.EducationThe decay of the American educational system is a great socialtragedy.  It may be the single biggest threat to the future social and

economic health of the nation.  While the information superhighway

will be only part of the solution to this problem, it has a major role to
play.Information technology frees us from the traditional but tiredmodel of learning:  an 
ÒexpertÓ teacher in the front of a classroom
intent on dispensing knowledge to a captive group of students.  Infor-

mation technology encourages other modes of classroom teachingÑteachers and students do not have to be in the same place at the same
time, and learning does not have to stop when the student joins the
workforce but can occur throughout oneÕs life.For example, the National Technological University (NTU), acollaborative effort by a number of leading schools of engineering, is
using a satellite TV system to bring the best teachers into corpora-
tions around the country.  This is extremely affordable for corpora-

tions, and it minimizes or eliminates travel time for professors.
Equally exciting benefits are becoming available to young learners.
In Tennessee, educators are using a network link that allows highRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34ROBERT W. STEARNSschool science students to ask questions and get answers from 70college science professors.  This capability complements learning in

the classroom.Teachers themselves are benefiting.  Incorporating information
technology in the pursuit of learning frees teachers from having to
know it all.  Instead, they can be facilitators, helping students in their

quest for learning.  Taking this approach, many teachers find the

classroom a less intimidating place.Technology is helping teachers in other ways as well.  In Texas,teachers in remote locations are linked via the Texas Educational
Network.  They use the network to share lesson plans and ideas on

new ways to teach old subjects.  In the process, they enrich both their

work experience and their studentsÕ learning.  The same network
offers similar advantages in the administrative area.With increasing cost pressures in academia and the demand forongoing education in an information-based society, information tech-
nology provides an innovative, less-costly way to meet the nationÕseducational needs.EntertainmentThe implications of new information technologies for entertain-ment can be profound, but the vision of what might be has been
clouded by a focus on a passive rather than interactive model.  The

interactivity offered by new technologies will allow networked games,
full-motion feeds of customized videos, and virtual reality experi-
ences, all available in the home.  Either these services will be avail-

able using narrow-band technology with processing and compression
to allow a near-wideband experience, or they will wait until the invest-

ment in 
higher bandwidth communication is economically justified.In the near term, communities of interest will meet in cyberspaceto interact and enhance each otherÕs knowledge.  This new form of
entertainment and social activity is the likely forerunner of the enter-
tainment world to come.  No couches here.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR GOING FORWARDMoving forward will require us to overcome various technicalchallenges.  However, the products and services that are on hand
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE35today, combined with the technical innovations that will be availableshortly, will provide most of the core technology needed to realize
the next stage.  The more pressing challenges are to identify the

embodiments of technology that the consumer will find truly compel-
ling and to ensure the creation and protection of a commercial and
academic environment conducive to real innovation.Meeting these challenges requires the development of respon-sible public policy.  As Vice President Gore stated in a September

1994 speech:ÒGovernment has an indisputable and appropriate role in develop-ing the GII.  By reducing the regulatory barriers and promoting
private sector involvement, by identifying the public interests that
must be served, and by aggressively using the GII to provide edu-cation, health care and other public services, governments can playa key role in developing the GII in cooperation with industry and
others in the private sector.ÓHis emphasis on reducing regulatory barriers and on the strongrole of the private sector is correct.  Untangling the regulatory legacy

of the telecommunications and cable industries is critical.  These

efforts should be directed at opening up access to the networks and to
the devices that interface to the networks.  We cannot permit tele-

communication companies to reassert a de facto monopoly power
over access to the home or the equipment used in the home.  Nor can

we allow the cable companies to act as rigid gatekeepers controlling
the content of services they provide.  If the conduit providers are

allowed to assert monopoly control over access to the home, or if
they are directed to do so in the name of universal service, this will
seriously stifle progress in the development of the infrastructure.The government will also need to work to assure interoperability.Here we should encourage straightforward, open standards whose
effect is to encourage competition among compatible solutions.  The
opportunity for missteps is significant.  For example, the idea of

requiring interoperability not only with new technologies but also
with all antecedent systems is potentially paralyzing.  There are al-

ready many industry, national, and international organizations that
have a long history of debating, creating, and promulgating standards
for information technology.  We do not need to impose another or

higher-level standards-setting process.  Finally, forcing standards that
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36ROBERT W. STEARNSare too rigid or pervasive risks locking in inferior, unworkable, anduneconomical approaches.We must also avoid pressures to turn this into a governmententitlement program.  Because the Clinton administration has shownsuch a strong interest in this issue, some parties are recommending
poorly conceived technical visions in hopes of winning governmentfunding for ill-considered research activities that tend to complicatefairly simple facts and practices.  They suggest problems that exist

only in the minds of over-reaching central planners and over-zealousacademics.  Let
Õs not overstudy this, particularly in an academicvacuum.Many individuals advocate universal service to ensure that wedo not stratify our society into Òinformation haves and have nots.ÓThey promote special support for needy individuals to allow them
access to the information infrastructure.  Careful thought should be
applied to the priority we place on information access relative toother needs in our society.  In our zeal to provide access to advanced
information services for individuals, we must be careful not to placehigher value on the highway than we place on food, shelter, and basicmedical care.Adherents of universal access look to the health care, education,and government sectors to support widespread involvement in theinformation infrastructure.  This is a worthy objective, but I recom-
mend we examine closely the rationale and methods for such fund-
ing.  John Browning, in a superb article in the September 1994 
Wiredmagazine, writes:ÒUniversal service cross-subsidies are a taxÑalbeit a tax buried inthe price of services and beneath layers of obscure allocation andpricing regulation.  They are a particularly inefficient and wasteful

tax.  And worst of all, they are a deceptive and distorting tax, a tax
that makes it hard to see the real costs of the building blocks oftomorrowÕs networks and thus the real opportunities in buildingthe networks that will change the world.ÓSince health, education, and government represent a sizable pro-portion of our economy, this tax would be substantial, could obscurethe true costs of providing a specific service, and as a result couldhinder and distort the development of this enterprise.  In general, the
less subsidy, the better.  We should subsidize the consumer, not the
provider.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE37CONCLUSIONA free-market approach to the development of the infrastructureis critical to the appropriate development of products and services.
This point of view was strongly supported in a 1994 report issued by
European Union Commissioner Martin Bangemann that led to the
CommissionÕs recent Òaction plan.Ó  Allowing market forces to guide
the computer industry, and more recently the telephone industry, has
worked well for industry, government, and the consumer.  The

Internet is an excellent demonstration of what can be achieved
through unconstrained, unregulated innovation.  With a minimum of

government funding and a lot of collaboration between government
and academiaÑand most of all by letting a balance develop betweenwhat people want and what they are free to supplyÑthe Internet hasgrown and will continue to develop at an astonishing pace.  The

Internet points to a future in which the information infrastructure is
not a highway but a web of interrelated public and private networks,
platforms, and services.  A market approach will allow the infrastruc-

ture to continue to grow while addressing real needs today, will cre-
ate an atmosphere that encourages experimentation and rapid learn-
ing, and will permit good ideas to flourish and bad ideas to die.A word of caution:  we must not underestimate the population of
future users.  By this I mean we should not develop the NII and all the

related products with an inactive user in mind.  What is exciting is not

the ability to deliver more passive entertainment products.  Instead,

the focus should be on new forms of entertainment, new connections,
and new ways of learning.The NII is based on technologies in which American industryleads the world.  If we creatively pursue this opportunity with the

right goals in mind, there will be significant benefits to both the
public and private sectors.  Moreover, we will lead the world into a

new and truly exciting era.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39This paper presents my views on satellite communications andthe global information infrastructure (GII).  I believe the GII is more
important to the future of this country in terms of world leadership,
job creation, and export revenues than the national information infra-
structure (NII), which is often called the information superhighway.
The GII is also of paramount importance to the worldÕs newly emerg-
ing global economy.  TodayÕs global marketplace requires a reliable,

timely, and unrestricted flow of people, information, capital, and
products.  By creating a seamless, ubiquitous, and cost-efficient glo-

bal information infrastructure, we provide the communications archi-
tecture for the global marketplace.  Satellites, in particular, will play

a critical role in executing this mission.THE NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTUREEver since Vice President Albert Gore first lit the fuse with hisfocus on the NII, the media have responded with a barrage of stories.
Media megamergers, alliances, and acquisitions are frequent news.
Stock prices soar at the mention of the magic phrase Òinteractive
multimedia.Ó  Conferences are being held, and committees are being
formed.  Hundreds of billions of dollars have been pledged to build

the NII.Satellite Communications in theGlobal Information InfrastructureSTEVEN D. DORFMANRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40STEVEN D. DORFMANMuch of this interest is justified, because we are indeed on thebrink of turning some fascinating concepts into reality.  These in-

clude viewing whatever we want, whenever we wantÑvideo on de-mand; strolling through video shopping malls from our living roomand ordering with a push of a button on the remote control; having
two-way fiber optic video transmission into and out of the home;playing video games with someone in another state; telemedicine;and telecommuting.But so far, most of what we hear and read about the NII suggeststhat fiber will be the delivery system.  Satellites are seldom men-
tioned.  Even the term 
Òinformation superhighwayÓ connotes some-
thing that is land-based, which is why I believe this term is a misno-mer.  It is true we already have 15 million miles of fiber optic cable
crisscrossing the country.  This is more than 300 times the mileage of

our federal interstate highway system.  However, I believe that satel-
lites will play a major role in the NII, because they fulfill both of VicePresident GoreÕs clearly stated NII policy objectives of competitionand universal access.COMPETITION AND UNIVERSALACCESS IN THE NIIThe real story behind the hype about the NII is competitionÑhow we are breaking away from the monopoly concept of telephoneand cable service.  The original thought that government would in-
vest huge sums to help create the information superhighway is gone.
Instead, telecommunication bills are being promoted to encouragecompetition for local phone, cable, and long-distance service.  Now,
the cable company will be able to compete with the local phone
company and vice versa, while long-distance and local phone compa-nies will also be able to compete with one another.  In this competi-
tive environment, prices will drop, services will improve, and new
applications will flourish.Regarding universal access, the second NII policy goal, the realissue here is the last-mile link to the home or office.  This final mile,
bridged either by wire or by satellite dish, is where the majority ofcosts are.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS41THE ECONOMICS OF SATELLITE TRANSMISSIONSatellite communications will flourish in this new competitiveenvironment and will help make universal access a reality.  Hughes
Õnewly launched DIRECTV service is a good example.  We offer 150
channels of TV service to homes that have no cable.  That is universal

access.  We also provide a competitive alternative to consumers who

do have access to cable.  While bridging the last mile to the home by

cable costs $2000, providing this link by satellite costs $700.  The

economics favor satellites, if the playing field is kept level by pre-
venting cross subsidies.Similarly, satellite communication will provide two-way, highdata-rate services using very small aperture terminals (VSATs) where
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) is not readily available,
and it will be a competitive alternative where ISDN is available.
Moreover, satellites can provide mobile communication when terres-
trial cellular communication is unavailable.Thus, with 20 gigahertz (GHz) of satellite transmission capacityavailable from geostationary orbit, a new realism is now replacing
the hype.  Many are now questioning whether the cost of a fiber to

each home is justified if phone users or taxpayers do not pay for it.
After all, how much are people willing to pay to save a trip to the
local video store, especially when a service like DIRECTV can pro-
vide video on near demand?As a result, alliances and mergers, such as the one between BellAtlantic and TCI, are being reconsidered.  Pilot interactive multime-

dia systems are being carefully reviewed, and investments are being
rethought.  One Bell Atlantic executive recently described the firmÕsplanned advanced video networks as Òa little more difficult to de-velop than people thought.Ó  The company intends to invest $11
billion to develop these networks.Like other companies, Hughes is working vigorously to injectthe already sophisticated NII with new capabilities and services that
focus on satellite communications.  I am particularly proud of our

Galaxy Classroom project, where we have demonstrated the power of
satellite-based distance learning by accelerating the learning rate of
KÐ4 students by one grade in 40 schools around the country.  We will
expand this program to 20,000 schools.  We support the efforts of

Congress, the Justice Department, and the Federal CommunicationsRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42STEVEN D. DORFMANCommission (FCC) as they strive to implement the architecture thatwill serve this country best in the 21st century.Increasingly, however, Hughes is also focusing its attention out-side the United States.  As both industrialized and developing nations

increase their demand for access to information, entertainment, and
mobile communications, the GII is where the action will be.  In a

March 21, 1994 speech in Buenos Aires, Vice President Gore talked
about the importance of the GII and did an excellent job of position-
ing America for a leadership role.  The ubiquitous reach of satel-

litesÑtheir ability to provide that crucial last-mile linkÑmeans thatsatellite technology will play a major role in the GII.THE GII:  MEETING THE WORLDÕS
NEED FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONSIn recent years, the world has exchanged a bipolar, Cold Warmentality for an environment that recognizes the benefits of multilat-
eral trade and cultural exchange.  A global economy has emerged.

But developing nations are finding that in order to participate in this
global economy, they must build significant infrastructureÑevery-thing from modern roads and air transportation systems to reliable
electronic banking and telecommunications networks.A global information infrastructure will require massive devel-opment around the world.  Many countries have only minimal access

to communications technologies and very primitive or poorly devel-
oped internal and external connectivity.  China, for example, will

spend $600 billion on infrastructure in the next 6 years.  Without

huge spending on such infrastructure, developing nations will experi-
ence bottlenecks that will impede their economic growth and social
progress.  Ironically, because they have made limited investments in

communications infrastructure in the past, developing countries will
be heavy users of wireless, digital, and satellite technologies.PRIVATIZATION, COMPETITION, ANDADVANCES IN SATELLITE TECHNOLOGYAs we move toward a seamless, ubiquitous, and cost-efficientglobal information network, three significant trends are shaping the
future of satellite communications.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS43The first is privatization.  Many governments cannot readily
afford the major investments required to develop communications
infrastructure and so are increasingly turning to sources of private
capital.  In Latin America, privatization is revolutionizing telecom-

munications in places like Mexico, Argentina, Chile, Colombia, and
Venezuela.  In 1994, India ended its state monopoly on telecommuni-

cations after determining it would have had to spend over $7 billion
to modernize its phone system.As privatization takes hold, HughesÕ international satellite con-
struction business is becoming increasingly commercial.  For in-

stance, most of the satellites we now build for other countries are
contracted by private firms.  Hughes-built satellites serving Japan,

Malaysia, China, Indonesia, Luxembourg, and Thailand were all con-
tracted by private, nongovernment entities.Competition is the second key trend shaping the future of satel-lite communications.  Competition from both domestic and foreign

satellite service providers is driving down costs, spurring technologi-
cal innovation, improving service, and expanding offerings to users.In August 1994, for example, Singapore announced it would letprivately owned companies compete to provide satellite communica-
tions links that previously could be supplied only by two govern-
ment-controlled enterprises.  By 1998, the European Union will de-

regulate all basic telecommunication services, opening a $100
billion-a-year market to competition.Privatization and competition are also creating new regional sat-ellite operators, like Panamsat and SES.  With the launch of PAS-3 in

December 1994 and PAS-4 in 1995Ñboth high-power Hughes 601satellitesÑPanamsat will operate the worldÕs first privately ownedglobal satellite system.  SES, based in Luxembourg, covers Europe

with high-power TV signals using HS601 satellites.  Private compa-

nies like SES and Panamsat are building and expanding their systems
to compete against the old-line public satellite consortia.  Along with

added capacity, these new operators are infusing the international
satellite transmission market with greater flexibility, improved per-
formance, and competitive pricing.The third factor shaping the future of satellite communicationand, along the way, helping to create a more universal and lower-cost
global information infrastructure, is the quantum leap that has been
achieved in satellite technology.  Improvements in efficiency in space,
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44STEVEN D. DORFMANon the ground, and within the radio spectrum are lowering the cost ofsatellites and satellite services for everyone.  For example, 30 years

ago one needed a 100-foot antenna to receive one TV channel from a
satellite, but todayÕs DIRECTV can transmit 150 TV channels into
an 18-inch dish.ADVANCES IN SATELLITES, EARTH TERMINALS,AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGYLet us take a closer look at some of these technological ad-vances.  Today
Õs satellites are more powerful and efficient.  Re-
configurable spot-beam antennas shape the beams more accurately
and weigh less.  Miniaturization and component improvements have

made receivers more sensitive and lighter.  Traveling-wave tubes and

solid-state power amplifiers have increased efficiency and, hence,
require less prime power.  Batteries and solar panels are more effi-

cient and lighter.  Microprocessors simplify tracking, telemetry, and

control of the satellite.  Modern composite techniques contribute to

lighter-weight satellite structures, and on-board propulsion has be-
come more cost-effective.  In 1995, Hughes will launch the first

commercial ion-propulsion system, for the Galaxy III-R spacecraft.
This will save 800 pounds of satellite mass and more than $10 mil-
lion per launch.  As a result of these technological improvements and

improved production efficiency, the Hughes 601 satellite is up to five
times more cost-effective than its predecessor of the 1980s.Advances in technology are also yielding more efficient, lower-cost ground-based satellite terminals.  At the 1977 World Adminis-

trative Radio Conference, scientists predicted that 60 decibel watts
(dBW) of power would be required to transmit TV signals to a one-
meter dish.  Since then, there has been great improvement in receiver

sensitivity, antenna efficiency, and signal processing.  Today, only

50 dBW are required to transmit TV to a half-meter dish, and receiv-
ers can be purchased for less than $700.Finally, digital communication combined with digital data com-pression is enabling new satellite applications.  For example, com-

pression of digital audio signals has made satellite mobile communi-
cations economically feasible by increasing the capacity of satellites
tenfold.  Compression of digital video signals will result in at least a

fivefold increase in the capacity of a transponder to transmit televi-Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS45sion channels.  This, combined with the decreased cost of decompres-
sion chip sets in ground receivers, permits new applications of satel-
lite digital TV, such as HughesÕ DIREC
TV.  In general, compression
of digital signals will significantly reduce the cost of transmitting
through satellites.  I believe that the satellite communication market

is elastic and that the reduced cost will increase demand.AN EXPLOSION OFSATELLITE COMMUNICATIONSWe already see evidence that the increased cost-efficiency ofsatellite communications is stimulating demand.  There is an abun-

dance of new satellite capacity.  Already, 145 commercial communi-

cations satellites orbit the globe.  Another two dozen were scheduled

for launch during the last three months of 1994, and more than 100
new commercial communications satellites are on order.  Nine hun-

dred filings have been submitted to the International Telecommuni-
cation Union (ITU) for future satellite systems, and that number
excludes hundreds more low Earth-orbiting (LEO) satellites that
companies such as Iridium and Teledesic plan to launch.  At Hughes,

we have our largest-ever backlog; in 1994 and 1995, we will be
launching an average of one satellite per month for customers in
Thailand, Mexico, Brazil, and other countries. The technological advances I described
Ñmore powerful satel-lites, more sensitive lower-cost receivers, and digital communica-
tionsÑare bringing more than just cost efficiencies.  They are also
stimulating new satellite applications.  I would like to discuss three of

these:  high-speed interactive voice, data, and video transmission;

satellite mobile services, which will eventually evolve into hand-
held terminals; and direct-to-home television broadcasting through
satellites.Before discussing high-speed interactive communications, how-ever, we must consider that much of the world is still in need of basic
telephony.  In China, which has fewer than two phone lines for every

100 citizens, a private residential phone line from the Beijing Tele-
phone Company requires a 6 month wait and costs $575, the average
government workerÕs salary for an entire year.  In Mexico, the phone
system is so unreliable that when a call finally does go through, the
common greeting is not ÒHelloÓ but 
ÒWho have I reached?ÓRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46STEVEN D. DORFMANSatellites, in the form of VSAT networks, already play a tremen-dous role in providing basic telephony in such areas.  While voice is

not a common VSAT application in the developed world, it is per-
haps the most critical application in both public and private networks
in places such as China, India, southern Asia, and Eastern Europe.
VSATs also transmit two-way data and video for business applica-
tions and offer the unique ability to overcome the challenges posed
by distance and terrain.In Africa, for example, 70 percent of the people live in ruralareas, and major business centers, like Cairo and Nairobi, are thou-
sands of miles apart.  The continent
Õs vast mountain and desert areaswould make it prohibitively expensive to provide telephony via fixed
terrestrial links.  VSATs offer an immediate, low-cost solution and

the only real opportunity to rapidly advance the continentÕs economicdevelopment.  It will be a very long time before the developing

countries of the world have fiber optic networks approaching the
sophisticated networks that exist in the United States.VSAT networks are providing far more than basic public tele-phone and government communications services.  They
Õre also beingused for more sophisticated applications in banking, retail merchan-
dising, oil exploration, and newspaper production and distribution.
In Europe, VSATs handle Holiday InnÕs international reservationssystem and VisaÕs global transaction network.  The 
China PeopleÕsDaily is published via a VSAT network.
SPACEWAY:  HIGH DATA RATES AND
BANDWIDTH ON DEMANDWith these VSAT applications as a starting point, we now findourselves on the threshold of a new era of interactive high data-rate
transmission.  Microsoft
Õs Bill Gates and cellular phone pioneer CraigMcCaw made headlines when they announced an ambitious plan to
launch a high data-rate global satellite business, Teledesic.  The

project would rely on a global network of 840 low Earth-orbiting
satellites.Alternatively, Hughes has announced its intention to establish aglobal network of geostationary (GEO) satellites, called Spaceway,
that will provide an interactive bandwidth-on-demand service for
telephony, high-speed data exchange, and high-resolution interactiveRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS47video.  Spaceway will consist of four interconnected regional satellite
systems operating in the Ka band and providing worldwide coverage.
By transmitting in this high frequency band and by using tightly
focused spot beams, we can transmit to or from ultra-small antennas
measuring 26 inches in diameter.  The price of these dishes will be

less than $1,000.The Spaceway system will play two key roles.  First, it will
provide basic telephony to underserved areas of the world and offer
these regions access to global telecommunication.  Second, Spaceway

will provide critical advanced communications support to the global
marketplace, where huge quantities of information must be accessed
and shared electronically.Spaceway will offer business users a wide variety of applica-tions, including desktop video telephony and conferencing, computer
networking, technical tele-imaging, CAD/CAM transmission, and

high-speed, low-cost access to the next generation of online multime-
dia databases, at rates from 16 kilobits per second to 1.5 megabits per
second, and higher if necessary.Spaceway will enable the entire world to have access to the kindof souped-up capacity that we are planning for the United States.
And, it will deliver capacity on demand using asynchronous transfer
mode (ATM) technology at a relatively low cost.  Spaceway will

offer two-way video for less than the current price of an international
phone call and international phone calls for less than the current price
of a local phone call.THE NEXT GENERATION:MOBILE SATELLITE SERVICESMeanwhile, our second new applicationÑsatellite mobile com-municationsÑis about to take off.  The pioneering work has been
done by Inmarsat, which provides service to tens of thousands of
maritime and aeronautical customers.  The first land mobile services

will be available soon via piggybacked payloads on the already-
launched Optus and Solidaridad satellites of Australia and Mexico,
respectively.In spring 1995, the first high-power land mobile satellite, AMSC-1,will be launched, followed shortly by its twin, TMI-1.  These satel-

lites, which Hughes is building for the U.S. American Mobile Satel-Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48STEVEN D. DORFMANlite Corporation and the Canadian Telesat Mobile Incorporated, willfor the first time give cellular car phone users ubiquitous roaming
service across North America.  Dual-mode handsets will route calls

over cellular networks when they are available and by satellite when
they are not.AMSC-1 and TMI-1 will interconnect with all existing cellularsystems and with the entire public switched telephone network, creat-
ing the first seamless network for nationwide mobile voice, data, andfax communications in the United States and Canada.  The satellites
will be capable of serving hundreds of thousands of customers.A follow-on AMSC-2 satellite with eight times the capacity ofAMSC-1 will lower costs; more important, its tightly focused spotbeams and on-board digital processing will reduce the needed uplink
power to less than one-half watt.  This will permit hand-held service,
using lightweight pocket phones, for the first time.Hughes is one of several companies examining hand-held mo-bile telephone service in other regions of the worldÑPacific Asia, forexample, where demand is great.  While Hughes and others are cur-
rently working on geostationary systems, several different entities
have proposed projects that would provide worldwide hand-held ser-
vice via a constellation of either low or medium Earth-orbiting (MEO)satellites.Two LEO systems are being built:  Motorola
Õs 66-satellite Iri-dium project and the 48-satellite Globalstar system from Loral/Qualcomm.  A MEO system based on 12 satellites is planned by
Inmarsat.  Construction of this system is scheduled to start in 1995.
Each type of system proposedÑGEO, LEO, and MEOÑhas cer-tain advantages.  A GEO system is most suitable as a regional system
and has the lowest cost.  Ultimately, a series of regional GEO sys-

tems could form a global system.  A LEO system will be the most
expensive service because of the large number of satellites required,but it will not have the transmission-time delay of GEO satellites.  A
MEO system will be more expensive than a GEO but less than a LEOand will have minimal time delay.I believe worldwide demand will be such that all three types ofsystems could coexist.  Ubiquitous hand-held telephony, using a com-
bination of satellite and terrestrial communications infrastructure, isa virtual certainty for the 21st century.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS49DIRECT-TO-HOME DIGITAL TVHigh-power direct-to-home TV is already a reality.  With the
launch of HughesÕ DBS-1 and DBS-2 satellites, every U.S. house-
hold with a TV can now access a cornucopia of digitally pure video
programming, accompanied by CD-quality audio, via an 18-inch
dish.  Using digital compression, Hughes
Õ DIREC
TV company and
HubbardÕs USSB are able to beam more than 150 channels of pre-mium programming directly into every American home.  Competi-

tors such as Echostar and Primestar have announced similar services.Demand for TV entertainment and information is also explodinginternationally.  Currently, more than 25 million privately owned

satellite dishes in backyards and on rooftops across the world are
delivering vast menus of programming directly into the home.  SES,

for example, is broadcasting programs in five languages to over 17
million privately owned receivers.  After Germany and the United

Kingdom, Poland is the European country that has the largest number
of privately owned dishes, even though no Polish language channels
are broadcasting and satellite dishes were banned there until 1990.
Satellites with names like AsiaSat, APStar, Palapa, JCSat, Superbird,
and Astra are sources of such familiar channels as CNN, HBO, ESPN,
and MTV.Because most of the world has access to only a handful of localchannels, there is enormous pent-up demand for more variety and for
foreign programs.  This demand can be filled most cost-effectively

by satellite TV, especially when there is little or no cable.  As already

indicated, it costs less to provide access by satellite than to build a
new cable or fiber link to the home.Because of these fundamental economics and built-in demand,Hughes is exporting its high-power direct broadcast satellite (DBS)
technology to the rest of the world.  We are building high-power

satellites capable of direct-to-home broadcasts for China, Malaysia,
Mexico, Australia, and Japan, among others.  Australia, which has no

cable and only a handful of broadcast stations in the major cities, got
its first direct-to-home TV service in 1992 via an Optus satellite.  A

second Optus satellite went into service in 1994.Also, Hughes recently teamed up with three of Latin AmericaÕsleading media companies in a joint venture called Galaxy Latin
America (GLA).  Beginning in early 1996, GLA will bring multi-
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50STEVEN D. DORFMANchannel satellite-to-home digital TV to millions of households inCentral and South America and the Caribbean.  Panamsat has an-

nounced a similar system.The spectacular success of Star-TV in the Asian-Pacific region isa good window into the future of satellite-to-home TV worldwide.
Star-TV uses 10 channels on AsiaSat, which Hughes built in 1990, to
beam entertainment programming to 60 million homes in 53 coun-
tries.  Apparently, 
The Bold and the Beautiful and 
Santa Barbara are
especially popular in India.Because of all these satellites, global viewership is rising expo-nentially.  CNN International currently has 80 million subscribers, up

from just 11.6 million in October, 1991.  Soon, satellites will serve

the entire world with direct-to-home digital TV, providing multiple
programming choices from every corner of the globe.A VISION FOR THE FUTUREIn 1962, President John F. Kennedy envisioned the United Statesusing its technology to connect the world through satellite communi-
cations.  From this vision came the Communications Satellite Act

and two of the most successful international organizations in history,
Intelsat and Inmarsat.Now, more than 30 years later, we have the opportunity to trans-port President KennedyÕs vision into the next millennium.  By ex-
panding on that vision, we can create a global telecommunications
infrastructure that will make this a better world.  This satellite-based

network will allow schoolchildren in a remote African village to
receive a superior academic or technical education from instructors
in Nairobi, Cairo, or virtually anywhere in the world.  It will enable a

doctor in Afghanistan to transmit a patientÕs X-rays and medicalrecords instantly to a consulting specialist in the United States.  Local

contractors in Sarajevo or Beirut will be able to rebuild their cities
with the benefit of online engineering and architectural expertise
from other countries.  And, using workgroup computing, employees

in the budding economic zones of Eastern Europe can contribute their
talents to leading multinational corporations.An integral part of this global telecommunications infrastructurewill be the satellite global phone, which we will automatically slip
into our purse or pocket each morning.  It will be a smart phone,
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS51always in communication with our personal computer, even as wetravel to the most remote corners of the world.  It will know where we

are through a global positioning system (GPS) chip set, automatically
switching to satellite mode when we move out of range of terrestrial
cells.Satellite-to-home television will keep us well informed and en-tertained and will help us learn and understand the values and cul-
tures of other societies.  Hundreds of millions of us will own personal

satellite dishes, and we will be able to receive programs from every
continent.  Everybody will be watching news events as they happen,

wherever they happen. There will no longer be any remote corners of
the world.There will be challenges.  We must modify the Comsat, Intelsat,
and Inmarsat organizations so they can keep pace with todayÕs tech-nology and the worldwide drive toward competition and privatization.
We must formulate an international approach to the orderly alloca-
tion of frequency spectrum for geostationary and low Earth-orbiting
satellites in a highly competitive marketplace.  Sufficient spectrum

exists for all of the satellite applications discussed here, but it must be
allocated efficiently.  Another challenge we face is to create a global
environment that permits the free flow of information across borders
and, at the same time, protects copyrights.As in 1962, we have an enormous opportunity to shape the futureof satellite communications around the world.  By exporting our

nationÕs rich store of satellite technology and know-how, we not onlycreate new jobs in the United States and boost our own economy, we
also further the economic and social progress of developing nations
through improved access to education and health care.  By exporting
AmericaÕs defining values of democracy and human rights, we willmake this a better world.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53No matter how you look at it, the 1990s has been an incredibleperiod for communications in general and wireless communications
in particular.  For example, the paging industry, once predicted to be
eclipsed by the cellular industry, is now growing faster than ever.  By

the end of 1993, there were some 50 million pagers in use worldwide;
150 million units may be in service by the turn of the century.  That is

150 million units for a service that was expected just several years
ago to pass out of use.  Meanwhile, cellular communication and now

Personal Communications Services (PCS) have exploded onto the
world scene.  Although there were just 600,000 units in service at the

end of 1985, some 33 million units were in service worldwide at the
end of 1993, and the prediction is for well over 100 million cellular
and PCS units by the year 2000.Moving beyond sales figures, governments worldwide have em-braced the issue of communications, and wireless communications in
particular, as a national priority.  The U.S. government stimulated

this trend when it began using two new acronyms, NII (National
Information Infrastructure) and GII (Global Information Infrastruc-
ture).  Neither the NII nor the GII is fully developed yet, but open

debate about them at the national and international level has focused
attention on important issues and helped accelerate the process of
change.Current Trends and Likely
Futures in Wireless Systems
JOHN E. MAJORRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54JOHN E. MAJORAlthough this is a global story, one can gain an understanding ofit by focusing on events in the United States.  In 1994, the Federal

Communications Commission (FCC) allocated 3 megahertz (MHz)
of spectrum for a new class of service called narrow-band PCSÑ
paging, if you will.  That move doubled the available spectrum and

opened up the potential for whole new classes of services.  For ex-

ample, one will be able to know that a page was received, and be-
cause the network will be able to locate the cell the pager is in, it will
be economical to send much longer pages, such as the dayÕs agenda.
Finally, the person being paged will be able to respond with short
messages such as, ÒIÕll reach you this evening.ÓFollowing narrow-band PCS is PCS itself, which is essentiallyupbanded  cellular communication.
1  For this service, 120 MHz of
spectrum has been set aside, which is more than twice what was
previously available.  This not only makes possible truly competitive

cellular service, with the attendant benefits of decreasing costs and
increasing features, but it also offers the prospect of enhanced voice
quality for a wireless last-mile alternative that would provide compe-
tition in the local loop.  The FCC has allocated another 20 MHz of

spectrum for unlicensed PCS to be used for building networks and
wireless local area networks (LANs).  Finally, some 33 MHz has

been designated for use by big LEOs, or low Earth-orbiting satellite
networks, to provide global wireless service.All of thisÑthe 3-, 120-, 20-, and 33-MHz allocationsÑhas oc-curred in just 2 yearsÕ time.  Similar activities are under way around

the world.  The pace is startling, and if we proceed with courage,

energy, and vision, we can expect much more to happen as the de-
cade proceeds.The outcome of these trends depends greatly on what we chooseto do, for there are still many unresolved issues in the NII/GII debate.
These include concerns about security and privacy, interoperability,
information access, ease of use, portability, ubiquity, network avail-
ability and manageability, applications development, and network
components.  This paper will focus on just two of these:  portability

and ubiquity.  Unless the NII/GII initiative satisfies these two re-
1 Upbanded cellular communication is cellular service at the 1.8-gigahertz (GHz)band.  TodayÕs service is at the 800-MHz band.
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WIRELESS SYSTEMS55quirements, it cannot deliver the promised convenience, services, andapplications.INDIVIDUAL VOICE AND PUBLIC IMAGESAfter some 100 years of technological progress in telecommuni-cations, we live in a world that can be characterized as having Òindi-vidual voiceÓ and 
Òpublic images.Ó  Individual voice means that al-
most anyone can have a voice conversation with almost anyone else,
anywhere, at any time.  With cellular and cordless technologies, the

phones are locally or regionally wireless, and the wireless network
that supports them is implemented by a highly complementary paral-
lel wired network.  There are some limitations in terms of access,

costs, and competition, but recent PCS decisions will greatly improve
these areas.Ours is a world of public images because those broadband, orvideo-based, services are still comparatively expensive or controlled
tightly.  Whereas anyone can make a phone call, only those with

specialized equipment and an FCC license can broadcast a television
show or movie.  Further, in this world of individual voice and public
images, information and computing have largely been left out of the
technological picture.  Newspapers, books, and learning services are

obtained pretty much as they were at the turn of the centuryÑinnewsstands, libraries, and schools.The NII/GII initiative holds the potential to change dramaticallyall of this and in so doing to empower all citizens through the oppor-
tunities that result from making communication services personally
accessible.  In the NII/GII vision, the separate worlds of individual

voice and public images will be unified.  That is, individuals will

have full access not to just voice services, as they do today, but also
to image-based and information services that can now only be imag-
ined.  This is telecommunications with full mobility and connectiv-

ity, and it will be made possible by completing the second- and third-
generation systems that must be part of the global telecommunications
agenda.A VISION AT RISKThe promise of NII/GII lies in three synergistic forces:  the avail-
ability of bandwidth resulting from developments in fiber optics andRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56JOHN E. MAJORsignaling; the availability of computing brought on by the develop-ment of the microprocessor and advances in semiconductor technol-
ogy; and the emergence of competition and choice spawned by new
telecommunications policies worldwide.What is missing from this picture is wireless communications,the next generation of telecommunication technology represented by
paging, cellular, and PCS services.  Until recently, everything you

could receive on a wall-attached television in your home, you could
receive on a portable television, whether you chose to use it in an-
other room, on a campout, or at a sporting event.  That started to

change with cable, when the delivered wired bandwidth for television
services was effectively increased by two orders of magnitude.  To-

day, one buys a portable TV but ends up tying it permanently to the
wall with a coaxial line.  That has got to change.
A similar shift has occurred in computing.  Early on, what could
be done with a portable computer, or what we then called a portable
computer, was pretty much what could be done with an office or
home computer.  That changed when LANs and computer networks

came into being.  With that transition, the unnetworked portable com-

puter became less useful than its LAN-based equivalent.  These

changes initially went unnoticed; after all, at least the new portable
computer was portable when you carried it home.  This too will

change.  In the near future, for a portable computer to be truly por-

table, the network will need to be portable as well.Let us keep this perspective and move forward to the time whenthe NII/GII begins to deliver on its promises.  People far from one

another will be able to talk face to face, so groups can interact and
decisions made more quickly; families will be united although they
live miles apart; and high-speed computing and information access
will be available in the home and office. Because of these develop-
ments, people will be more productive and better informed.  Today,

the communications services that are available to a worker in his or
her office are available when that person is on the move.  In the

future, that will no longer be true unless broadband wireless services
are brought in line with broadband wired services.Some people say this cannot be done.  Can you imagine what
would have happened to television if, when it was first conceptual-
ized, people had said that it would not work because it could not be
made to fit into the bandwidth of the existing AM and FM radioRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WIRELESS SYSTEMS57channels?  It took great courage and vision to make the changes
necessary to support television.  Similar vision and courage are nec-

essary to develop broadband wireless networks.This picture of broadband wireless communication of the futureprompts two questions:  Does having wireless matter?  If it does, can

this future be realized with the technology now available and despite
other likely constraints?  The answer to both questions is 
Òyes.ÓAlready, we have seen the high value people put on mobility.  That

demand for mobility is generating vast new high-growth industries
that produce products to make our citizens more accessible and our
companies more efficient.  Substantial new export markets are open-

ing up for these products.APPLICATIONS OF MOBILE COMMUNICATIONSWhat I have just outlined is the broad picture, but what happensin specific circumstances and industries is perhaps more important.
The availability and dependability of private land-mobile communi-
cations is one of the primary factors that has allowed the United
States to establish and maintain its position as the worldÕs leadingproducer of goods and services.  Private land-mobile radio is used by

all segments of the industrial, business, public-safety, public-service,
and land-transportation workforces.  The continued growth of this

nationÕs commercial and public-service activities demands additionalcommunication capabilities.  It is imperative that the industrial and

public-safety sectors have access to new imaging and decision-pro-
cessing/remote-file access technologies.  Even though personal com-

munications services will be available to the general public through
common and private carriers, public-safety, public-service, and in-
dustrial users will continue to satisfy their specialized communica-
tions requirements through private systems.A community of private land-mobile radio users is necessary tomaintain global competitiveness.  Motivated by the constant need to

improve productivity and service, private users will invariably mi-
grate to the specific communications solutions that provide the great-
est advantage to their operations.  An additional allocation of radio

spectrum is essential if these users and their industries are to continue
to flourish in increasingly competitive global markets.Wireless systems will serve the critical day-to-day operationalRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58JOHN E. MAJORneeds of a variety of industrial, public-safety, and public-service sec-tors.  These include:
Law Enforcement¥Mobile transmission of fingerprints, mug shots, warrants, andother images to and from law enforcement field personnel¥Mobile transmission of maps, floor layouts, and architecturaldrawings for crime-in-progress operations¥Tactical use of live mobile video for hostage, arrest, and sur-veillance operations¥High-resolution graphics and electronic transfer of maps andother graphic information to police vehicles¥Vehicle- and personnel-tracking systems¥Wireless Òdog tagÓ locator services to help assure personnel
security¥On-board information and security systems for mass transitvehiclesEnergy Conservation and Management¥Advanced distribution automation, such as remote monitor-ing, coordination, and operation of distribution and transmission com-
ponents from centralized locations, for load management, advanced
metering, and system-control functions¥Demand-side management (DSM) systems; for example,managing the consumption of electric power and natural gas¥Transmissions to monitor and record pipeline flow and pipe-line pressure indicators¥Real-time monitoring, alerting, and control in situations in-volving handling of hazardous materialsHealth Care and Fire/Emergency Medical Systems¥Remote monitoring of patientsÕ vital signs in health-care fa-
cilities to allow immediate response in the event of a patient medical
crisis¥Mobile transmission of maps, floor layouts, and architecturaldrawings to assist fire fighters and other response personnel in the
rescue of individuals in emergenciesRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WIRELESS SYSTEMS59¥Transmission of visual signals and physician instructions insupport of rescue operations¥High-speed transmission of high-resolution medical imageryand data from paramedics to hospitals¥Automated inventory controlPollution Control¥High-resolution graphics and electronic transfer of maps andother graphics information to mobile users¥Management and remediation operations following spills orother crises¥Real-time monitoring, alerting, and control in situations in-volving handling of hazardous materials¥Visual inspection of pipes and cables exposed during excava-tion projectsIndustrial Productivity¥Automatic transmission of messages advising of impendingshortages of parts in a manufacturing environment¥Vehicle and personnel tracking systems¥Locator service based on wireless transmitters to address per-sonnel security¥Remote safety and security inspection of inaccessible loca-tions¥Automation of process- and quality-control functions¥Transmission of scheduling and cost updates, job site inspec-tion results, and performance assessments relating to construction
projects¥Wireless Òface-to-faceÓ conferences between in-house pro-
duction and sales personnelIntelligent Vehicle Highway Systems (IVHS)¥Traffic management systems that adjust to actual traffic con-ditions rather than rely on historical patterns¥Systems that can electronically weigh and inspect commer-cial vehicles in motion, issue and monitor permits, or track a con-
tainer throughout a multimodal shipmentRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60JOHN E. MAJOR¥Systems that permit electronic collection of tolls and transitfares¥Devices that alert authorities to the need for emergency ve-hicles at the site of a collision or other roadside situationThe recent spectrum allocation for PCS will not satisfy the per-sonal-use needs for emerging wireless technologies.  The regulatory

scheme adopted for PCS makes it impractical, if not impossible, for
private users to obtain and use their own PCS licenses for the new
telecommunications technologies they need.  Private users, including

those in public-safety fields, need to use continuously the spectrum
allocated to them so that they can design systems to meet specific
needs.  Consider two examples.  First, for the typical PCS user, radio

coverage while in a building or even in a basement might be desir-
able, but it is not critical.  If a portable phone does not work in these

locations, it is an inconvenience but no more.  However, for a fire

fighter trapped in the basement of a burning building, that same lack
of coverage could be a life and death matter.  Systems only deliver

this type of coverage throughout a service area if they are specifically
designed to do so.  Second, if a system does not work during very

adverse conditionsÑa flood, an ice storm, or a power blackoutÑit isagain just an inconvenience for the typical PCS user.  This is not true

for the radio systems used by certain crucial components of our infra-
structure.  Phone and utility companies, for instance, design such

systems to work regardless of emergency conditions.  In fact, the

functioning of these systems is critical during such emergencies.PHASED APPROACH One aspect of the NII/GII vision calls for fully mobile commu-
nications.  Implementation of this goal should take place in two

phases; the first requires immediate attention, and the second requires
specific actions toward deployment by the turn of the century.Phase ISpectrum allocations for second-generation LEO satellite sys-tems for hand-held, two-way subscriber units and pagers.  Although
the first generation of LEO technology is only now being brought toRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WIRELESS SYSTEMS61market, it is not too early to plan additional spectrum allocations inanticipation of LEOÕs success.  An additional 60 MHz will be re-
quired to allow for the expansion of existing systems and the emer-
gence of anticipated competitive systems.Spectrum allocations for industrial and public-safety digital sys-tems with broadband capability.  It has always been a priority of the
FCC to ensure that all necessary spectra critical to public safety and
industry support are made available.  As such, the long tradition of

support and forward-looking solutions for public safety and private
industry has been marked by the continued leadership of the United
States.  To prepare for the next series of changes, it is estimated that

75 MHz of spectrum will be needed to deliver digital systems with
broadband capability.  These systems will not support continuous

full-motion video, but they will allow selected slow-scan video, im-
age transmissions, file searches, and the transmission of building
layouts, maps identifying the locations of hazardous chemicals, and
fingerprints.IVHS.  One function of the information highway is to support
and make more efficient existing physical roadways through IVHS
programs.  These programs need additional spectra to support the

transfer of information between vehicles and IVHS infrastructure.
Twenty MHz is needed to meet this requirement.Phase IIAnalog cellular, paging, and private systems provided the firstgeneration of wireless communications.  The second generation con-

sists of digital systems, such as U.S. Digital Cellular (USDC), that re-
mined existing systems, PCS, and the first phase of the NII mobility
initiatives.  Third-generation systems for private or public use allow

paging, or image data, or voice transmission with similar functional-
ity but with flexible broadband capability, increased capacity, satel-
lite system interconnectivity, and global roaming.  These systems not

only support data, but they support it at LAN rates.  They deliver the
full capacity of the NII/GII vision to the mobile person.  Clearly, a

substantial amount of spectrum will need to be set aside to support
competing public systems, wireless cable access, and private systems
with this capacity.  Efforts are just beginning to assess spectrum use

and availability around the world.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62JOHN E. MAJORTHE ROLE FOR THE GOVERNMENTHow can government help?  First and foremost, the government
needs to accept what history has shownÑthat mobility is essential.Wireless solutions need to be an explicit part of the NII/GII agenda.
The initial 155 MHz should be for industrial and public-safety ser-
vices, IVHS, and satellite services.  Substantial additional spectrum

will be required to support third-generation systems.  Government

assistance needs to be focused on making spectrum available.  Re-

mining of portions of the spectrum used by broadcast television
should be considered in light of the capability of Phase II systems to
deliver both broadband data and video.  Clearing the spectrum is not
just a regulatory challenge.  Solutions need to be developed to trans-
fer existing services to either wireline or to new spectrum areas.CONCLUSIONFor the next 5 years or so, thanks to the vision and efforts ofgovernments around the world, we can expect current trends in wire-
less communications to continue.  Cellular and cellularlike services

will become more global and more ubiquitous.  Wireless local-loop

services will provide increased competition and basic service in rural
areas worldwide.  Paging services will become more sophisticated,

and they, too, will become even more global.  Satellite services that

deliver global, portable service will emerge, allowing true global
roaming.  Beyond these initial trends, greater allocation of spectrum

will allow services for satellite system expansion, IVHS, and indus-
trial and public safety use.  After that, we will see the emergence of

broadband wireless services.That is the potential of these new telecommunications technolo-gies.  The United States has led the world with its communications

and computing visions in the past, and, with mobility as part of the
NII/GII agenda, it will do so again well into the next century.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63I will start with a confession:  I am a telecommunications neo-
phyte, having only recently learned how to use the Internet.  But I

know from my job and from casual reading that the United StatesÑ
and indeed the worldÑis in the midst of a telecommunications revo-
lution that will have profound consequences for every aspect of our
lives.At the global level, telecommunications helped end the ColdWar.  The former communist countries could not control the flow of

information that personal computers and television delivered about
life in the West.  Ultimately, political freedom itself spilled over from

West to East.Within the United States, telecommunications products and ser-vices are powering economic growth.  According to the Council of

Economic Advisers, firms engaged in the information-services sector
of our economyÑincluding computers, software, telecommunica-
tions services, and equipmentÑaccounted for 9 percent of the
nationÕs Gross Domestic Product in 1993.  Assuming the admin-

istrationÕs telecommunications reform proposals are enacted by the
next Congress, this share could double over the following decade.Meanwhile, advances in telecommunications have been trans-forming our daily lives.  It is difficult to remember life without fax

machines or e-mail, both of which have dramatically speeded upAntitrust Enforcement and theTelecommunications Revolution:
Friends, Not EnemiesROBERT E. LITANRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64ROBERT E. LITANcommunications on the job.  Some people may already feel the sameabout videoconferencing, which may be standard practice in rela-
tively few companies now but surely will be common throughout the
country in just a few short years.In our homes, the telecommunications revolution has alreadydramatically lowered long-distance telephone rates, while bringing
dozens of video channels to our television sets.  Millions of Ameri-

cans are now also using online information services and the Internet
to communicate with each other, with a growing number of libraries
and other databases, and with people around the world.The future promises even more video interactivity.  Once they
are fully built, fiber optic highways and satellites will do for video
what copper wire did for voice:  allow individuals to interact with one

another rather than passively receive information or entertainment.These are not simply pie-in-the-sky predictions.  By the time the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) completes its auction,
investors are likely to have plunked down billions of dollars for spec-
trum rights that will enable providers to deliver these services to the
public.The question this paper addresses is:  What public-policy issues
are raised by the spread of computer- and video-based interactivity?
There are many, and I certainly do not feel competent to address them
all.  Instead, I would like to concentrate on two very simple but

powerfully important objectives that government policy makers
should focus on as the telecommunications revolution proceeds.First, policies should be in place to assure that firms in all partsof the telecommunications industryÑthose building the infrastruc-ture and those developing the content that will travel over itÑhavethe maximum incentive to innovate and to develop and deliver prod-
ucts and services of the highest quality at the lowest cost.Second, the telecommunications services that are generatedshould be made available broadly, not just to the fortunate few.  In-

formation networks have positive externalities:  the more people

hooked up to the networks, the more valuable the hookups are for
each participant.Moreover, information is what economists call a public good.We educate our children, at public expense, by giving them the infor-
mation and skills they will need to lead productive lives, because it is
in everyoneÕs interest for all kids to grow up to be responsible adults.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT65Similarly, we provide libraries, also at public expense, so that knowl-edge is made freely available to all segments of society.Now that technology is revolutionizing the way information isdeliveredÑover wires, over the air, and through computersÑit isvitally important that all citizens continue to have at least some ac-
cess to the information services of the modern age.  This does not

mean that everyone should be entitled to order movies on demand in
their homes at subsidized rates.  However, it does mean that great

attention will have to be paid to ensuring that all of us have some basic
level of access to the services and information that will be delivered
over the information highways of tomorrow.  By making sure that

competition governs the telecommunications marketplace, the fed-
eral government can both provide incentives for innovation and en-
courage widespread availability of new telecommunications services.This is an objective shared by all government agencies respon-sible for telecommunications policy:  the FCC, the Department of

Commerce, and the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice.
The rest of this paper will explain why competition is so important
and how, in concrete terms, the Antitrust Division in particular has
promoted and will continue to promote innovation in the telecommu-
nications industry by protecting the competitive process.THE IMPORTANCE OF COMPETITIONThe notion that competition is critical to the development oftelecommunications services has not been, and may still not be, ac-
cepted by everyone.  For decades following the invention of the

telephone, for example, it was widely assumed that telephone service
was a natural monopoly.  Public policy makers embraced this as-

sumption by allowing AT&T to run the nationÕs telephone networkfree from competitive challenge.More recently, some parties have suggested that the need forstandards in computer-based systems is incompatible with competi-
tion.  For example, Bill Gates has asserted that Microsoft
Õs operatingsystems for personal computers have become industry standards and
thus have characteristics of a natural monopoly.  While each of these

arguments in support of natural monopoly may be appealing superfi-
cially, neither, on closer examination, justifies the rejection of the
central role of competition that they both imply.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66ROBERT E. LITANConsider first the claim of natural monopoly in the telephonebusiness.  This notion was roundly rejected when the Department of

Justice and Judge Harold Greene forced the breakup of AT&T in the
early 1980s.  The breakup was not a universally popular move, even

inside the Reagan administration.  In fact, according to published

accounts, President Reagan, Secretary of Commerce Malcolm
Baldrige, and Secretary of Defense Casper Weinberger believed that
the AT&T monopoly was a national treasure that should not be bro-
ken up.  But William Baxter, then the assistant attorney general for

antitrust at the Justice Department and now professor emeritus at
Stanford Law School, insisted that only by divesting the regional
telephone monopolies from AT&TÕs long-distance monopoly wouldlong-distance competitors to AT&T have a fair chance to hook up to
local telephone networks.Professor Baxter and Judge Greene were right.  Look what has
happened since the breakup:¥Over 100 companies have entered the long-distance telephonemarket, knocking AT&TÕs share of that business down from 100percent to 60 percent.  Real residential long-distance rates have fallen

by about half, in part due to the increased competition.  While the

long-distance market could use even more competitionÑAT&T,MCI, and Sprint today account for about 90 percent of the businessÑthe entry of so many firms rebuts the view that long-distance tele-
phone service is a natural monopoly;¥A less well-recognized but potentially even more importantproduct of the AT&T breakup is that it helped unleash the fiber optics
revolution, making possible an exciting range of telecommunications
capabilities.  Corning Glass invented fiber optic cable and attempted

to sell it to AT&T in the early 1970s, but AT&T was a monopolist
and probably had little interest in ripping up its existing copper-wire
network in order to replace it with fiber.  It was not until AT&T was

broken up that the use of fiber optics really took off.  In part, this was

because AT&T, Corning, and others working on fiber optics were by
then able to bring down costs.  Fiber became cheaper than the micro-

wave technology that was once thought to be the main competitor to
copper wires.  However, the breakup itself almost certainly pushed

things along.  New entrants into the long-distance telephone busi-

ness, like Sprint, MCI, and their smaller competitors, turned to Corn-Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT67ing for fiber optic cables.  Eventually, AT&T too was forced to install
fiber in order to match the quality and low cost of its competitorsÕservices.Now that long-distance telephone markets have successfullywithstood the dissolution of the natural-monopoly model, the next
candidate for competition is the local telephone business.  Today, this

market is virtually monopolized by the regional Bell operating com-
panies (RBOCs), which carry more than 99 percent of the local traf-
fic in their regions.  The local market may look very different in the

near future, however.It is possible, if not likely, that within a few years the coaxialcable owned by cable television operators will be delivering local
telephone traffic, just as it is doing today for nearly 400,000 custom-
ers in the United Kingdom.  In addition, a variety of wireless tech-

nologiesÑincluding cellular, specialized mobile radio, and the newpersonal communications services portions of the spectrumÑcouldcreate powerful competition to land-line telephone services.Of course, cable and other alternatives to the RBOCsÕ local tele-
phone monopolies will arrive only if state and local regulators permit
them to compete.  So far, only a few states have taken steps to remove

restrictions to entry into the telephone business.  Later, this paper will

address the need for other states to eliminate these artificial and un-
necessary barriers to entry.What about the claim that the need for standards leaves littleroom for competition?  This argument is flat wrong.  It may well be

true that once a standard has been accepted in the marketplace, such
as the QWERTY layout on a typewriter, competition is no longer
possible.  But, with the one qualification I will discuss shortly, com-

petition should actually govern the development of the standards
themselves.Microsoft proves this point.  Microsoft gained a monopoly in
operating systems for personal computers in the 1980s by success-
fully marketing DOS and Windows, which became industry stan-
dards.  There was nothing unlawful about this.  But then the company

adopted certain licensing practicesÑÓper processorÓ licenses that
taxed competing operating systems and set lengthy terms and large
minimum commitments.  This effectively froze competing operating
systems out of the original equipment market, the largest channel forRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68ROBERT E. LITANdistributing this type of software.  The Justice Department sued
Microsoft because these practices, coupled with restrictive nondis-
closure agreements imposed on developers of applications software,
unlawfully entrenched the companyÕs monopoly and thereby deprivedcompetitors of a fair shot at becoming the next standard.  Microsoft

has signed a consent decree, which the District Court for the District
of Columbia disapproved in February 1995 but which I fully expect
the Court of Appeals to approve on appeal.  When it does, this decree

will help level the playing field in the PC operating systems market.The Microsoft case teaches an important lesson.  It is perfectly
legitimate to own a technology or product that becomes a standard,
but it is against the law to erect barricades to competing, would-be
standards.  This proposition is especially important in high-technol-

ogy industries, where rapid innovation may create frequent opportu-
nities for new standards to replace old ones.  If the owners of the old
standards are allowed to use any means to block entry of the new,
then innovation itself will be discouraged and consumers will lose
out.The one qualification to the proposition that competition shouldgovern the development of standards is that in some cases, it may be
in societyÕs interest for competitors to agree on standards, or, ineffect, to work jointly to create standards.  For example, manufactur-

ers may lawfully cooperate to set quality standards, saving regulators
the time and expense of certification.  A number of bodies in the

telecommunications and computer fields perform similar functions.But even in these cases, the joint-venture partners in the stan-dards process must not abuse their legitimate collaboration to distort
the competitive process.  Thus, standards-setting bodies should be

open to all parties who meet reasonable criteria for membership.  In

addition, the standards-setting process must be a fair one and not
serve simply as a device for preventing new competitors or new
standards from entering the market.In sum, competition must remain the central governing principlefor the information age.  Competition encourages continued innova-

tion and guarantees consumers the lowest prices for telecommunica-
tions and information services, and by so doing it promotes the wide-
spread availability of these services.If there is any doubt about these propositions, one need only lookto Europe and Japan.  Both regions have continued to follow the
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT69state-directed, monopoly model in telecommunications, and they now
find themselves playing catch-up to the United States.  For instance,

it was recently reported that JapanÕs telephone monopoly, NTT, is farbehind the U.S. regional telephone companies in laying fiber optic
cable (Hamilton, 1994).  In addition, European governments have

been taken to task for sheltering their telecommunications giants from
both domestic and foreign competition (The Economist, 1994).  Thiscriticism is not hard to understand.  One recent study projects that an

end to telephone monopolies in Europe would not only lower prices
but improve quality by 40 percent (Hudson, 1994).The benefits of competition are being recognized closer to home.In September, Canadian regulators took a major step to promote
competition by allowing telephone companies to transmit video im-
ages and by opening up local telephone markets to competition from
cable television operators and other sources.  If the United States

wants to continue to lead the world in telecommunications innova-
tion, it must act soon to move in a direction similar to CanadaÕs; thatis, it must clear away the remaining obstacles to fair and effective
competition throughout the telecommunications industry.PRESERVING AND PROMOTING COMPETITIONTHROUGH ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENTAlong with the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the JusticeDepartmentÕs Antitrust Division is charged by federal law with pro-tecting and promoting competition.  Next, this paper will consider

how the division has been fulfilling this mandate in ways that affect
the future of telecommunications.Merger EnforcementOne of the defining characteristics of the current revolution inthe telecommunications field is the dizzying pace of corporate
mergers.  It seems that not a week goes by without one or two major
mergers or corporate alliances being announced, each advertised as
an ideal way to accelerate the building of the information super-
highway by combining the unique talents and expertise of the twopartners.In many cases, this may be true, and the division will not stand inRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70ROBERT E. LITANthe way of these arrangements.  However, we draw the line, as the
law requires us to, at mergers that threaten to concentrate economic
power in particular markets or to erect barriers to the entry of com-
petitors.Mergers involving telecommunications and computer firms canpose special problems for those who enforce antitrust laws, because
many of the firms in these industries already have dominant, or even
monopoly, positions.  The seven RBOCs, for example, each currently

has a monopoly in local telephone service.  The same is true for

almost all cable television firms in the markets they serve.  Other

high-technology firms also have substantial market power in various
lines of business.Firms that are already dominant in their markets surely knowthat neither the division nor the FTC is likely to permit them to
engage in horizontal acquisitions, that is, purchases of direct com-
petitors.  As a result, many of the high-technology mergers we have

seen so far involve the marriages of firms dominant in one market
with firms in related marketsÑsuch as RBOCs proposing mergerswith cable companies, telephone companies active in different geo-
graphic areas proposing mergers, and so on.  The critical question

posed by these mergers is whether they will allow one or both of the
firms with dominance in one market to extend market power to a
second marketÑa special danger where the acquiring firm is a regu-lated monopoly.  If so, antitrust enforcers try to persuade the parties

to revise their plans in ways that remove the anticompetitive effects
of the transaction.  If this fails, we will sue to halt the merger.
Two recent examples demonstrate how it is possible to prune theanticompetitive effects from otherwise lawful telecommunications
mergers.  The first is the union between AT&T and McCaw Cellular
Communication, both dominant players in their respective markets.
As noted earlier, AT&T still has about 60 percent of the long-dis-
tance telephone market.  Overall, McCaw carries about 30 percent of

the nationÕs cellular traffic, but in some regions of the country thisfigure is closer to 50 percent.  In seeking to acquire McCaw, AT&T

clearly wanted to provide seamless local and long-distance cellular
service to customers.Without any conditions, however, this proposed merger posedrisks to competition in several markets.  Under the original proposal,

the parties wanted to be able to market to their customers a com-Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT71bined long-distance/local-service cellular package, without givingthem a choice of another long-distance carrier.  Given McCaw
Õsmarket power in various localities and AT&TÕs market power inlong-distance, this proposal could have significantly distorted com-
petition in the long-distance market by diverting customers away
from other long-distance companies based on factors other than qual-
ity or price, further entrenching AT&TÕs already dominant positionin long distance.To address this problem, the division conditioned its approval ofthe merger on McCawÕs providing to competing long-distance carri-ers equal access to its subscribers.  This is what the RBOCs now are

required to do for long-distance traffic on their land lines, and the
Department of Justice has proposed that they do the same if they are
allowed to provide long-distance service to cellular customers.  In

addition, the consent decree that the parties signed prohibits AT&T
from offering its local and long-distance cellular services as a bundle;
the company must instead separately price each service.The AT&T/McCaw merger also posed a threat to competition inlocal cellular markets.  AT&T currently is the dominant manufac-

turer of equipment for cellular carriers, including many of the RBOCs
that compete with McCaw.  Given the nature of cellular systems,

once a carrier begins purchasing a particular brand of equipment, it
gets locked in to that brand for some period of time.  The additional

danger posed by the merger was that AT&T could exploit its position
in the cellular-equipment market by raising prices or denying or de-
laying the delivery of parts and other services to RBOCs that com-
pete with McCaw in local cellular service.  Knowing this, rival cellu-

lar carriers and AT&T/McCaw could implicitly decide to keep
cellular prices high.  The consent decree prevents this result by pro-

hibiting AT&T from such conduct.  In addition, it addresses the lock-

in problem by allowing, under certain circumstances, cellular equip-
ment customers of AT&T to sell back their equipment to AT&T, if
they want to, at cost minus a reasonable allowance for depreciation.The second telecommunications merger approved subject to im-portant conditions is the purchase by British Telecommunications
(BT) of a 20 percent interest in MCI, as well as the creation of a
global joint venture between the two companies.  This transaction

raised important telecommunications issues in an international con-
text.  Like AT&T and McCaw, MCI wanted its equity partnership
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72ROBERT E. LITANwith BT in order to enhance its ability to offer seamless telecommu-nications services, in this case on a worldwide basis.  If BT did not

have market power in telecommunications services in the United
Kingdom, it is unlikely that either the proposed equity investment by
BT in MCI or the joint venture would pose any competitive risks.But BT was and remains the dominant telephone company in theUnited Kingdom.  By virtue of this dominance, BT would gain from

the proposed transaction both the incentives and the ability to favor
its joint venture with MCI in pricing, interconnection, and possibly
other waysÑall to the detriment of U.S. users of other global tele-communications providers.  If this occurred, then the prices on tele-

phone traffic between our two countries would increase.Accordingly, the division imposed several conditions on the BT/MCI transaction.  Most important, the parties agreed to publish de-

tailed information about the terms and conditions of services that BT
provides to the joint venture and to MCI.  This information will give
ammunition to any disfavored competitors that wish to lodge com-
plaints with regulatory authorities in either the United States or the
United Kingdom.  Such a 
ÒtransparencyÓ provision is less intrusive
and less costly, but no less effective, than direct regulation.In addition, the consent decree prohibits BT from providing toeither the joint venture or to MCI confidential information about
other international telecommunications providers.  Moreover, the

parties agreed that if a significant act of discrimination in favor of
the joint venture or MCI occurs in the future, the department may
seek modification of the decree to strengthen its nondiscrimination
provisions.What about future mergers in the telecommunications industry?It is difficult to be specific, because some are pending now before the
division.  It is possible, however, to offer several broad comments on

the relation between competition policy and mergers in the industry.There has been much talk about ÒtheÓ information superhigh-
way.  In fact, several highways appear to be in the works
Ñland-linetelephone, land-line cable, and various wireless technologiesÑallcompeting to deliver voice and video content to businesses and homes
around the country.  No one really knows which of these highways

will be successful.  That is what markets are for
Ñto let the firms thatare now spending billions of dollars to build these highways fight it
out.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT73For those charged with enforcing the antitrust laws, three con-cerns are paramount.First, we do not want any highway owner that now has a regu-lated monopoly in its market to cross-subsidize.  That is, cable opera-

tors who want to enter telephone markets, or local telephone compa-
nies that may eventually gain entry into long-distance markets, should

fund their expansion only from the capital markets and not from their
customers.  The same is true for regulated telephone companies hop-

ing to offer video and other services.  To allow any other result is to

permit the marketplace to favor monopolists, to the detriment of
consumers.Second, at least for the next several years, we should not allowthe owner of any one highway in a given geographic area to merge
with or buy out a competing highway.  If, for example, local tele-

phone companies were permitted to merge with their cable televi-
sion competitors in the same service territory, neither firm would
retain the incentive to develop and supply the new interactive ser-
vices that consumers have been promised.  This situation may change

once technology affords consumers more ways to receive informa-
tion in the home.  In the meantime, however, it is prudent to prohibit

for a reasonable period marriages of cable and telephone firms oper-
ating in the same service areas; the administration has suggested 5
years.Third, we will be especially watchful of mergers or joint ven-tures between owners of highways and owners of content.  Such

transactions may create strong incentives for the integrated entity to
deny competing programmers access to the highways.  In such cases,

we will be prepared either to block the merger or to condition it on
Òequal accessÓ requirements that prevent such discrimination, as we
did with TCIÕs acquisition of Liberty Media.Removing Barriers To EntryIt is one thing to prevent mergers that threaten to choke offcompetition.  It is another to ensure that such competition is allowed

to take place.  Current law, however, largely presumes that certain

telecommunications markets should be monopolies and therefore
insulated from competition.  Therefore, unless the Supreme Court

holds that federal law is unconstitutional (as have three federalRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74ROBERT E. LITANcourts), local telephone companies will remain barred from offeringvideo services in their service territories.  As noted earlier, local

telephone companies are legally insulated from competition in all
but a few states.  In addition, the consent decree governing the

AT&T breakup prohibits the RBOCs from competing in long-dis-
tance telephone services.In 1994, Congress came very close to enacting comprehensivelegislation that would have paved the way for erasing each of these
barriers to competition.  The Clinton administration worked closely

with Congress to achieve passage of this legislation and intends to
continue that partnership in 1995.  In the meantime, the administra-

tion urges the states to remove barriers preventing new entrants in the
local telephone business.  New York, Wisconsin, Illinois, and a num-

ber of other states have already taken such steps or will soon do so.Competition is vital if America is to maintain its leadership intelecommunications technologies and services.  Competition also will

best advance the goal of universal service, since competition will
encourage providers to lower their own costs, and thus their prices to
consumers.Still, even a vibrantly competitive telecommunications market-place will not deliver its services to all consumers.  Some will lack

the income to buy.  Others services may be too costly for private

suppliers profitably to provide.  The most efficient and least distort-

ing way to fill these gaps is to provide subsidies to those who would
otherwise not be able to purchase competitively priced telecommuni-
cations services.  The legislation considered by Congress last year

would have directed the appropriate federal and state regulatory bod-
ies to move in this direction.CONCLUSIONThe message here has been a simple one.  Monopolies in tele-
communications are dead or dying.  This is good news, for only

through vigorous competition will the telecommunications revolu-
tion we are now witnessing bring its full benefits to American con-
sumers.  The Justice Department
Õs Antitrust Division is working hardto make this happen.  We hope that Congress will assist us in this task

by enacting soon the comprehensive telecommunications legislation
that is so sorely needed.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ANTITRUST ENFORCEMENT75REFERENCESHamilton, D.P.  Wall Street Journal.  August 15, 1994.  Getting wired:  big fiber-optic
project is private sectorÕs job, Japan reformers say.  A1.
Hudson, R.L.  Wall Street Journal.  September 30, 1994.  World business (A special
report):  An industrial revolution.  R20.
The Economist.  August 13, 1994.  Europe
Õs dash for the future.  13.
Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Revolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.77STEVEN D. DORFMAN is a senior vice president and member of
the Office of the Chairman of GM Hughes Electronics Corp. and its
subsidiary, Hughes Aircraft Company, and president of the Hughes
Telecommunications and Space Company.  He joined Hughes in

1957 and, in subsequent years, held positions of increasing responsi-
bility in management, systems engineering, and electro-optics.  Mr.

Dorfman was named to his present position in October 1993 after
serving more than 2 years as president of Hughes Space and Commu-
nications Company.  Prior to Mr. DorfmanÕs Space and Communica-

tions Company assignment, he was president and chief executive
officer of Hughes Communications Inc. (HCI), the Hughes subsid-
iary that owns and operates communications satellites.  Mr. Dorfman

was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1992.  He

received his bachelorÕs degree in electrical engineering from the Uni-
versity of Florida and his masterÕs degree in the same field from the
University of Southern California.ROBERT E. KAHN has been president of the Corporation for Na-
tional Research Initiatives (CNRI) in Reston, Virginia since 1986.
CNRI was created as a not-for-profit organization to provide leader-
ship and funding for research and development of the national infor-
mation infrastructure.  From 1972 to 1985, he was a program man-
ContributorsRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78CONTRIBUTORSager, deputy director, and ultimately director of the Information Pro-cessing Techniques Office at the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency.  He is a member of the National Academy of Engi-

neering, a fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engi-
neers, and twice recipient of the Secretary of Defense Meritorious
Civilian Service Award.  Dr. Kahn received his B.E.E. from City

College of New York and his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
engineering from Princeton University.ROBERT E. LITAN is an associate director of the Office of Man-
agement and Budget.  At the time this paper was written, Dr. Litan

was deputy assistant attorney general in the Antitrust Division of the
U.S. Justice Department, where he supervised the divisionÕs civilnon-merger enforcement program and the development of the di-
visionÕs policies affecting regulated industries.  He came to this posi-
tion in September 1993, following 9 years as a senior fellow at the
Brookings Institution, where he also was director of two research
centers in the institutionÕs Economics Studies Program.  Dr. Litan
formerly was a partner and then counsel to Powell, Goldstein, Frazer
& Murphy, an associate at Arnold & Porter, and the regulatory and
energy specialist for President CarterÕs Council of Economic Advis-ers.  He has a B.S. in economics from the Wharton School of Finance,

a J.D. from Yale Law School, and a Ph.D. in economics from Yale
University.JOHN E. MAJOR is the senior vice president and assistant chief
corporate staff officer for Motorola.  In those roles, he oversees

MotorolaÕs product, software, and manufacturing research, as well asmanages MotorolaÕs global telecommunications network.  One of his
key initiatives is leading MotorolaÕs effort to be a global leader insoftware technology.  Previously, he managed the Worldwide Sys-

tems Group that developed and manufactured private voice and data
radio systems for public-safety and business users.  Mr. Major serves

on the boards of directors of the Telecommunications Industry Asso-
ciation and the Electronics Industry Association.  He is a member of

the National Academy of Sciences, where he serves on the Computer
Science and Telecommunications Board.  His degrees include a B.S.
in mechanical and aerospace engineering from the University of
Rochester, an M.S. in mechanical engineering from the University ofRevolution in the U.S. Information InfrastructureCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTRIBUTORS79Illinois, an M.B.A. from Northwestern University, and a J.D. fromLoyola University.JOHN S. MAYO is president emeritus of AT&T Bell Laboratories.
He served as president from July 1991 until March 1995.  Through-

out his career at Bell Laboratories, Dr. Mayo has played an important
role in the development of digital technologies that have brought the
world to the threshold of the information age.  Dr. Mayo is a fellow of

the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE).  Among

his awards is the 1990 National Medal of Technology, given for his
contributions to the technological foundations for information age
communications.  Dr. Mayo was elected to the National Academy of
Engineering in 1979.  He received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees

in electrical engineering from North Carolina State University in
1952, 1953, and 1955, respectively.ROBERT W. STEARNS is vice president of corporate development
for the Compaq Computer Corp.  He directs the company
Õs strategicplanning and business development activities, including acquisitions,
joint ventures and alliances, advanced market research, and technol-
ogy assessment.  He is also responsible for coordinating legislative

policy issues and CompaqÕs involvement in various technical stan-dards-setting organizations and trade associations.  Mr. Stearns joined

Compaq in July 1993 from McKinsey & Co., where he served as a
consultant to high-technology clients.  He previously held senior

management positions at a number of technology companies, includ-
ing Motorola/Codex, Banyan Systems, MotorolaÕs Information Sys-tems Group, and Management Technologies Inc., a decision-support
software company that he founded.  Mr. Stearns speaks and writes

frequently on matters related to the computer and telecommunica-
tions industries and innovation in technological organizations. He
graduated with a B.S. degree in chemistry from Brown University in
1971 and an M.S. degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology in 1973.